                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Canada v.
  Addison & Leyen Ltd., [2007] 2 S.C.R. 793, 2007 SCC 33  Date:  20070712 Docket:  31451  Between: Her
Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada and Canada
Customs and Revenue Agency Appellants and Addison
& Leyen Ltd., Concrest Corporation Ltd., John
Joseph Dietrich, Jeannette Marie Dietrich, Rofamco
Investments Ltd., Wilfrid Daniel Roach and
Helen Ann Roach Respondents  Coram:
McLachlin C.J. and Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Abella and
Charron JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 12)   The Court  ______________________________ Canada v. Addison & Leyen Ltd., [2007] 2 S.C.R. 793, 2007
SCC 33  Her Majesty
The Queen in Right of Canada and Canada Customs and Revenue Agency                                                                          Appellants  v.  Addison &
Leyen Ltd., Concrest Corporation Ltd., John Joseph
Dietrich, Jeannette Marie Dietrich, Rofamco
Investments Ltd., Wilfrid Daniel Roach and Helen Ann Roach                                                                                                    Respondents  Indexed as:  Canada v. Addison & Leyen Ltd.  Neutral citation:  2007 SCC 33.  File No.:  31451.  2007:  May 24; 2007:  July 12.  Present:  McLachlin C.J.
and Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Abella and Charron JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal    In February 2001, the Minister of National Revenue sent
notices of assessment to the respondent taxpayers pursuant to s. 160  of
the Income Tax Act  for taxes owing by a company to the limit of the
payments received by them as direct or indirect shareholders of that company. 
The Minister had concluded the company’s taxes, which arose from a 1992
assessment of its 1989 taxation year, were not recoverable.  The taxpayers
filed notices of objection in May 2001, to which Revenue Canada did not
respond, but never appealed to the Tax Court.  In 2005, the taxpayers applied
for judicial review, under s. 18.5  of the Federal Courts Act , of
the Crown’s decision to use its discretionary assessment powers under
s. 160 , arguing that the long delay before the assessment was abusive,
prevented their mounting a proper challenge to the assessment’s validity in the
Tax Court and deprived them of any possibility of indemnification by the
primary taxpayer.  The Federal Court granted the Crown’s motion to strike the
claim, but a majority of the Federal Court of Appeal reversed that decision and
allowed the application for judicial review to proceed.  Held:  The appeal should
be allowed.  On the facts of this case, judicial review was not
available because the Minister can assess at any time as s. 160  of the Income
Tax Act  contains no limitation period.  This does not mean that the
exercise of this discretion is never reviewable, but the length of the delay
before a decision whether or not to assess is not enough to ground judicial
review.  The length of delay might, however, ground a remedy like mandamus to
prod the Minister to act with due diligence.  Furthermore, the allegations of
fact here did not show that the regular appeal process could not have dealt
with the tax liability issues.  [9-10]  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 152 , 160 .  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal
(Rothstein, Sharlow and Malone JJ.A.), [2006] 4 F.C.R. 532, 265 D.L.R.
(4th) 253, 346 N.R. 238, [2006] 3 C.T.C. 95, 2006 D.T.C. 6248, [2006] F.C.J.
No. 489 (QL), 2006 FCA 107, reversing a judgment of Kelen J., [2005]
2 C.T.C. 201, 2005 D.T.C. 5212, [2005] F.C.J. No. 516 (QL), 2005 FC 411. 
Appeal allowed.  Graham R. Garton, Q.C.,
and Wendy Burnham, for the appellants.  Roderick A. McLennan,
Q.C., H. M. Kay, Q.C., Curtis R. Stewart
and L. A. Goldbach, for the respondents.  The following is the judgment delivered by  1                                  
The Court — The respondents
applied for judicial review of a tax assessment issued by the Minister of
National Revenue under s. 160  of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985,
c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”).  On a motion by the Crown, the Federal Court
struck the application.  A majority of the Federal Court of Appeal reversed
this judgment and allowed the application for judicial review to proceed. For
the reasons that follow, we are of the view that the Crown’s motion to strike
was well founded, that its appeal should be allowed and that the application
for judicial review should be struck.  2                                  
The present litigation arises out of the tax planning decisions that
were made several years ago and the business dealings that were subsequently
transacted.  In 1989, the respondents, who held shares, directly or indirectly,
in a company, York Beverages (1968) Ltd. (“York”), which had sold its bottling
business the year before, sold their York shares to another company, Synergy Inc.
(“Synergy”).  Synergy planned to use York’s cash in hand to purchase seismic
data and reduce York’s tax liability to zero.  Between the time of the sales of
the bottling business and of the York shares, the respondents received various
payments from York in the form of dividends, directors’ fees, loan repayments,
etc.  3                                  
In 1992, the Minister of National Revenue reassessed York for the 1989
taxation year under s. 152  ITA  after determining that the seismic data
had been overvalued.  The reassessment was for $3,247,074.05, including a
penalty and interest.  York filed a notice of objection.  The Minister never
responded and York never appealed to the Tax Court of Canada.  4                                  
At some point, the Minister concluded that nothing would ever be
recovered from York.  In February 2001, the Minister sent notices of assessment
to the respondents under s. 160  ITA .  In the notices of assessment, the
Minister claimed York’s entire tax liability from the respondents, jointly and
severally, and the amount assessed in respect of each of the respondents was
limited to the amount of the payments that person had received from York in
1988 and 1989.  Including interest, the claim now exceeds $6,000,000.  5                                  
The respondents filed notices of objection in May 2001.  Revenue Canada
never dealt with the objections and the respondents never appealed to the Tax
Court of Canada.  In 2005, they applied for judicial review of the Crown’s
decision to use its discretion to assess them under s. 160  ITA .  They
submitted that the long delay in issuing the assessment was abusive, prevented
them from mounting a proper challenge to the validity of the assessment in the
Tax Court and deprived them of any possibility of indemnification by the
primary taxpayer.  6                                  
The Crown moved to strike the application for judicial review.  In the
Federal Court, Kelen J. granted the motion and struck the application: [2005] 2
C.T.C. 201, 2005 FC 411.  He found that judicial review was not available to
the respondents and that they could and ought to have pursued alternative
remedies.  The majority of the Federal Court of Appeal reversed the trial
judgment: [2006] 4 F.C.R. 532, 2006 FCA 107.  Sharlow J.A. held that the Federal
Court had jurisdiction over the matter and that the test for granting a motion
to strike had not been met.  She stated that judicial review might be available
on the issue of the exercise of the discretion to assess a taxpayer under s.
160  ITA .  Rothstein J.A. (as he then was), in dissent, would have upheld
Kelen J.’s judgment.  He was of the view that a delay in issuing an assessment
under s. 160  is not reviewable by the Federal Court under its judicial review
jurisdiction.  7                                  
The issue in this appeal is whether judicial review under s. 18.5  of the
Federal Courts Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 , is available to challenge the
exercise of the Minister’s discretion to assess a taxpayer under s. 160  ITA . 
What the case actually turns on, however, is the interpretation of s. 160 .  8                                  
We need not engage in a lengthy theoretical discussion on whether
s. 18.5  can be used to review the exercise of ministerial discretion.  It
is not disputed that the Minister belongs to the class of persons and entities
that fall within the Federal Court’s jurisdiction under s. 18.5 .  Judicial
review is available, provided the matter is not otherwise appealable.  It is
also available to control abuses of power, including abusive delay. 
Fact-specific remedies may be crafted to address the wrongs or problems raised
by a particular case.  9                                  
Nevertheless, we find that judicial review was not available on the
facts of this case.  As Rothstein J.A. pointed out, the interpretation of s.
160  ITA  by the majority of the Federal Court of Appeal amounted to
reading into that provision a limitation period that was simply not there.  The
Minister can assess a taxpayer at any time.  In the words of Rothstein J.A.:  While in the sense identified by the majority, subsection 160(1) may be
considered a harsh collection remedy, it is also narrowly targeted.  It only
affects transfers of property to persons in specified relationships or
capacities and only when the transfer is for less than fair market value. 
Having regard to the application of subsection 160(1) in specific and limited
circumstances, Parliament’s intent is not obscure.  Parliament intended that
the Minister be able to recover amounts transferred in these limited
circumstances for the purpose of satisfying the tax liability of the primary taxpayer
transferor.  The circumstances of such transactions mak[e] it clear that
Parliament intended that there be no applicable limitation period and no other
condition on when the Minister might assess. [para. 92]  10                              
The Minister is granted the discretion to assess a taxpayer at any
time.  This does not mean that the exercise of this discretion is never
reviewable.  However, in light of the words “at any time” used by Parliament in
s. 160  ITA , the length of the delay before a decision on assessing a
taxpayer is made does not suffice as a ground for judicial review, except,
perhaps, inasmuch as it allows for a remedy like mandamus to prod the Minister
to act with due diligence once a notice of objection has been filed.  Moreover,
in the case at bar, the allegations of fact in the statement of claim do not
disclose any reason why it would have been impossible to deal with the tax
liability issues relating to either the underlying tax assessment against York
or the assessments against the respondents through the regular appeal process.  11                              
Reviewing courts should be very cautious in authorizing judicial review
in such circumstances.  The integrity and efficacy of the system of tax
assessments and appeals should be preserved.  Parliament has set up a complex
structure to deal with a multitude of tax-related claims and this structure
relies on an independent and specialized court, the Tax Court of Canada. 
Judicial review should not be used to develop a new form of incidental
litigation designed to circumvent the system of tax appeals established by
Parliament and the jurisdiction of the Tax Court.  Judicial review should
remain a remedy of last resort in this context.  12                              
For these reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Federal
Court of Appeal is set aside and the judgment of the motions judge is restored,
with costs.  APPENDIX  Statutory
Provisions  Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)  160. (1) Where a person has, on or after May 1, 1951,
transferred property, either directly or indirectly, by means of a trust or by
any other means whatever, to  . . .  (c)     a person with whom the person was not dealing at arm’s
length,  the following
rules apply:  (d)     the
transferee and transferor are jointly and severally liable to pay a part of the
transferor’s tax under this Part for each taxation year equal to the amount by
which the tax for the year is greater than it would have been if it were not
for the operation of sections 74.1 to 75.1 of this Act and section 74  of the Income
Tax Act , chapter 148 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, in respect of
any income from, or gain from the disposition of, the property so transferred
or property substituted therefor, and  (e)     the
transferee and transferor are jointly and severally liable to pay under this
Act an amount equal to the lesser of  (i)     the
amount, if any, by which the fair market value of the property at the time it
was transferred exceeds the fair market value at that time of the consideration
given for the property, and  (ii)     the
total of all amounts each of which is an amount that the transferor is liable
to pay under this Act in or in respect of the taxation year in which the
property was transferred or any preceding taxation year,  but nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to limit the liability of the transferor under
any other provision of this Act.  . . .  (2)     The Minister may at any time assess a
taxpayer in respect of any amount payable because of this section and the
provisions of this Division apply, with any modifications that the
circumstances require, in respect of an assessment made under this section as
though it had been made under section 152 .  Federal
Courts Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7  18.5 Despite sections 18 and 18.1, if an Act of Parliament
expressly provides for an appeal to . . . the Tax Court of Canada . . . from a
decision or an order of a federal board, commission or other tribunal made by
or in the course of proceedings before that board, commission or tribunal, that
decision or order is not, to the extent that it may be so appealed, subject to
review or to be restrained, prohibited, removed, set aside or otherwise dealt
with, except in accordance with that Act.   Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellants:  Attorney General of Canada,
Ottawa. Solicitors for the respondents:  Bennett Jones, Calgary.    