Friesen v. Canada, [1995] 3
S.C.R. 103  Jake Friesen                                                                                      Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Friesen v.
Canada  File No.:  23922.  1995:  March 1;
1995:  September 21.   on appeal from the federal court of
appeal                      In 1982, the
appellant and several others bought a parcel of land for the purpose of
reselling it at a profit.  In the years immediately following its acquisition,
the property substantially decreased in value and was eventually foreclosed in
1986.  The appellant, relying on ss. 248(1) , 10(1), 9 and Regulation 1801
of the Income Tax Act, sought to deduct the decline in the fair market
value of the land as a business loss in his 1983 and 1984 tax returns.  The
appellant argued that he was entitled to make such deductions because
s. 10(1) permits the use of such a valuation scheme should the initiative
to purchase the land be deemed a "business" and should the land be
defined as "inventory".  The Minister of National Revenue disallowed
these business losses on the basis that the property was not "inventory in
a business" within the meaning of ss. 10(1) and 248(1) .  The taxpayer
appealed and both the Federal Court, Trial Division and the Federal Court of
Appeal upheld the Minister's disallowance of the losses.                     Held (Gonthier and Iacobucci JJ.
dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed.                     Per L'Heureux-Dubé, Sopinka and
Major JJ.: In interpreting sections of the Income Tax Act, the
correct approach is to apply the plain meaning rule.  When a provision is
couched in specific language that admits of no doubt or ambiguity in its
application to the facts, it must be applied.  Here, on a plain reading of the
relevant sections of the Act, the appellant was entitled to make use of the
inventory valuation method in s. 10(1) in order to recognize a business
loss on the property in the 1983 and 1984 taxation years.                      The property is
also "inventory" pursuant to the definition in s. 248(1).  Under
that definition, an item of property is not required to contribute directly to
income in each taxation year in order to qualify as inventory.  Provided that
the cost or value of an item of property is relevant in computing business
income in a year, that property will qualify as inventory.  As a general
principle, items of property sold by a business venture will always be relevant
to the computation of income in the year of sale.  The property at issue is
therefore correctly categorized as "inventory" for the purposes of
the Income Tax Act, both in the taxation year of disposition and in
preceding years, because its cost or value is relevant to the computation of
business income in a taxation year.  The plain meaning of the definition of
"inventory" in s. 248(1)  is consistent with the commonly
understood definition of the term and also reflects the definition of inventory
which is accepted according to ordinary principles of commercial accounting and
of business.  While the express wording of the Income Tax Act is capable
of overruling these principles where it is sufficiently explicit, a court
should be cautious to adopt an interpretation which is clearly inconsistent
with the commonly accepted usage of a technical term particularly where an
interpretation consistent with common usage is more natural on a plain reading
of the definition.                      Per Gonthier and Iacobucci JJ.
(dissenting): The appellant cannot benefit from the application of the
valuation scheme established by s. 10(1) of the Income Tax Act to
deduct as a business loss in 1983 and 1984 the decline in the fair market value
of the property.  While the appellant's real estate purchase was an adventure
in the nature of trade and, consequently, a "business" under
s. 248(1) of the Act, he is not the kind of businessperson intended to be
covered by s. 10(1) and, furthermore, the property is not
"inventory" under s. 248(1)  for the taxation years in question.                      As well, the land
is not inventory for the 1983 and 1984 taxation years under the Income Tax
Act's definition in s. 248(1) .  The key element of that definition is
that the property, in order to be properly classified as "inventory",
must have a cost or value which, in the particular taxation year in question,
bears some relevance to the amount of the taxpayer's income (profit or loss)
for that particular year.  Here, since the land was not involved in any
transaction in 1983 and 1984, it bears no relation whatsoever to the
appellant's income in the taxation years in question.  The appellant should be
able to claim, under the ordinary tracing formula (proceeds less the purchase
cost), the drop in the value of the land in the year in which the property is
disposed of, but not in years where the property remains dormant.  Cases Cited  By Major J.                     Followed:  Bailey v. M.N.R., 90 D.T.C.
1321; Weatherhead v. M.N.R., [1990] 1 C.T.C. 2579; Van Dongen v. The
Queen, 90 D.T.C. 6633; Skerrett v. M.N.R., 91 D.T.C. 1330; Cull
v. The Queen, 87 D.T.C. 5322; not followed:  Canada v. Dresden
Farm Equipment Ltd., [1989] 1 C.T.C. 99; referred to:  Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; Canada v. Antosko,
[1994] 2 S.C.R. 312; Californian Copper Syndicate v. Harris (1904), 5
T.C. 159; Minister of National Revenue v. Irwin, [1964] S.C.R. 662; Gresham
Life Assurance Society v. Styles, [1892] A.C. 309; Neonex International
Ltd. v. The Queen, 78 D.T.C. 6339; Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R.
695; Ostime v. Duple Motor Bodies, Ltd., [1961] 2 All E.R. 167; Minister
of National Revenue v. Anaconda American Brass Ltd., [1956] A.C. 85; Whimster
& Co. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners (1925), 12 T.C. 813; BSC Footwear
Ltd. v. Ridgway, [1971] 2 All E.R. 534; Minister of National Revenue v.
Consolidated Glass Ltd., [1957] S.C.R. 167.  By Iacobucci J. (dissenting)                     Bailey v. M.N.R., 90 D.T.C. 1321; Van Dongen v. The
Queen, 90 D.T.C. 6633; Weatherhead v. M.N.R., [1990] 1 C.T.C. 2579; Skerrett
v. M.N.R., 91 D.T.C. 1330; Minister of National Revenue v. Shofar
Investment Corp., [1980] 1 S.C.R. 350; Californian Copper Syndicate v.
Harris (1904), 5 T.C. 159; Edwards v. Bairstow, [1956] A.C. 14; Irrigation
Industries Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1962] S.C.R. 346; Regal
Heights Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1960] S.C.R. 902; The
Queen v. Cyprus Anvil Mining Corp., 90 D.T.C. 6063; Daley v. M.N.R.,
[1950] C.T.C. 254; Dominion Taxicab Association v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1954] S.C.R. 82; Friedberg v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R.
285:  Minister of National Revenue v. Consolidated Glass Ltd., [1957]
S.C.R. 167; Whimster & Co. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners (1925),
12 T.C. 813; BSC Footwear Ltd. v. Ridgway, [1971] 2 All E.R. 534;  Minister
of National Revenue v. Irwin, [1964] S.C.R. 662; Oryx Realty
Corp. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1974] 2 F.C. 44; Tara
Exploration and Development Co. v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 6370, aff'd [1974]
S.C.R. 1057; Neonex International Ltd. v. The Queen, 78 D.T.C. 6339; West
Kootenay Power and Light Co. v. Canada, [1992] 1 F.C. 732; Tobias v. The
Queen, 78 D.T.C. 6028; Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695; Ken
Steeves Sales Ltd. v. M.N.R., 55 D.T.C. 1044; M.N.R. v. Publishers Guild
of Canada Ltd., 57 D.T.C. 1017; Associated Investors of Canada Ltd. v.
M.N.R., 67 D.T.C. 5096; Maritime Telegraph and Telephone Co. v. The
Queen, 91 D.T.C. 5038.  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Income
Tax Act, R.S.C.,
1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), s. 95(1) .  Income
Tax Regulations,
C.R.C. 1978, c. 945, s. 1801.   Authors Cited  Arnold,
Brian J.  Timing and Income Taxation:  The Principles of Income
Measurement for Tax Purposes. Toronto:  Canadian Tax Foundation, 1983.  Arnold,
Brian J., Tim Edgar and Jinyan Li, eds.  Materials on Canadian Income
Tax, 10th ed.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1993.      Canada. 
Royal Commission on Taxation.  Report of the Royal Commission on Taxation,
vol. 3.  Ottawa:  Queen's Printer, 1966.  Canadian
Institute of Chartered Accountants.  Terminology for Accountants, 3rd
ed.  Toronto:  Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, 1983.  Canadian
Institute of Public Real Estate Companies.  Canadian Institute of Public
Real Estate Companies Recommended Accounting Practices for Real Estate
Companies, November 1985.  Canadian
Institute of Public Real Estate Companies.  CIPREC Handbook, September 1990.  Harris,
Edwin C.  Canadian Income Taxation.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1979.  Hogg,
Peter W., and Joanne E. Magee.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law. 
Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1995.   Kieso,
Donald E., and Jerry J. Weygandt.  Intermediate Accounting, 2nd
Canadian ed.  Prepared by V. Bruce Irvine and W. Harold Silvester.  Toronto: 
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd., 1986.  Krishna,
Vern.  The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax, 4th ed.  Scarborough,
Ont.:  Carswell, 1993.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal, [1993] 3 F.C. 607, 93 D.T.C. 5313,
[1993] 2 C.T.C. 113, 156 N.R. 199, affirming a judgment of the Trial Division,
[1992] 2 F.C. 552, 92 D.T.C. 6248, [1992] 1 C.T.C. 296, 53 F.T.R. 49, upholding
the Minister of National Revenue's decision to disallow the appellant's claim. 
Appeal allowed, Gonthier and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting.                     Craig C.
Sturrock, for the
appellant.                     Roger E.
Taylor and Al
Meghji, for the respondent.                     The judgment of
L'Heureux-Dubé, Sopinka and Major JJ. was delivered by                     Major
J. --  I.  Background 1                 As set out in greater detail in
the reasons of my colleague Iacobucci J., the appellant was a participant in an
adventure in the nature of trade involving a piece of Calgary real estate known
as the "Styles Property". The Styles Property was acquired for the
sole purpose of reselling it at a profit.  The anticipated profit was to be
split between a charitable donation to Trinity Western College and other
organizations and the investors in their personal capacity.  Contrary to the
expectations of the investors, real estate prices fell instead of rising.  2                 The appellant claimed business
losses on his 1983 and 1984 tax returns relying on s. 10(1)  of the Income
Tax Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, which permits inventory to be valued at
the lower of cost or market value.  The Minister of National Revenue disallowed
this claim.  II.  Analysis  A.   Introduction  3                 The narrow issue in this appeal
is whether land held for resale as an adventure in the nature of trade may be
valued as inventory under s. 10(1)  of the Income Tax Act .  I have read
the reasons of my colleague Iacobucci J., and, with respect, I disagree with
his conclusion.  In my opinion the provisions of the Income Tax Act 
allow land held as an adventure in the nature of trade to be valued as
inventory under s. 10(1)  and therefore I would allow this appeal.  B.  The Scheme of the Income Tax
Act  4                 It is necessary to make some
comments on the basic scheme of the Income Tax Act  given my analysis of
the issue raised in this appeal.  5                 Section 3  of the Income Tax
Act  sets out the ground rules for the computation of a taxpayer's income
for a taxation year.  Section 3  recognizes two basic categories of income:
"ordinary income" from office, employment, business and property, all
of which are included in s. 3 (a), and income from a capital source, or
capital gains which are covered by s. 3 (b).  The whole structure of the Income
Tax Act  reflects the basic distinction recognized in the Canadian tax
system between income and capital gain.  6                 Subdivision b of Division B of
the Act entitled "Income or Loss from a Business or Property"
contains all the rules which govern business and property income.  The leading
section in this subdivision is s. 9  which provides that a taxpayer is taxable
on the profit for a business or property for the year.  Profit is not
defined in the Income Tax Act .  7                 Unlike business or property
income which is fully taxable, income from capital sources was not subject to
tax at all in Canada until 1972 and is still partially protected from
taxation.  Subdivision c of Division B of the Act entitled "Taxable
Capital Gains and Allowable Capital Losses" contains all of the rules
which apply to income derived from a capital source.  The leading section in
this subdivision is s. 38 which provides that a taxpayer is taxable on 3/4 of
the capital gain from the disposition of property in the year.  8                 The distinction between income
from office, employment, business and property sources and that from a capital
source and the preferential treatment of the latter has long been the subject
of academic criticism: see B. J. Arnold, T. Edgar and J. Li, eds., Materials
on Canadian Income Tax (10th ed. 1993), at p. 297; and Report of the
Royal Commission on Taxation (Carter Report) (1966), vol. 3, at pp. 62-67. 
The distinction between amounts of an income nature and those of a capital
nature was imported into the Canadian tax system from the United Kingdom where
it is believed to have originated from a primarily agricultural economy whose
concept of income was the fruits of productive source.  In spite of the
uncertainty of origins of the distinction between capital gain and other income
and the criticisms of preferential tax treatment of capital gain, differential
tax treatment of capital gain and income remains a fundamental feature of the
Canadian taxation system.  C.  Principles of Interpretation  9                 The central question on this
appeal of whether the appellant is entitled to take advantage of the inventory
valuation method in s. 10 of the Act involves a careful examination of the
wording of the provisions of the Act and a consideration of the proper
interpretation of these sections in the light of the basic structure of the
Canadian taxation scheme which is established in the Income Tax Act .  10               In interpreting sections of the Income
Tax Act , the correct approach, as set out by Estey J. in Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, is to apply the plain
meaning rule.  Estey J. at p. 578 relied on the following passage from E. A.
Driedger, Construction of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983), at p. 87:                     Today
there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be
read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense
harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the
intention of Parliament.  11               The principle that the plain
meaning of the relevant sections of the Income Tax Act  is to prevail
unless the transaction is a sham has recently been affirmed by this Court in Canada
v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312.  Iacobucci J., writing for the Court, held
at pp. 326-27 that:  While
it is true that the courts must view discrete sections of the Income Tax Act 
in light of the other provisions of the Act and of the purpose of the
legislation, and that they must analyze a given transaction in the context of
economic and commercial reality, such techniques cannot alter the result where
the words of the statute are clear and plain and where the legal and practical
effect of the transaction is undisputed: Mattabi Mines Ltd. v. Ontario
(Minister of Revenue), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 175, at p. 194; see also Symes v.
Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695.  I accept the following comments on the
Antosko case in P. W. Hogg and J. E. Magee, Principles of Canadian
Income Tax Law (1995), Section 22.3(c) "Strict and purposive
interpretation", at pp. 453-54:  It
would introduce intolerable uncertainty into the Income Tax Act  if clear
language in a detailed provision of the Act were to be qualified by unexpressed
exceptions derived from a court's view of the object and purpose of the
provision.... [The Antosko case] is simply a recognition that
"object and purpose" can play only a limited role in the
interpretation of a statute that is as precise and detailed as the Income Tax
Act .  When a provision is couched in specific language that admits of no doubt
or ambiguity in its application to the facts, then the provision must be
applied regardless of its object and purpose.  Only when the statutory language
admits of some doubt or ambiguity in its application to the facts is it useful
to resort to the object and purpose of the provision.  D.  Plain Meaning of Section 10  12               The primary section whose
interpretation is in dispute is s. 10:                     10. (1)  For the purpose of computing
income from a business, the property described in an inventory shall be valued
at its cost to the taxpayer or its fair market value, whichever is lower, or in
such other manner as may be permitted by regulation.  The plain reading of this section is
that it is a mandatory provision requiring a taxpayer who computes income from
a business to value the inventory at the lower of cost or market value or as
permitted by regulation.  Thus, prima facie, the taxpayer must meet two
requirements in order to use this section: the venture at issue must be a
"business" and the property in question must be
"inventory".                    (1)  Is the
Appellant's Venture a Business?  13               The definition of
"business" in s. 248(1)  specifically includes an adventure in the
nature of trade:  "business",
includes a profession, calling, trade, manufacture or undertaking of any kind
whatever and, except for the purposes of paragraph 18(2)(c), an
adventure or concern in the nature of trade but does not include an office
or employment; [Emphasis added.]  An "adventure in the nature of
trade" is not defined in the Act but is a term which has a meaning
established by the common law.  14               Both parties in this appeal accept
that the appellant's real estate venture constitutes an adventure in the nature
of trade.  Nevertheless, it is useful to briefly examine the requirements for
an adventure in the nature of trade since these requirements serve to limit the
scope of ventures which are eligible to use the provisions of s. 10(1) .  15               The concept of an adventure in the
nature of trade is a judicial creation designed to determine which purchase and
sale transactions are of a business nature and which are of a capital nature. 
This question was particularly important prior to 1972 when capital
transactions were completely exempt from taxation.  The question was succinctly
stated by Clerk L.J. in Californian Copper Syndicate v. Harris (1904), 5
T.C. 159 (Ex., Scot.), at p. 166:  Is
the sum of gain that has been made a mere enhancement of value by realising a
security, or is it a gain made in an operation of business in carrying out a
scheme for profit-making?  16               The first requirement for an
adventure in the nature of trade is that it involve a "scheme for
profit-making".  The taxpayer must have a legitimate intention of gaining
a profit from the transaction.  Other requirements are conveniently summarized
in Interpretation Bulletin IT-459 "Adventure or Concern in the Nature of
Trade" (September 8, 1980) which references Interpretation Bulletin IT-218
"Profit from the Sale of Real Estate" (May 26, 1975) for a summary of
the relevant factors when the property involved is real estate.  17               IT-218R, which replaced IT-218 in
1986, lists a number of factors which have been used by the courts to determine
whether a transaction involving real estate is an adventure in the nature of
trade creating business income or a capital transaction involving the sale of
an investment.  Particular attention is paid to:  (i)The
taxpayer's intention with respect to the real estate at the time of purchase
and the feasibility of that intention and the extent to which it was carried
out.  An intention to sell the property for a profit will make it more likely
to be characterized as an adventure in the nature of trade.  (ii)The
nature of the business, profession, calling or trade of the taxpayer and
associates.  The more closely a taxpayer's business or occupation is related to
real estate transactions, the more likely it is that the income will be
considered business income rather than capital gain.  (iii)               The nature of the
property and the use made of it by the taxpayer.  (iv)The
extent to which borrowed money was used to finance the transaction and the
length of time that the real estate was held by the taxpayer.  Transactions
involving borrowed money and rapid resale are more likely to be adventures in
the nature of trade.  18               The factual record in this case
reveals a legitimate "scheme for profit-making" with respect to the
Styles Property.  The appellant and his associates purchased the Styles
Property with the intention of reselling it at a profit.  The appellant and his
associates planned to split the anticipated profit between designated charities
and themselves on a pro rata basis.  The persons involved in this
venture were experienced business people who treated the transaction as a business
venture.  The land involved was undeveloped real estate which was suitable for
resale but unsuitable as an income producing investment or for the personal
enjoyment of the appellant or his associates.  19               I agree with Iacobucci J. that the
appellant meets the tests which have been established in the common law for an
adventure of trade.  The speculative venture in which the appellant was
involved was clearly an adventure of a business nature rather than an
investment of a capital nature.  Like my colleague, I respectfully disagree
with the trial judge ([1992] 2 F.C. 552) and Marceau J.A. ([1993] 3 F.C. 607)
that s. 10(1)  does not apply to a business which is an adventure in the nature
of trade: see Bailey v. M.N.R., 90 D.T.C. 1321 (T.C.C.), at p. 1328.  I
affirm the succinct summary of the law contained in IT-218R:  The
word "business" is defined in subsection 248(1)  so as to include,
inter alia, an adventure or concern in the nature of trade.  This definition
can cause an isolated transaction involving real estate to be considered a
business transaction.  As a business, any gain or loss which arises therefrom
is, by virtue of section 9 , required to be included in computing income or
loss, as the case may be.                     (2)  Is the Styles
Property "Inventory"?  20               In order to take advantage of the
valuation method in s. 10(1) , a taxpayer must also establish that the property
in question is inventory.  A definition of "inventory" is contained
in s. 248(1) of the Act:  "inventory"
means a description of property the cost or value of which is relevant in
computing a taxpayer's income from a business for a taxation year;  The first point to note about this
definition of inventory is that property is not required to contribute directly
to income in a taxation year in order to qualify as inventory.  Provided that
the cost or value of an item of property is relevant in computing
business income in a year that property will qualify as inventory.  Generally
the cost or value of an item of property will appear as an expense (and the
sale price as revenue) in the computation of income.  21               Reduced to its simplest terms, the
income or profit from the sale of a single item of inventory by a sales business
is the ordinary tracing formula calculated by subtracting the purchase cost of
the item from the proceeds of sale.  This is the basic formula which applies to
the calculation of profit before the value of inventory is taken into account,
as is made clear by Abbott J. in Minister of National Revenue v. Irwin,
[1964] S.C.R. 662, at pp. 664-65:                     The
law is clear therefore that for income tax purposes gross profit, in the case
of a business which consists of acquiring property and reselling it, is the excess
of sale price over cost, subject only to any modification effected by the
"cost or market, whichever is lower" rule.  Thus, for any particular item:                     Income = Profit =
Sale Price - Purchase Cost.  22               It is clear from the formula above
that the cost of an item of property sold by a business is relevant in
computing the income from the business in the taxation year in which it is
sold.  As discussed above, an adventure in the nature of trade constitutes a
business under the Act.  Therefore, an item of property sold as part of an
adventure in the nature of trade is relevant to the computation of the
taxpayer's income from a business in the taxation year of disposition and so is
inventory according to the plain language of the definition in s. 248(1) .  23               The respondent argued that even if
the Styles Property were inventory in the year of disposition it would not
qualify as inventory in preceding years.  Specifically the respondent urged
that the phrase "relevant in computing a taxpayer's income from a
business for a taxation year" requires that the characterization of
each item of property as inventory (or not) be made on an annual basis on the
basis of the relevance of the item to the computation of income for that
taxation year.  The respondent relied on dicta to this effect in  Canada
v. Dresden Farm Equipment Ltd., [1989] 1 C.T.C. 99 (F.C.A.), at p. 105, a
case which held that a taxpayer may not deduct an inventory allowance on goods
in which the taxpayer has no property but merely holds on consignment.  The
respondent's argument on this point was accepted by Létourneau J.A. in the
Federal Court of Appeal ([1993] 3 F.C. 607, at pp. 617-18) and is relied upon
by Iacobucci J.  24               In my opinion, the interpretation
urged by the respondent runs contrary to the natural meaning of the words used in
the definition of inventory in s. 248(1)  and to common sense.  The plain
meaning of the definition in s. 248(1)  is that an item of property need only be
relevant to business income in a single year to qualify as inventory:
"relevant in computing a taxpayer's income from a business for a
taxation year".  In this respect the definition of "inventory"
in the Income Tax Act  is consistent with the ordinary meaning of the
word.  In the normal sense, inventory is property which a business holds for
sale and this term applies to that property both in the year of sale and in
years where the property remains as yet unsold by a business.  25               In addition to the plain meaning
of the words, several other considerations militate against the respondent's
interpretation of the definition of "inventory" in s. 248(1) .  26               First, an examination of other
definitions in the Income Tax Act  reveals that there is a particular
phraseology used in the definition of things, amounts or concepts which must be
determined on an annual basis.  The definitions of income (in s. 9 ) and taxable
capital gain (in s. 38 ), both of which must be determined on an annual basis,
contain the characteristic phraseology which denotes that requirement:                     9. (1) Subject to this Part, a
taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a business or property is his
profit therefrom for the year.                     (2) 
Subject to section 31, a taxpayer's loss for a taxation year from a
business or property is the amount of his loss, if any, for the taxation
year from that source computed by applying the provisions of this Act
respecting computation of income from that source mutatis mutandis.                     38.
 For the purposes of
this Act,  (a) 
a taxpayer's taxable capital gain for a taxation year from the
disposition of any property is 3/4 of his capital gain for the year from
the disposition of that property;  (b) 
a taxpayer's allowable capital loss for a taxation year from the
disposition of any property is 3/4 of his capital loss for the year from
the disposition of that property; [Emphasis added.]  This formulaic phraseology appears
innumerable times in the definitions in the Income Tax Act : see for
example: s. 3  "income"; s. 5  "income from office or
employment" and "loss from office or employment"; s. 38 (c)
"allowable business investment loss"; s. 39  "capital gain",
"capital loss" and "business investment loss"; s. 41 
"taxable net gain"; s. 63(3) (c) "eligible child"; s.
127.2(6) (a) "share-purchase tax credit"; s. 127.3(2) (a)
"scientific research and experimental development tax credit"; s.
248(1)  "appropriate percentage", "balance-due day" and
"gross revenue".  27               The respondent is asking this
Court to interpret the definition of "inventory" as though it read:  "inventory"
[for a taxation year] means a description of property the cost or value
of which is relevant in computing a taxpayer's income from a business for [the]
taxation year;  The principal problem with the
respondent's interpretation is that the bracketed words do not appear in the
definition in the Income Tax Act .  The addition of these words to the
definition effects a significant change to the sense of the definition.  It is
a basic principle of statutory interpretation that the court should not accept
an interpretation which requires the insertion of extra wording where there is
another acceptable interpretation which does not require any additional
wording.  Reading extra words into a statutory definition is even less
acceptable when the phrases which must be read in appear in several other
definitions in the same statute.  If Parliament had intended to require that
property must be relevant to the computation of income in a particular year in
order to be inventory in that year, it would have added the necessary
phraseology to make that clear.  28               The second problem with the
interpretation proposed by the respondent is that it is inconsistent with the
basic division in the Income Tax Act  between business income and capital
gain.  As discussed above, subdivision b of Division B of the Act deals with
business and property income and subdivision c of Division B deals with capital
gains.  The Act defines two types of property, one of which applies to each of
these sources of revenue.  Capital property (as defined in s. 54 (b))
creates a capital gain or loss upon disposition.  Inventory is property the
cost or value of which is relevant to the computation of business income.  The
Act thus creates a simple system which recognizes only two broad categories of
property.  The characterization of an item of property as inventory or capital
property is based primarily on the type of income that the property will produce.  29               As discussed above in the context
of the definition of an adventure in the nature of trade, a comprehensive
discussion of whether the sale of real estate will create income or capital
gain can be found in Interpretation Bulletin IT-218R (September 16, 1986).  The
full title of this Interpretation Bulletin, "Profit, Capital Gains and
Losses from the Sale of Real Estate, Including Farmland and Inherited Land and
Conversion of Real Estate from Capital Property to Inventory and Vice
Versa" emphasizes what the bulletin makes clear -- real estate, like
other forms of property, must fall into one of two basic categories under the Income
Tax Act : inventory or capital property.  30               IT-218R clarifies that real estate
which is held by the taxpayer as capital property may be used as personal-use
property or as an investment for the purpose of gaining or producing income. 
The sale of this kind of property creates capital gain or capital loss.   On
the other hand, real estate which is purchased for profitable resale value is
inventory which creates business income or loss.  In  determining whether the
gains from a sale of real estate are income or capital particular emphasis is
placed on the taxpayer's intention at the time of the initial purchase of the
real estate.  Thus, a particular piece of real estate becomes either inventory
or capital property in the hands of the taxpayer from the time of the
original purchase.  31                      The basic scheme of
dividing property into one of two broad classes under the Income Tax Act  is
further assisted by ss. 13(7)  and 45(1) .  These sections make specific
provision for the conversion of real estate from capital property to inventory
and vice versa in particular circumstances.  As IT- 218R explains, these
circumstances arise only when the taxpayer's intention and use of the property
change subsequent to the initial purchase. Sections 13(7)  and 45(1)  provide for
the transfer to be made by means of a deemed disposition and reacquisition at
fair market value.  The deemed reacquisition at the time when the taxpayer's
intention with respect to the property is materially changed reflects the fact
that the category of the property is determined according to the taxpayer's
intention at the time of acquisition.  32               The interpretation of
"inventory" urged by the respondent is fundamentally incompatible
with the statutory dichotomy between inventory and capital property in two
respects.  First, it would require a change in the characterization of
particular items of property on the basis of annual relevance to income rather
than according to the carefully tailored circumstances enumerated in ss. 13(7)
and 45(1).  Second, and more seriously, if an item of property is not relevant
to income in a particular year, it does not convert to capital property unless
it meets the requirements of ss. 13(7) and 45(1).  Under the respondent's
proposed interpretation, an item of property would not be inventory in a year
in which it was not relevant to income and thus would cease to exist for the
purposes of the Income Tax Act  in that year.  This runs contrary to the
scheme of the Act which classifies every piece of property owned by a taxpayer
into one of the two broad classes.  It creates an absurdity for items of
property held for sale by a business to simply disappear from the scheme of the
Act in years prior to sale.  33               Thirdly, the interpretation
proposed by the respondent is inconsistent with the commonly understood
definition of the term.  In the ordinary sense of the term, an item of property
which a business keeps for the purpose of offering it for sale constitutes
inventory at any time prior to the sale of that item.  The ordinary sense of
the word also reflects the definition of inventory which is accepted according
to ordinary principles of commercial accounting and of business.  The Canadian
Institute of Chartered Accountants has defined "inventory" as
including, inter alia "[i]tems of tangible property which are held
for sale in the ordinary course of business": Terminology for
Accountants (3rd ed. 1983), at p. 81.  In the specific context of real
estate the Canadian Institute of Public Real Estate Companies states that land
held for sale and land held for future development and sale is inventory: Canadian
Institute of Public Real Estate Companies Recommended Accounting Practices for
Real Estate Companies (November 1985), at p. 204-1.  34               It was held in Bailey, supra,
and is accepted by Iacobucci J., that single pieces of real estate held for
sale as an adventure of the nature of trade meet the definitions of inventory
accepted by the commercial and accounting worlds.  These definitions are
consistent with the plain meaning interpretation of the definition in the Act
which would require only that the item of property be relevant to the
computation of income in a single year.  However, the interpretation sought by
the respondent is considerably more restricted because it would require a
connection to income in years prior to sale.  I agree with my colleague that
the express wording of the Income Tax Act  is capable of overruling
accounting and commercial principles where it is sufficiently explicit. 
Nevertheless, the Court should be cautious to adopt an interpretation which is
clearly inconsistent with the commonly accepted usage of a technical term
particularly where an interpretation consistent with common usage is more natural
on a plain reading of the definition.  35               The fourth problem with the
interpretation of "inventory" proposed by the respondent is that the
relationship between s. 10(1)  and the definition of "inventory" in s.
248 would become circular.  Specifically, reading s. 10(1)  and the definition
of "inventory" proposed by the respondent in tandem would mandate the
conclusion that s. 10(1)  applies if the property in question is inventory and
that the property in question is inventory if s. 10(1)  applies.  Under the
respondent's interpretation, if the inventory valuation method in s. 10(1) 
applies then the cost or value of the property is relevant in computing income
in the year in question and the property is inventory.  On the other hand, if
the valuation method does not apply then the cost or value of the property is
not relevant to the computation of income and the property is not inventory. 
Interpretations which lead to circular definitions are contrary to common sense
and should be avoided.  36               For all of the reasons discussed
above, I conclude that the correct interpretation of the term
"inventory" in s. 248(1)  is the one which appears most obvious on a
literal reading of the wording that an item of property is inventory if it is
relevant to the computation of business income in a year.  As a
general principle, items of property sold by a business venture will always be
relevant to the computation of income in the year of sale.  37               To the extent that Dresden Farm
Equipment, supra, relies upon an interpretation which is
inconsistent with this approach, I choose not to follow it as it does not deal
directly with the issue raised in this case.  Instead I prefer to follow the
well-established line of cases which have specifically held as part of their rationes
decidendi that real estate held for resale in an adventure in the nature of
trade constitutes "inventory" for the purposes of s. 10(1) : Bailey,
supra; Weatherhead v. M.N.R., [1990] 1 C.T.C. 2579
(T.C.C.); Van Dongen v. The Queen, 90 D.T.C. 6633 (F.C.T.D.); Skerrett
v. M.N.R., 91 D.T.C. 1330 (T.C.C.); and Cull v. The Queen, 87 D.T.C.
5322 (F.C.T.D.).  I endorse the approach taken in these cases of considering
the definition of "inventory" in the context of the basic distinction
between business income and capital gain.  As Cullen J. stated in Van Dongen
at p. 6634:                     The
characterization of these properties as inventory is significant, because any
gain or loss from the disposition of the inventory will be treated as business
income or loss rather than a capital gain or loss.  [Emphasis added.]  38               The Styles Property was relevant
to the computation of business income in the taxation year of
disposition and therefore it is correctly categorized as "inventory"
for the purposes of the Income Tax Act  both in that year and in
preceding years.                     (3)   The
Calculation of "Profit" in Section 10(1)  39               As noted earlier in these reasons,
a taxpayer must establish that he or she is involved in a "business"
and that the property in question is "inventory" before the valuation
scheme in s. 10(1) can be invoked.  Since the appellant's adventure in the nature
of trade was a "business" and the Styles Property constituted
"inventory", the appellant was prima facie entitled to make
use of the valuation scheme set out in s. 10(1).  However, as Iacobucci J. has
pointed out, the valuation scheme in s. 10(1) does not provide an automatic
deduction from income nor does it mandate that any taxpayer with inventory can
deduct any loss on fair market value arising therefrom.  Rather s. 10(1)
mandates how the valuation procedure must take place when ordinary commercial and
accounting principles establish that the value of inventory is relevant to the
computation of business income in a taxation year.  40               The computation of business income
is rooted in s. 9  of the Income Tax Act .  Section 9  provides that the
income from a business for a year is the profit and that loss is to be
calculated by applying the same provisions mutatis mutandis:                     9. (1)  [Income from business or
property] Subject to this Part, a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a
business or property is his profit therefrom for the year.                     (2) 
[Loss from business or property] Subject to section 31, a taxpayer's loss for a
taxation year from a business or property is the amount of his loss, if any,
for the taxation year from that source computed by applying the provisions of
this Act respecting computation of income from that source mutatis mutandis.  41               The Act does not define
"profit" nor does it provide any specific rules for the computation
of profit.  Tax jurisprudence has established that the determination of profit
under s. 9(1) is a question of law to be determined according to the business test
of "well-accepted principles of business (or accounting) practice" or
"well-accepted principles of commercial trading" except where these
are inconsistent with the specific provisions of the Income Tax Act : 
see Gresham Life Assurance Society v. Styles, [1892] A.C. 309 (H.L.); Neonex
International Ltd. v. The Queen, 78 D.T.C. 6339 (F.C.A.); Symes v.
Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at p. 723; Materials on Canadian Income Tax,
supra, at p. 291; and R. Huot, Understanding Income Tax for
Practitioners (1994-95 edition), at p. 299.  42               In calculating profit under s. 9 
of the Income Tax Act , a business calculates its gross profit and then
subtracts allowable operating and non-operating expenses.  Under well-accepted
principles of business and accounting practice gross profit for a business
involved in sale is calculated according to the following formula:                     Gross Profit =
Proceeds of Sale - Cost of Sale  and: Cost
of Sale = (Value of Inventory at beginning of year + Cost of Inventory
acquisitions) - Value of Inventory at end of year.  Thus for a business involved in sales:  Gross
Profit = Proceeds of Sale - [(Value of Inventory at beginning of year + Cost of
Inventory acquisitions) - Value of Inventory at end of year].  43               This formula was originally
designed for companies with significant inventories at a time when computer
technology did not allow the specific cost of each item to be easily traced on
an individual basis.  The formula allowed a business to calculate gross profit
on the basis of a single inventory valuation each year rather than keeping
detailed ongoing records.  It is rather an anachronism in an age where most
businesses with significant inventories carefully track both the cost and sale
price of each item by means of computer technology.  A moment of thought,
however, will lead to the conclusion that this formula is merely a convenient
shorthand for a two-step process which recognizes profit as the excess of sale
proceeds over value for inventory sold in the year and the change in the value
of inventory still on hand at the end of the year.  Thus the formula could
equally be expressed as:  Gross
Profit = (Proceeds of Sale - Value of Inventory Sold) + Change in Value of
Unsold Inventory.  44               Thus, under well-accepted
principles of commercial and accounting practice the value of unsold inventory
is relevant to the computation of business income.  This is based on the
accounting presumption that holding onto unsold inventory represents a cost to
a business.  This is a principle generally applicable to the calculation of
business income from businesses of any size and with inventories of any size although
the popular formula was originally created as a convenient shortcut for the
computation of business income for companies with large inventories.  45               Section 10(1)  of the Income Tax
Act  recognizes the well accepted commercial and accounting principle of
requiring a business to value its inventory at the lower of cost or market
value.  This principle is an exception to the general principle that neither
profits nor losses are recognized until realized.  As well, it represents a
departure from the general principle that assets are valued at their historical
cost.  The underlying rationale for this specific exception to the general
principles is usually explained as originating in the principle of
conservatism.  The generally accepted accounting principle applicable in this
situation is explained by D. E. Kieso et al., Intermediate Accounting
(2nd Canadian ed. 1986), at pp. 421-22, as follows:                     A
major departure from adherence to the historical cost principle is made in the
area of inventory valuation.  Applying the constraint of conservatism in
accounting means recognizing known losses in the period of occurrence.  In
contrast, known gains are not recognized until realized.  If the inventory
declines in value below its original cost for whatever reason ..., the
inventory should be written down to reflect this loss.  The general rule is
that the historical cost principle is abandoned when the future utility
(revenue-producing ability) of the asset is no longer as great as its original
cost.  A departure from cost is justified on the basis that a loss of utility
should be reflected as a charge against the revenues in the period in which the
loss occurs.  Inventories are valued, therefore, on the basis of the lower
of cost and market instead of on an original cost basis.  [Emphasis added.]  46               As the above passage makes clear,
the well-accepted principle of conservatism which underlies the valuation
method in s. 10(1)  represents not only an exception to the realization
principle (in cases of loss) but also an exception to the principle of symmetry
since gains are not recognized until they are realized.  Thus the taxpayer who
is entitled to rely on s. 10(1)  is allowed to claim a business loss where the
value of inventory falls but is not required to declare a business profit until
the inventory is sold even if the value of the inventory rises.  47               In Ostime v. Duple Motor
Bodies, Ltd., [1961] 2 All E.R. 167 (H.L.), at pp. 172-73, Lord Reid
discussed the fact that generally items should be valued at historical cost but
that the "lower of cost or market" exception allows valuation at
market value only if market value falls below cost.  As Lord Reid pointed out,
this lack of symmetry is not entirely logical but it represents good
conservative accountancy and therefore has always been recognized as legitimate
for taxation purposes:  If
market value [rather than cost] were taken [in all cases], that would generally
include an element of profit, and it is a cardinal principle that profit
shall not be taxed until realised; if the market value fell before the
article was sold the profit might never be realised.  But an exception seems to
have been recognised for a very long time; if  market value has already fallen
before the date of valuation, so that, at that date, the market value of the
article is less than it cost the taxpayer, then the taxpayer can bring the
article in at market value, and in this way anticipate the loss which he will
probably incur when he comes to sell it.  That is no doubt good conservative
accountancy, but it is quite illogical.  The fact that it has always
been recognised as legitimate is only one instance going to show that these
matters cannot be settled by any hard and fast rule or strictly logical
principle.  [Emphasis added.]  48               The well-accepted business and
accounting principles applicable to real estate held out as inventory are
illustrated in the Canadian Institute of Public Real Estate Companies
Handbook (September 1990), at sections 301 and 302:  301.            INTRODUCTION 301.1.         Real estate property is
normally carried at the lower of cost and net realizable value if it is held as
inventory and at cost if it is held for investment purposes....  302.            PROPERTY
HELD AS INVENTORY  302.1.Property
held as inventory should be stated at the lower of cost and net realizable
value.  302.2.         Land held for sale currently
and land held for future development and sale is inventory and generally
accepted accounting principles require that it be stated at the lower of cost
and net realizable value.  (Note that "net realizable
value" is the estimated selling price plus other estimated revenue reduced
by the costs to improve and sell the property -- for the purposes of this
analysis it is equivalent to fair market value.)  49               In summary, I conclude that the
valuation method in s. 10(1)  is available for inventory held as part of an
adventure in the nature of trade.  The valuation method becomes relevant in any
particular taxation year through the calculation of business income.  Business
income is calculated according to well-accepted commercial and accounting
principles.  According to these principles the value of inventory is relevant
to the computation of income in years prior to sale since it comprises part of
the cost of sale.  According to the same principles inventory is to be valued
at the lower of cost or market value, a specific exception to the general
principle of realization.  This exception is well accepted in the specific
instance relevant to this appeal: the valuation of real estate inventory.  This
conclusion is fully consistent with the line of cases following Bailey. 
As Cullen J. states in Van Dongen, supra, at p. 6639:  The
later Bailey case appears to have settled the issue that land held as an
adventure in the nature of trade is eligible for inventory write-down.  See also:  Weatherhead, Skerrett,
and Cull.                     (4)   The Common
Law Restriction to Stock-in-Traders  50               The final argument of the
respondent which should be addressed is that the inventory valuation method in
s. 10(1)  is simply a codification of the common law and so is restricted to
stock-in-traders.  The respondent is correct to note that the common law
recognized an exception to the realization principle by allowing inventory to
be valued at the lower of cost or market value in the case of stock-in-trade. 
The common law in Canada is summarized in Minister of National Revenue v.
Anaconda American Brass Ltd., [1956] A.C. 85, a Canadian case which was
appealed from this Court to the Privy Council.  Viscount Simonds, speaking for
the Privy Council stated (at pp. 100-101):  The
income tax law of Canada, as of the United Kingdom, is built upon the
foundations described by Lord Clyde in Whimster & Co. v. Inland
Revenue Commissioners (1925), 12 T.C. 813, 823, in a passage cited by the
Chief Justice which may be here repeated.  "In the first place, the
profits of any particular year or accounting period must be taken to consist of
the difference between the receipts from the trade or business during such
year or accounting period and the expenditure laid out to earn those
receipts.  In the second place, the account of profit and loss to be made
up for the purpose of ascertaining that difference must be framed
consistently with the ordinary principles of commercial accounting, so far as
applicable, and in conformity with the rules of the Income Tax Act , or of that
Act as modified by the provisions and schedules of the Acts regulating Excess
Profits Duty, as the case may be.  For example, the ordinary principles of
commercial accounting require that in the profit and loss account of a
merchant's or manufacturer's business the values of the stock-in-trade at the
beginning and at the end of the period covered by the account should be entered
at cost or market price, whichever is the lower; although there is nothing
about this in the taxing statutes."  [Italics in original; underlining
added.]  See also:  Whimster & Co. v.
Inland Revenue Commissioners (1925), 12 T.C. 813 (Ct. Sess., Scot.), at p.
823 (per Lord Clyde); and BSC Footwear Ltd. v. Ridgway, [1971] 2
All E.R. 534 (H.L.).  51               Interestingly, the exception to
the realization principle for stock-in-traders existed at common law without
any statutory authorization and was based solely on ordinary commercial
principles as they existed at that time.  As discussed above, ordinary
commercial principles would now suggest that all inventory be valued at the
lower of cost or market value.  The respondent, however, argues that s. 10(1) 
is merely a codification of the common law as it existed in 1948 when the
provision first appeared in the Income Tax Act .  This argument is
accepted by Iacobucci J. who cites the comments of Abbott J. in Irwin, supra,
as authority for this proposition.  52               I do not accept the argument that
s. 10(1)  is merely a codification of ordinary commercial principles as they
existed and were recognized by the common law in 1948.  The obiter
comments by Abbott J. in Irwin (at p. 665) to the effect that the former
version of s. 10(1) , s. 14(2) , was merely a codification of the common law and
that s. 14(2) probably did not apply to single pieces of real estate were
explicitly not made part of the ratio of the decision.  Abbott J. did
not give any consideration to the specific wording of s. 14(2) which would have
been a sine qua non to expressing an authoritative opinion on this
point.  53               The appropriate focus in
determining whether s. 10(1)  is a mere codification of the common law is upon
the wording of the section itself.  For ease of reference I quote that section
once again:                     10. (1)  For the purpose of computing
income from a business, the property described in an inventory
shall be valued at its cost to the taxpayer or its fair market value, whichever
is lower, or in such other manner as may be permitted by regulation.  [Emphasis
added.]  The common law rule was restricted to
stock-in-traders.  Section 10(1)  on the other hand explicitly states that it
applies to the inventory of a business.  As discussed above, the word
business is defined in the Act and specifically includes adventures in the
nature of trade.  If Parliament had wanted to simply codify the common law it
could and would have used the term "ordinary trading business" or
"stock-in-trader" both of which had judicially established definitions. 
Since Parliament chose to use the broader term "business", there is
simply no basis on which to assume that s. 10(1)  was no more than a
codification of a common law rule.  To place such a judicial limit on the clear
and unambiguous wording of the statute is a usurpation of the legislative
function of Parliament.  54               In rejecting the principal
argument of the respondent that s. 10(1)  is restricted to stock-in-traders, I
must also, with respect, reject a number of other corollary arguments accepted
by Iacobucci J.  55               First, I do not accept the
argument that s. 10(1)  applies only to those who "carry on a
business".  A specific judicial interpretation has evolved for the phrase
"carry on a business".  That phrase is used in the Income Tax Act 
and is useful for determining the residence of a taxpayer (see s. 253 ).  Once
again if Parliament had intended to restrict the ambit of s. 10(1)  to taxpayers
which carry on a business it would have done so.  I can do no better on this
point than to quote with approval the response of Rip T.C.J. to this argument
in Bailey, supra, at p. 1330:  Subsection
10(1)  directs a property to be valued "for the purpose of computing income
from a business".  The phrase does not contemplate computing income only
from carrying on a business, as suggested by counsel for the respondent.  The
phrases "carrying on a business" and carried on a business" are
found in several provisions of the Act: see, for example, paragraph 2(3)(b),
and subsections 115(1) and 219(1).  "To carry on something," stated
Jackett P. in Tara Exploration [and Development Co. v. M.N.R., 70
D.T.C. 6370], page 6376, "involves continuity of time or operations such
as is involved in the ordinary sense of a `business'".  When this
expression "carry on" is used in the Act, Parliament describes a
continuity of time or operations with respect to the factual situation
contemplated by the particular provision.  Such continuity is not required in
subsection 10(1)  and its addition to that provision would add nothing to that
provision's ordinance.  56               I am also unable to accept the
argument that because s. 10(1)  represents an exception to the general
commercial and accounting principle of realization (see Minister of National
Revenue v. Consolidated Glass Ltd., [1957] S.C.R. 167, at p. 174 (per
Rand J.)) and because this exception has been the subject of some academic
criticism (see B. J. Arnold, Timing and Income Taxation: The Principles of
Income Measurement for Tax Purposes (1983), at pp. 332-33), therefore the
exception should be read more narrowly than the express words chosen by
Parliament.  57               Although the inventory valuation
scheme in s. 10(1)  represents an exception to the normal principle of
realization, the exception itself is also a well-accepted commercial and
accounting principle.  While the realization principle applies with respect to
capital property, it is subject to an exception in the case of inventory as
Rand J. recognized in Consolidated Glass, at p. 174:  "Losses
sustained" and "profits and gains made" are clearly correlatives
and of the same character; but how can profits and gains be considered to have
been made in any proper sense of the words otherwise than by actual realization? 
This [sic] is no inventory valuation feature in relation to capital
assets.  [Emphasis added.]  58               Furthermore, it is not the role of
the court to restrict the interpretation of the clear statutory language
because the exception created by the language has been the subject of academic
criticism.  Many sections of the Income Tax Act  have been the subject of
academic criticism.  By way of example, the basic distinction between capital
gain and income has been criticized in a tax text edited by the same Professor
Arnold whose criticisms of conservative inventory valuation are relied upon by
Iacobucci J.: see Materials on Canadian Income Tax, supra, at p.
297.  Moreover, Professor Arnold's criticisms of conservative inventory valuation
are aimed at any exception to the realization principle and have no greater
force when applied to an adventure in the nature of trade seeking to apply the
exception on a single item of inventory than to stock-in-trader who seeks to
apply the exception to hundreds if not thousands of items of inventory.  59                My colleague Iacobucci J. accepts
the fact that s. 10(1)  applies to an adventure in the nature of trade. 
However, he would restrict the use of the valuation method in s. 10(1)  to
stock-in-traders and those who "carry on" a business.  This
effectively prevents s. 10(1)  from being applied to an adventure in the nature
of trade since by definition an adventurer in the nature of trade is neither a
stock-in-trader nor does he "carry on" a business.  The restriction
placed upon this section by my colleague is based on his view that the object
and purpose of the section is to provide a limited exception to the realization
principle for stock-in-traders as was provided for at common law.  However, as
discussed at the beginning of these reasons, the clear language of the Income
Tax Act  takes precedence over a court's view of the object and purpose of a
provision.  As Hogg and Magee stated in Principles of Canadian Income Tax
Law, supra, at p. 453:  It
would introduce intolerable uncertainty into the Income Tax Act  if clear
language in a detailed provision of the Act were to be qualified by unexpressed
exceptions derived from a court's view of the object and purpose of the
provision.  60               Therefore, the object and purpose
of a provision need only be resorted to when the statutory language admits of
some doubt or ambiguity.  In this case, there is no doubt or ambiguity in the
statutory language of s. 10(1)  which clearly applies to the inventory of a
business including an adventure in the nature of trade.  Although there is no
need to resort to the object and purpose of the section in this case, I would
note that the object and purpose of s. 10(1)  is fully consistent with allowing
the valuation method in that section to be used for adventures in the nature of
trade.  Section 10(1)  is specifically designed as an exception to the
principles of realization and matching in order to reflect the well-accepted
principle of accounting conservatism.  In addition to recognizing accounting
conservatism, the section is designed to stop a business from accumulating
pregnant losses from declines in the value of inventory.  The object and
purpose of the section is to prevent businesses from artificially inflating the
value of inventory by continuing to hold it at cost when the market value of
that inventory has already fallen below cost.  61               Thus, it should not be assumed
that Parliament is opposed to the inventory valuation exception to the
realization principle simply because this exception allows unrealized losses in
certain circumstances.  Although the principal goal of the Income Tax Act 
is to raise national revenue, there are many competing demands and priorities
which may shape tax policy in any given circumstances.  Changes to the Income
Tax Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 945, made subsequent to the years at issue
in this appeal strongly suggest that Parliament supports the principle of
accounting conservatism which underlies the inclusion of inventory valuation in
the determination of business income.  62               Section 10(1) provides that
inventory must be valued at the lower of cost or fair market value or as
otherwise permitted by regulation.  The relevant regulation is Regulation 1801
which read as follows in the years in question on this appeal:                     1801.
[Valuation] Except as provided in section 1802, for the purpose of computing
the income of a taxpayer from a business  (a)
all the property described in all the inventories of the business may be valued
at the cost to him; or  (b)
all the property described in all the inventories of the business may be valued
at the fair market value.  The combined effect of s. 10(1)  and
Regulation 1801 was explained in Interpretation Bulletin IT-473 "Inventory
Valuation" (March 17, 1981 (as revised by Special Release dated December
5, 1986)) as follows:                     Valuation of
Inventory 4.
Except where an individual has elected under subsection 10(6) to value
inventory at nil in computing income from an artistic endeavour (see IT-504),
subsection 10(1) of the Act and section 1801 of the Regulations provide three
alternative methods of valuing inventory.  These are:  (a)
valuation at the lower of cost or fair market value for each item (or class of
items if specific items are not readily distinguishable) in the inventory;                     (b)
valuation of entire inventory at cost;                     (c)
valuation of the entire inventory at fair market value.  Once
a taxpayer has adopted, or has been required to adopt, one of the foregoing
methods of valuing inventory, the taxpayer must continue to use that method on
a consistent basis in subsequent years....  In 1989, Regulation 1801 was amended
to read:                     1801.
[Valuation] Except as provided by section 1802, for the purpose of computing
the income of a taxpayer from a business, all the property described an all the
inventories of the business may be valued at its fair market value.  63               The 1989 amendment removed from
the taxpayer the option of choosing to value inventory at historical cost and
left only the more conservative methods of fair market value or the lower of
cost or market value.  The practical effect of this amendment is that in years
following 1989 the taxpayer must declare a loss for taxation purposes in any
year in which the fair market value of inventory falls below historical cost. 
The taxpayer no longer has the option of postponing this loss until the
taxation year in which the loss is actually realized upon sale of the
inventory.  This is made clear in the "Regulatory Impact Analysis
Statement" published along with the amended regulation, SOR/89-419:  This
change, which is part of the measures announced by the Minister of Finance on
January 15, 1987 relating to the application of losses and other deductions,
will prevent a corporation from maintaining at cost inventories which have
declined in value and thereby deferring the recognition of a loss by postponing
the write-down to fair market value until after a change in control.  The Department of Finance release of
January 15, 1987 which accompanied the introduction of this and other
amendments to the Income Tax Act  amply supports the appellant's
submission that this amendment was part of a concerted effort by the Department
of Finance "to prevent trafficking in loss companies, that is, the
acquisition by a profitable company of a `pregnant loss' company".  Thus
the Department had a valid policy reason to change the exception to the realization
principle recognized by accounting conservatism from an optional to a mandatory
requirement.                     (5)  Policy
Considerations  64               Finally, I wish to address some of
the policy concerns raised by counsel for the respondent.  65               The respondent has raised the
concern that if s. 10(1)  inventory valuation applies to adventures in the
nature of trade then the realization principle will only apply to capital
property.  The respondent also argued that the inventory valuation scheme in s.
10(1)  undermines the matching principle and gives rise to asymmetry since it
allows for business losses when inventory declines in value but does not create
taxable income where there has been an unrealized gain created by a rise in
fair market value.  All of these are valid criticisms of the inventory
valuation scheme in s. 10(1)  but they cannot serve to thwart the intention of
Parliament as expressed in the plain wording of the statute.  Furthermore these
criticisms are relevant to s. 10(1)  as a whole and have no particular
application to adventures in the nature of trade.  I cannot accept that
applying s. 10(1)  to adventures in the nature of trade in accordance with the
wording of that provision will cause significant harm especially when the
respondent admits that the same section should be applied to all the inventory
of all businesses with significant quantities of inventory.  66               Of greater concern is the
interpretation proposed by the respondent which would create a whole new
category of property unrecognized in the Act.  This new class of property would
attract the higher tax rate applicable to business income upon disposition but
in years prior to disposition would be subject to the strictures which the
realization, matching and symmetry principles impose upon the disposition of
capital property.  The Income Tax Act  has established a system with two
distinct categories of property -- inventory, which creates business income or
loss, and capital property, which creates capital gain or loss.  There are
separate rules for each of these two categories of property and the taxpayer
should be entitled to take the benefit as well as bear the burden applicable to
the category into which the property falls.  As Reed J. stated in Cull, supra,
at pp. 5325-26:  Had
the partnership realized a profit from the venture, there can be no question
that, on the basis of the Fraser line of cases, it would have been
business income, and not a capital gain.  Thus, the taxpayer should be allowed
to treat the losses according to the same principle.  67               It is true that an annual
appraisal of the property which constitutes inventory is required in order for
the taxpayer to comply with the requirements of s. 10(1) .  This, however, is
simply a cost of doing business which must be borne by the taxpayer and it is
no more burdensome than the same requirement which is imposed upon companies
with far larger inventories to value that inventory each year.  It should be
remembered that the categorization of inventory (and hence s. 10(1) ) will only
apply to those who meet the judicially established test for an adventure in the
nature of trade, namely that the taxpayer has a trading or business intention
with respect to the property.  This categorization will not apply to taxpayers
who own personal-use property or who hold property for the purpose of long-term
investment since this is categorized as capital property.  68               The fear that allowing adventures
in the nature of trade to take advantage of the inventory valuation in s. 10(1) 
will lead to tax avoidance is unfounded.  It is the rare taxpayer who will be
faced with the situation of this appellant.  In order to meet the test for an
adventure in the nature of trade the taxpayer must have an intention to enter
into a "scheme of profit-making".   It is only where that
scheme goes awry contrary to the intentions of the taxpayer that the taxpayer
will be entitled to take advantage of the inventory valuation scheme in s.
10(1)  in order to recognize a business loss.  Schemes entered into with the intention
of creating a business loss would not qualify as adventures in the nature of
trade and would be tantamount to a sham.  Further, any loss claimed by a
taxpayer when the fair market value falls below cost is subject to recapture by
the Minister in the year of disposition if the fair market value rises again. 
For greater clarity, in the year of disposition the taxpayer is subject to
taxation on the difference between the proceeds of sale and the lowest value
ascribed to the inventory in the years prior to sale.  69               It is true that the application of
the formula Gross Profit = Proceeds of Sale - Cost of Sale [(Value of Inventory
at beginning of year + Cost of Inventory acquisitions) - Value of Inventory at
end of year] could lead to a negative cost of sale if the taxpayer chose to
value inventory at fair market value as permitted by the current Regulation
1801.  This problem can be obviated if the taxpayer chooses to value according
to the lower of cost or fair market value method set out in s. 10(1) .  This
method only recognizes unrealized losses and never recognizes unrealized
gains.  It is only unrealized gains which could give rise to a negative cost of
sale.  A negative cost of sale is not, however, a problem confined to single
items of inventory used in an adventure in the nature of trade where the fair
market value method is chosen.  Trading companies with larger inventories would
face the same problem on a larger scale in any year where the increase in the
market value of inventory on hand exceeds the value of new inventory purchased
in a year.  70               Further, the fact that proceeds of
sale may be zero in a given year does not cast any doubt on the applicability
of the formula.  In any year in which there is a loss under this formula, the
proceeds of sale will be less than the cost of sale and the fact that proceeds
of sale are zero simply reflects this general truth on a smaller scale.  A
taxpayer is statutorily entitled by s. 9(2) to calculate loss using the same
formula as would apply for the calculation of profit.  Moreover, it is
conceivable that a company with a large inventory could generate no sales in a
year.  It would be far more anomalous if the ability of such a company to
recognize declines in the value of its inventory in a year were dependent on
the existence of a single sale.  III.  Conclusions  71               In summary I arrive at the
following conclusions:  1.The
appellant's venture is a business pursuant to the definition in s. 248(1) of
the Act since it meets the test for an adventure in the nature of trade.  2.The
Styles Property is inventory pursuant to the definition in s. 248(1)  because
its cost or value is relevant to the computation of business income in a
taxation year, namely the year of disposition.  3.The
use of the valuation system established in s. 10(1)  and Regulation 1801 is
governed by the application of well-recognized commercial and accounting
principles.  These principles establish that the value of inventory is relevant
to the calculation of business income because it contributes to the cost of
sale.  4.The
valuation system established in s. 10(1)  and Regulation 1801 is a specific
legislated exception to the principles of matching, realization and symmetry
and reflects well-recognized commercial and accounting principles which aim to
achieve a conservative picture of business income.  5.Neither
the common law restriction to stock-in-traders nor other policy considerations
can serve to override the explicit wording of s. 10(1)  which makes the
valuation system therein applicable to all inventory used in the computation of
business income.  6.The
plain reading of s. 10(1)  would allow single items of inventory held as part of
an adventure in the nature of trade to utilize the inventory valuation method
contained therein.  This conclusion is consistent with the basic dichotomy in
the Act between income and capital and the different schemes for taxing each of
these.  7.For
all of the above reasons, the appellant was entitled to make use of the
inventory valuation method in s. 10(1)  in order to recognize a business loss on
the Styles Property in the taxation years in question, namely 1983 and 1984.  IV.  Disposition  72               I would allow the appeal with
costs in this Court and in the courts below and would direct that the Minister's
assessment for the taxation years 1983 and 1984 be set aside and that the
appellant's tax liability for the years in question be redetermined in a manner
consistent with these reasons.                     The reasons of
Gonthier and Iacobucci JJ. were delivered by  I.                 Iacobucci
J. (dissenting) -- This appeal involves a technical question of income
taxation the disposition of which will have an important impact on the
collection of tax revenues in Canada.  It also has implications for many
businesses because this Court is being asked to clarify how general commercial
principles affect the determination of profit under income tax legislation.  II.                The specific issue in this appeal
is whether the vacant land purchased by the appellant, who is not engaged in an
ordinary trading business but, instead, in an adventure in the nature of trade,
is "inventory" in a "business" pursuant to s. 10(1)  of
the Income Tax Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, and, hence, the land's
decline in value is deductible from profit as a business expense.  The
determination of this issue must, however, be made with an eye to the legal
nature of "profit": in other words, whether it is consonant with
income taxation principles and jurisprudence to permit a taxpayer to claim the
fair market depreciation in the value of a piece of property as a business loss
in taxation years in which the property was neither disposed of nor generated any
income. III.               I conclude that the appellant
fails to qualify for the valuation scheme established by s. 10(1)  and,
therefore, cannot deduct the claimed expenses in the 1983 and 1984 taxation
years.  I.  Background  IV.              In January 1982, the appellant and
several others bought a parcel of land (the "Styles Property") in the
city of Calgary.  The land was registered in the name of Trinity Western
College.  The College held the property as nominee for the group of investors. 
The property was acquired for the purpose of reselling it at a profit.  Part of
the anticipated profit was to be paid to the College and to other organizations
as charitable donations and the balance of the profit was to be divided on a pro
rata basis among the members of the investor group.  V.                In the years immediately
following its acquisition, the property substantially decreased in value and
the mortgage thereon was eventually foreclosed in 1986.  The appellant, relying
on ss. 248(1) , 10(1) , 9  and Regulation 1801 (as it then read) of the Income
Tax Act , sought to deduct the decline in the fair market value of the land
as a business loss in his 1983 and 1984 tax returns.  The amounts claimed as
business losses specifically relating to the Styles Property were $252,954 in
1983 and $25,800 in 1984.  It should be noted that the amount claimed for 1983
was found to be incorrect and it was subsequently agreed by all parties that
the correct sum should be $197,690.  The appellant argued that he was entitled
to make such fair market deductions because s. 10(1) of the Act permits
the use of such a valuation scheme should the initiative to purchase the land
be deemed a "business" and should the land be defined as
"inventory".  I underscore that there was no disposition of the
Styles Property in the 1983 or 1984 taxation years; in fact, the land remained
completely undeveloped.  VI.              The Minister of National Revenue
disallowed these business losses on the basis that the property was not
"inventory in a business" within the meaning of ss. 10(1)  and 248(1) 
of the Income Tax Act .  The taxpayer appealed and both the Federal
Court, Trial Division, [1992] 2 F.C. 552, 92 D.T.C. 6248, [1992] 1 C.T.C. 296,
53 F.T.R. 49, and the Federal Court of Appeal, [1993] 3 F.C. 607, 93 D.T.C.
5313, [1993] 2 C.T.C. 113, 156 N.R. 199, upheld the Minister's disallowance of
the losses.  Leave to appeal was granted by this Court on April 28, 1994,
[1994] 1 S.C.R. vii.  II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  Income Tax Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63                     9. (1) [Income from business or
property] Subject to this Part, a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a
business or property is his profit therefrom for the year.                     (2) [Loss from business or
property] Subject to section 31, a taxpayer's loss for a taxation year from a
business or property is the amount of his loss, if any, for the taxation year
from that source computed by applying the provisions of this Act respecting
computation of income from that source mutatis mutandis.                     10. (1) [Valuation of inventory property]
For the purpose of computing income from a business, the property described in
an inventory shall be valued at its cost to the taxpayer or its fair market
value, whichever is lower, or in such other manner as may be permitted by
regulation.                     (2)
[Idem] Notwithstanding subsection (1), for the purpose of computing income for
a taxation year from a business, the property described in an inventory at the
commencement of the year shall be valued at the same amount as the amount at
which it was valued at the end of the immediately preceding year for the
purpose of computing income for that preceding year.  248. (1)  [Definitions] In this Act,                                                                     .
. .  "business"
includes a profession, calling, trade, manufacture or undertaking of any kind
whatever and, except for the purposes of paragraph 18(2)(c), an
adventure or concern in the nature of trade but does not include an office or
employment;                                                                     .
. .  "inventory"
means a description of property the cost or value of which is relevant in
computing a taxpayer's income from a business for a taxation year;  Income Tax Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 945                     1801. 
[Valuation] Except as provided in section 1802, for the purpose of computing
the income of a taxpayer from a business  (a)
all the property described in all the inventories of the business may be valued
at the cost to him; or  (b)
all the property described in all the inventories of the business may be valued
at the fair market value.  III.  Judgments Below  Federal Court, Trial Division, [1992] 2 F.C. 552  VII.             Rouleau J. dismissed the appellant's
appeal from the Minister's reassessment.  He first reviewed the case law which
considered the definition of "business" and "adventure or
concern in the nature of trade".  In Bailey v. M.N.R., 90 D.T.C.
1321, the Tax Court of Canada concluded that, for the purpose of s. 10(1) ,
"business" included "an adventure or concern in the nature of
trade".  As well, it was held that an isolated transaction may fall within
the meaning of the word "business" in s. 10(1) .  In Bailey
it was also held that land acquired for resale in an adventure in the nature of
trade could be classified as inventory for the purposes of s. 10(1)  and
the land was eligible for an inventory "write down".  This reasoning
was also followed in Van Dongen v. The Queen, 90 D.T.C. 6633 (F.C.T.D.),
and Weatherhead v. M.N.R., [1990] 1 C.T.C. 2579 (T.C.C.).  VIII.            Rouleau J. noted that both parties
conceded that the property in issue was an adventure in the nature of trade. 
However, he held that s. 10(1)  should not be interpreted in the manner
suggested by the appellant.  He emphasized that the Income Tax Act  must
be read as a whole.  Thus, one must also consider other relevant provisions
such as s. 9  (meaning of income and loss) and s. 248(1)  (definition
of inventory and business).  Rouleau J. observed that a taxpayer's profit must
be determined in accordance with ordinary commercial and accounting principles
and practices. It was held that these ordinary commercial principles and
practices dictated that in any business the revenues should be matched against
the expenses before any loss or profit is recognized.  Generally, in the case
of a trading business the profit (loss) equals the proceeds of sales less the
cost of sales.  The cost of sales is calculated by adding the value of the
inventory at the beginning of the year to the cost of acquisitions during the
year and subtracting the value of inventory at the end of the year.  Rouleau J.
then stated (at p. 558):  Adopting
this formula, a trading business can determine its cost of sales by calculating
the change in the value of its inventory from the beginning to the end of a
given period.  The valuation of inventory can therefore affect the business'
gross profit.  It is only to this extent that the inventory value becomes
relevant.  It is not by itself deductible from the taxpayer's income.  IX.              Rouleau J. then referred to the
decision in Minister of National Revenue v. Shofar Investment Corp.,
[1980] 1 S.C.R. 350, for approval of this approach.  It was emphasized that the
computation of profit must be different for a business with relatively few
transactions from that of a business engaged in continuous trading (at p. 559):                     For
example, when there is but one item in inventory, profit or loss cannot be
ascertained until the disposition of that particular item since before
disposition, there would be no revenues upon which to set off costs.  X.                Rouleau J. held that in a
business of few transactions the value of the inventory is not relevant in
computing income until disposition.  Thus, in a year when the property is not
sold, it would not be included in the computation of income for tax purposes
and s. 10(1)  would not apply.  In the case at bar, the trial judge
expressed the opinion that applying s. 10(1)  to an adventure in the nature
of trade would lead to an absurdity since the Act does not tax unrealized
profits and, accordingly, should not recognize unrealized losses.  If the
property had increased in value during the time it was held, there would be no
taxation of the increased value until the moment of disposition.  When
considering s. 9(1), Rouleau J. stated that it becomes apparent that an
inventory "write down" of the property would not reflect the truest
picture of the appellant's income position.  Federal Court of Appeal, [1993] 3 F.C. 607                     (i) per
Létourneau J.A. (majority)  XI.              The first issue discussed by
Létourneau J.A. (writing for himself and Linden J.A.) was whether s. 10(1) 
of the Income Tax Act  applied to property held in an adventure in the
nature of trade (at pp. 614-15):                     It
is true that the inventory rule makes more sense in the context of an ordinary
trading business where goods are regularly bought and sold, making it difficult
to keep track of the actual cost and sale price of each piece of property.  The
rule becomes then the only sound basis for computing the profits from the sales
made in the year.  Like Martland J. in Minister of National Revenue v. Irwin,
[1964] S.C.R. 662, at pp. 664-665, I doubt that there is a need for the rule to
apply in a case like the present one when there is only one item and its actual
costs and eventual sale price can easily be established.  But I cannot conclude
that its application to an adventure in the nature of trade necessarily leads
to an absurdity.  The fact that there are fewer transactions when it is a mere
adventure in the nature of trade than there would be if it were an ordinary
trading business does not render section 10 nugatory with respect to adventures
in the nature of trade.  Thus, a property held for resale as an
adventure in the nature of trade can be inventory under s. 10(1)  and is
eventually eligible for inventory write-down.  The only question is when this
eligibility arises.  XII.             The issue, then, is whether the
appellant could apply s. 10(1)  to the taxation years 1983 and 1984.  It was
noted that s. 10(1)  is not a specific provision overriding s. 9  which
establishes the basic rules for determining business income.  Thus, s. 10
becomes relevant only when it comes to computing business income; under
s. 9  such computation must relate to the actual taxation year.  As well,
the definition of "inventory" in s. 248(1)  is also linked to a
taxpayer's income from a business for a taxation year.  Létourneau J.A. held
(at pp. 617-18):                     As
it appears from this decision of our Court [Canada v. Dresden Farm Equipment
Ltd., [1989] 1 C.T.C. 99], a property is inventory in a taxation year
because its cost or value is relevant in the computation of the business income
in that year.  This is so in the year in which the property is sold.  A
property can be designated as inventory in a taxation year in which it is not
sold if that property is included in the computation of the income produced by
that business in that year.  However, there has to be a computation of income,
i.e., profit or loss, from the business.                            In
cases where the business itself consists in the buying and reselling of a
parcel of land as in the present case, there are no business receipts or
proceeds, and therefore no possible determination of a business profit or loss
within the terms of subsection 9(1), unless and until the land bought is
disposed of.  The valuation of inventory property according to subsection 10(1) 
then becomes relevant in assessing the profit, i.e., the business income, for that
year because it determines the cost of sale.  When there is more than one sale
and more than one property held in inventory, the cost of sales is
"computed by adding the value placed on inventory at the beginning of the
year to the cost of acquisitions to inventory during the year, less the value
of inventory at the end of the year".  As can be seen from these
provisions, the value of inventory is relevant in determining the profit of a
business, and the cost of an inventory item, as the Supreme Court of Canada
ruled, "can affect the ascertainment of the gross profit of the business,
but it is not, in itself, deductible from the taxpayer's income".
[Emphasis in original.]  XIII.            Létourneau J.A. concluded that, in
the case at bar, the losses could not be claimed in 1983 and 1984 since there
was no disposition of the property.  As has been noted by the trial judge, this
was consistent with the matching principle which requires the determination of
income revenues to be paired with the expenditures made to earn them.  Simply
put, there was no business income in 1983 or 1984 to be matched with the losses
claimed.                     (ii) Marceau
J.A. (concurring in the result)  XIV.            Marceau J.A. shared his colleague's
view that the appeal should be dismissed but expressed reasons similar to those
of the trial judge that the wording of s. 10(1)  does not apply to the case
at bar.  Otherwise, an application of the disposition would lead to an
absurdity, this being a finding not arrived at by Létourneau J.A.  XV.             As to the wording of the provisions,
Marceau J.A. stated that there is no calculation of income when no transaction
that could lead to a receipt or expense is performed throughout the year.  As
well, the definition of "inventory" in s. 248 as applied in
s. 10 makes no sense when the whole business is itself composed of the one
property alleged to be inventory.  XVI.            The absurdity would result from the
fact that the Act does not require a taxpayer who has claimed a loss for a
decrease in the market value of a property acquired as an adventure in the
nature of trade to pay tax in subsequent years  where there are increases in the
market value beyond original cost.  Such increases are only taxable when the
property is disposed of.  Section 9  could hardly be construed as requiring the
taxpayer to report income on his "continuing adventure" by apprising
the property in each subsequent year.  This would create obvious practical
problems.  XVII.          It was also held that the valuation of
inventories flows from the carrying on of a business.  The same cannot be said
for an adventure in the nature of trade involving a single property.  In
closing, Marceau J.A. held (at p. 611) that:  [S]ection 10, in the case of a trade, necessarily
implies writing up and writing down inventory values, where the market value of
the inventories are used in computing the cost of goods sold year after year,
but not so in the case of a so-called adventure in the nature of trade,
involving a sole property.  IV.  Issue on Appeal  XVIII.         Can the appellant benefit from the
valuation scheme established by s. 10(1)  and Regulation 1801 of the Income
Tax Act  with regard to the Styles Property and, if so, can the decline in
the fair market value of that property be claimed as a business loss in each of
the 1983 and 1984 taxation years?  V.  Analysis  A.  Introduction  XIX.            In order for the appellant to
prevail, he must satisfy this Court that the following two requirements are
met:  1.He
must demonstrate the he is eligible for the valuation scheme proposed by
s. 10(1) of the Act.  In order to prove such eligibility, the appellant
must show that his real estate transaction regarding the Styles Property was a
"business" pursuant to the definition set out in s. 248(1) of
the Act.  and  2.Given
that s. 10(1)  and Regulation 1801 simply create a valuation scheme and not
an automatic taxation deduction, the appellant must show that he can, under the
applicable principles and provisions of the Income Tax Act , utilize the
s. 10(1)  valuation scheme in order to calculate and claim a business loss
under s. 9 of the Act.  This involves an inquiry into whether the
appellant is the kind of businessperson intended to be covered by s. 10(1) 
and, furthermore, whether a single piece of property that realizes no income or
loss can, pursuant to s. 248(1) of the Act, be properly considered to be
"inventory" for the taxation years in question.  XX.             Although the appellant's initiative
is in fact a "business", in my opinion the Styles Property is not
"inventory" under s. 248(1)  for the taxation years in question. 
Persons in the position of the appellant cannot utilize the s. 10(1) 
valuation scheme to deduct fair market depreciations in their
"inventory" as business losses in years in which that
"inventory" is not sold.  I shall focus much of my attention on this
latter consideration given that it raises important issues touching upon the
interpretation of taxation legislation generally.  B.  Are the Losses
Deductible under Section 9  in the Years in Question?  XXI.            As I have already outlined, the
appellant must first satisfy this Court that (a) his speculative land deal
constituted a "business", namely an adventure or concern in the
nature of trade; and (b) that, under the governing principles and provisions of
the Income Tax Act , the raw land constituted "inventory" under
s. 248(1)  for the taxation years in question, namely 1983 and 1984.                     (i)    Is
the Appellant's Venture a Business?  XXII.          The relevant definition of
"business" is found in s. 248(1) :  "business"
includes a profession, calling, trade, manufacture or undertaking of any kind
whatever and, except for the purposes of paragraph 18(2)(c), an
adventure or concern in the nature of trade but does not include an office
or employment; [Emphasis added.]  XXIII.         Of all of the items included in the
definition of "business", the one bearing the closest relationship
with the appellant's initiative is the "adventure in the nature of
trade".  The question that must now be answered is whether the appellant's
real estate venture in fact meets the judicial interpretation on what
constitutes an "adventure in the nature of trade".  Since this point
is not seriously challenged by the respondent, I shall very quickly review the
authorities on this point.  XXIV.         Perhaps the best place to start is
Interpretation Bulletin IT-459 (September 8, 1980), which synthesizes the
Canadian and U.K. jurisprudence on the definition of an "adventure or
concern in the nature of trade" (such as, for example, Californian
Copper Syndicate v. Harris (1904), 5 T.C. 159 (Ex., Scot.); Edwards v.
Bairstow, [1956] A.C. 14 (H.L.); Irrigation Industries Ltd. v.
Minister of National Revenue, [1962] S.C.R. 346; and Regal Heights Ltd.
v. Minister of National Revenue, [1960] S.C.R. 902).  There are several
elements used to determine an "adventure in the nature of trade". 
These include:  (i)The
taxpayer's conduct: the consideration here is whether the taxpayer's actions in
regard to the property in question were essentially what would be expected of a
dealer in such a property.  (ii)The
nature of the property: sometimes an inference of "trading" will
emerge from the type of property and whether it appears that its purchase
cannot be justified by reasons that the property would procure personal
enjoyment or a return to the purchaser other than arising from its disposition.  (iii)The
intention of the taxpayer and the manner in which the property was purchased. 
Evidence that an attempt was made to sell the property shortly after its
acquisition reveals such a trading intention.  (iv)It
is clear that the mere fact that the transaction was a single or isolated one
is neither determinative nor prohibitive of a finding that the initiative was
in fact an adventure in the nature of trade.  See also E. C. Harris, Canadian
Income Taxation (1979), at p. 170; and B. J. Arnold, T. Edgar and J. Li,
eds., Materials on Canadian Income Tax (10th ed. 1993), at pp. 303  et
seq.  XXV.          In the case at bar, the factual record
reveals that the Styles Property was acquired for the purpose of reselling it
for financial gain.  There was a purchase and an intention to derive a profit
therefrom.  This anticipated profit was planned to be given partly to charity
and partly divided on a pro rata basis among the investors, including
the appellant.  The type of property in question was a parcel of raw land,
often the subject matter of real estate trading ventures. Although the actual
transaction was a single one, it does not appear that the individuals involved,
at least certainly not the appellant, were inexperienced; quite the contrary:
the evidentiary record reveals a sophisticated level of business correspondence
among the parties to the arrangement in which it was obvious that they were
treating it as a trading adventure.  For these reasons, I find that the real
estate deal was an adventure in the nature of trade and, consequently, a
"business" under s. 248(1)  of the Income Tax Act .  XXVI.         However, on another note, I, with
respect, disagree with the trial judge (and Marceau J.A.) that s. 10(1) of
the Act does not apply to a business such as the appellant's which is an
adventure in the nature of trade.  Nowhere in s. 248(1)  is it indicated that
something determined to be a "business" because it is an
"adventure" is exempt from the definition of "business" for
any provisions of the Act other than ss. 18(2)(c), 54.2, 95(1) and
110.6(4)(f).  (Sections 54.2 and 110.6(4)(f) were added to the
definition in 1988 and s. 95(1) in 1995.)  As noted by the Tax Court of Canada
in Bailey, supra, at p. 1328:                     The
definition of "business" in subsection 248(1)  includes "an
adventure or concern in the nature of trade".  It is the word
"business" so defined that is used in subsection 10(1) .  When
Parliament does not intend an adventure or concern in the nature of trade to be
included in the word "business" it provides for the exception in the
substantive definition of business; for example, the word "business"
used in paragraph 18(2)(c) does not include an adventure or concern in
the nature of trade....  XXVII.        Having found that the appellant's
undertaking comes within the definition of "business", the next
question to decide is whether the appellant is entitled to claim the decline in
his land value under s. 9 .  This brings us to the principles and
jurisprudence regarding that section of the Act.                     (ii)The
Governing Principles of Profit and Loss under Section 9 of the Act:  Can
the Appellant Use the Section 10(1)  Valuation Scheme to Deduct as a
Business Loss the Decline in the Fair Market Value of the Property?  XXVIII.      At the outset, I underscore (as did Rouleau
J. at trial) that neither s. 10(1)  nor Regulation 1801 provides a
deduction from income nor do they mandate that any person with inventory can
deduct any loss (on fair market value) arising therefrom.  They simply give
some direction as to how the valuation procedure should take place once
ordinary commercial principles establish whether a business loss should be
claimed under s. 9 .  XXIX.         As noted by Urie J.A. in The Queen v.
Cyprus Anvil Mining Corp., 90 D.T.C. 6063 (F.C.A.), at p. 6067:                     Subsection
10(1) , and Regulation 1801...[are]...provision[s] of general application
conferring the possibility for a taxpayer to make a choice of his method of
inventory valuation....  Computation of income, on the other hand, must relate
to the taxpayer's taxation year.  I do not think, therefore, that it can be
said that subsection 10(1)  is a specific provision overriding the general one,
subsection 9.  ... [Section
10(1) ] must be construed within the context of the Act and be harmonious with
its scheme and with the object and intention of Parliament.  XXX.          Under s. 9 of the Act, a taxpayer
is required to recognize profit from a business in a particular year as
income.  Profit (or loss) normally equals the proceeds of sales less the cost
of those sales.  I underscore that computation of profit and loss under
s. 9  runs independently from the determination whether a taxpayer is
eligible for the s. 10(1)  valuation procedure.  Inventory valuation is not
an expense and is not in itself deductible as such: Shofar, supra,
at p. 355. Consequently, this Court must thus determine whether, in this case,
the appellant is entitled to use the s. 10(1)  procedure to compute his
losses for the 1983 and 1984 taxation years and, then, whether he can deduct
these from his proceeds from the same source, which were nil in both years.  XXXI.         This determination must be made with an
eye to the principles that govern the computation of profit; in fact, I find
these principles are largely dispositive of the instant appeal.  As held by
Thorson P. in Daley v. M.N.R., [1950] C.T.C. 254 (Ex. Ct.), at p. 260:  [T]he first enquiry whether a particular
disbursement or expense is deductible...[is] whether its deduction is
permissible by the ordinary principles of commercial, trading or accepted
business and accounting practice.  XXXII.        Cartwright J., in Dominion Taxicab
Association v. Minister of National Revenue, [1954] S.C.R. 82, was even
less equivocal on this matter.  He held (at p. 85):  The
expression "profit" is not defined in the Act. It has not a
technical meaning and whether or not the sum in question constitutes profit
must be determined on ordinary commercial principles unless the provisions of
the Income Tax Act  require a departure from such principles.
[Emphasis added.]  See also V. Krishna, The
Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax (4th ed. 1993), at pp. 275 et seq.;
R. Huot, Understanding Income Tax for Practitioners (1994-95 edition),
at p. 299; and Materials on Canadian Income Tax, supra, at pp.
336 et seq.  XXXIII.      Probably the key taxation principle
relevant to the case at bar is the realization principle, which provides that,
in the computation of income from an adventure in the nature of trade, gains or
losses must be realized in order for them to be included in the computation of
income for tax purposes: Friedberg v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 285.  In Minister
of National Revenue v. Consolidated Glass Ltd., [1957] S.C.R. 167, Rand J.
held at p. 174:  [H]ow can profits and gains be considered to have
been made in any proper sense of the words otherwise than by actual
realization?  This [sic] is no inventory valuation feature in relation
to capital assets....  The word "loss" in the context means absolute
and irrevocable, finality.  That state of things is realized upon a sale;...  XXXIV.      In the case at bar, it is obvious that the
"loss" that the appellant seeks to deduct in computing his 1983 and
1984 income had not been realized at that time since the properties had not
been disposed of.  In fact, no revenues were generated from the Styles Property
in either 1983 or 1984.  In a sense, in the applicable taxation years the
"adventure" consisted only of a purchase.  It was therefore not fully
completed.  Although insufficient to extract it from the definition of
"business" under s. 248(1) , the fact that the adventure was only
half-completed in 1983 and 1984 strikes at the heart of the computation of any
business losses arising therefrom during those years.  XXXV.       Professor B. J. Arnold, in Timing and
Income Taxation: The Principles of Income Measurement for Tax Purposes
(1983), remarks at p. 333:  One
of the basic principles of income taxation is that appreciation or depreciation
in the value of property is not taken into account in the computation of income
until such appreciation or depreciation has been realized, usually by means of
a sale.  XXXVI.      The importance of this principle is reflected
in the fact that, whenever the Income Tax Act  permits deemed
dispositions at fair market value without actual realizations, it does so
narrowly and in a highly circumscribed manner: for example, when a taxpayer
ceases to be a Canadian resident (s. 48  (now repealed)), or upon death (s. 70 ),
or upon change of control (s. 111 ).  Exceptions from the realization principle
are thus clearly stipulated and explicitly codified, unlike the exception upon
which the appellant seeks to rely.  For the most part, the Act does not
recognize "unrealized" or "paper" gains or losses: Krishna,
supra, at pp. 278-79.  XXXVII.     The respondent correctly notes, however,
that the principle of realization in the computation of profit and loss is
subject to an exception in the case of stock-in-trade: Whimster & Co. v.
Inland Revenue Commissioners (1925), 12 T.C. 813 (Ct. Sess., Scot.), at p.
823, per Lord Clyde; and BSC Footwear Ltd. v. Ridgway, [1971] 2
All E.R. 534 (H.L.).  In Canada, this exception is presently codified in
s. 10(1)  of the Income Tax Act :  Minister of National Revenue v.
Irwin, [1964] S.C.R. 662 (referring to the former version of s. 10(1) ,
s. 14(2) ).  Such stock-in-trade can be valuated at the lower of cost and fair
market value and, consequently, can permit a dealer therein to deduct
unrealized losses through the cost of goods sold formula.  The result of this
principle is effectively to enable a business to increase its cost of goods
sold and thus reduce its profits (or increase its losses) in a given year by
the amount by which the market value of its inventory at the end of the year
falls below the cost of that inventory.  The effect of this is to permit a
business to recognize as a loss the decline in the value of its inventory in the
year in which this decline occurs as opposed to the year in which the inventory
is actually sold.  However, the commercial principles and jurisprudential
authority underpinning the Income Tax Act  do not recognize that this
exception to the realization principle should operate for unsold single pieces
of land that are held by adventurers in trade and alleged to be inventory.  XXXVIII.    The situation of dealers in stock-in-trade is
markedly different from that faced by a business adventurer such as the
appellant.  Whereas these dealers are engaged in the "carrying on of a
business", the appellant has launched a single adventure.  These dealers
regularly purchase hundreds of goods which are quickly sold.  Since there are
many sales, over which it is impossible to keep track on an individual basis,
an averaging formula is used and discrepancies are, over time, evened out: BSC,
supra, at p. 536.  Such an averaging formula is required since it is not
practicable for such dealers to determine their profit by looking at each
individual item sold.  In fact, in businesses where it is neither possible nor
desirable to keep a running total of the cost of the goods being sold on a
daily basis, the only feasible way to determine the cost of all the goods sold
in an accounting period is to add the value of the inventory on hand at the
beginning of the period to the cost of the inventory purchased during the
period and then subtract the value of the inventory on hand at the end of the
period: Krishna, supra, at p. 324.  XXXIX.      This situation must be contrasted with that
in which the appellant finds himself.  The profit/loss from the Styles Property
is readily ascertainable in the year of disposition.  The piece of inventory is
easily traceable.  The importance of these considerations was underscored by
Jackett C.J. in his decision in Oryx Realty Corp. v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1974] 2 F.C. 44 (C.A.).  Although the facts of Oryx are
different from those in the appeal at bar, I find the following passage (at p.
48) to be helpful to the present analysis:  Gross
trading profit for a taxation year may be obtained by adding together the
profits of the various transactions completed in the year or by adding together
the prices at which sales were effected in the year and deducting the aggregate
of the costs of the various things sold.  Either of such methods would be
suitable for a business consisting  of relatively few transactions.  In the
ordinary trading business, however, the practice, which has hardened into a
rule of law, is that profit for a year must be computed by deducting from the
aggregate "proceeds" of all sales the "cost of sales"
[involving inventory].  XL.             Drawing from this decision, the
respondent makes the following submission, which I fully endorse:                     The
introduction of section 10 in the Act was intended only to recognize
statutorily the rule that only "ordinary trading businesses" [not the
appellant] could properly use the lower of cost or market rule.  The section
was not intended to extend the use of that rule to cases such as the present
one where there is only a single transaction.  XLI.            This legal interpretation has even
woven its way into the prior jurisprudence of this Court.  In effect, in Irwin,
supra, Abbott J. remarked, in passing at p. 665, that he was
"doubtful whether... the inventory provisions [presently s. 10(1)  and
Regulation 1801]...are applicable in the circumstances of a case...where the
actual cost and sale price of each particular piece of property are well
established".  At the time these comments were obiter dicta, but I
now treat them as an important part of the ratio decidendi of the
instant appeal.  XLII.           It is well accepted that adventurers
do not "carry on" a business.  As remarked by Jackett P. in Tara
Exploration and Development Co. v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 6370 (Ex. Ct.), at p.
6376, aff'd [1974] S.C.R. 1057:  I
have concluded that the better view is that the words "carried on"
are not words that can aptly be used with the word "adventure".  To
carry on something involves continuity of time or operations such as is
involved in the ordinary sense of a "business".  An adventure is an
isolated happening.  One has an adventure as opposed to carrying on
a business. [Emphasis in original.]  XLIII.          Although an adventure in the nature of
trade (just as a stock-in-trade retail establishment and other examples of
"carried on" enterprises) are "businesses" under
s. 248(1) , I conclude that it is only persons who carry on a business who
ought to be entitled to benefit from s. 10.  This position is echoed in
previous decisions of this Court: Irwin, supra, and Shofar,
supra.  In fact, in Shofar, Martland J., writing for a unanimous
Court, held at p. 354:  [T]he practice, "hardened into a rule of
law" in the computation of the profit of a trading business is to
deduct from the aggregate proceeds of all sales the cost of sales computed by
adding the value placed on inventory at the beginning of the year to the cost
of acquisitions to inventory during the year, less the value of inventory at the
end of the year.  [Emphasis added.]  For his part, Harris, supra,
remarks at p. 170 that, if the taxpayer had "a trading motivation, his
gain or loss on the transaction would be a business gain or loss".  I
highlight his use of the words "on the transaction": implicit in this
terminology is the recognition that there be a purchase and a sale and
that the proceeds arising therefrom be used to calculate the profit or loss
flowing from that source and, in turn, be entered under s. 9  in the year
in which the trading venture is completed.  XLIV.         The appellant is concerned with the
alleged unfairness resulting from the adoption of the respondent's interpretation. 
According to the appellant, the respondent's methodology would result in an
inequitable situation in which a business, if it were to own 100 lots and sell
one of these, would be eligible for the inventory "write down" and if
it were to sell none it would not be so eligible.  I do not see how the
decision in the instant appeal would lead to such a result.  It is clear that
any profits or losses arising from that sale of the one piece of property
actually sold could be included under s. 9 .  However,  the ability to
deduct the fair market depreciation of the 99 unsold lots hinges not upon
whether or not one lot is sold but, rather, upon the determination whether
"ordinary commercial principles" would recognize the holding of 100
lots (in which only one was sold) as tantamount to "stock-in-trade". 
If so, then such a fictional taxpayer might very well be entitled to claim any
decline in fair market value as a business loss.  But this is a hypothetical
question for a future court to decide.  It does not arise upon the facts of
this case.  This appeal only involves one transaction, this being very far
removed from the level of continuous activity at which the cost of goods sold
formula is geared to operate.  XLV.           What does arise in this case is my
observation that, if adopted, the appellant's argument would have a wide range
of undesirable ramifications from a policy standpoint.  It would create a
situation in which any property acquired for the purpose of resale at a profit
(that is as part of an adventure in the nature of trade), outside of the normal
carrying on of a business (shares, art, stamps, gold, land, antiques), would
constitute a source of income in each year, thus requiring, in the absence of
the sale of the property, an annual computation of profit or loss in which,
necessarily, a valuation of the fair market value of the property would have to
be undertaken.  Moreover, this loss could be carried over to offset any actual
business profits regardless whether the loss was actually realized during the
year.  It would thus only be in cases of capital property that the realization
principle would continue to operate.  I have serious doubts that this was the
intent of the drafters of the exception to the realization principle contained
in s. 10(1)  and Regulation 1801.  I also doubt that it was their intention to
oblige the owners of such a vast array of property to make yearly appraisals of
the worth of that property for taxation purposes; moreover, given that these
calculations would merely be appraisals, significant uncertainty and
unreliability in the computation of tax liability might very well arise.  XLVI.         The appellant's interpretation would
also undermine the matching principle underpinning s. 9 of the Act: Neonex
International Ltd. v. The Queen, 78 D.T.C. 6339 (F.C.A.) (for an
affirmation of the importance of this principle and an invalidation of an
attempt to claim expenses in a year in which they were not incurred); see also West
Kootenay Power and Light Co. v. Canada, [1992] 1 F.C. 732 (C.A.).  This
principle emphasizes that receipts and expenditures which produce the net
income are to be properly "matched" in the same time period: Krishna,
supra, at p. 279.  The importance of the "match" flows from
the critical role timing considerations play in taxation matters.  In the case
of an adventure in the nature of trade, the profit or loss from the transaction
is computed at the time the adventure is effected, not in any year prior to the
settlement: see Tobias v. The Queen, 78 D.T.C. 6028 (F.C.T.D.). 
Instead, the adoption of the appellant's interpretation would permit a wide
array of these "adventures in the nature of trade"  to expense the
costs (or a portion thereof) in one taxation year while recognizing the
revenues in another year.  XLVII.        As was proposed by the respondent before
this Court:                     It
is submitted that it is settled law that in the case of an adventure in the
nature of trade, the profit or loss from the transaction is computed at the
time the adventure is settled and no computation of profit or loss is necessary
or appropriate in any year prior to the settlement....                     In
the case of isolated transactions, the use of the lower of cost or market
method typically would significantly distort the profit from such
transactions.  For example, where the sale of a particular piece of property
does not occur for several years, the taxpayer would be permitted to deduct
over the several years losses in respect of unrealized depreciations in value
of the property.  By contrast, with ordinary trading businesses, the
stock-in-trade of the particular business typically turns over in the next
fiscal period and, hence, the anticipated losses deducted at the end of any one
year are more likely (because of the continuing sales activity of the trading
business) to be in fact realized in the next year.  The distortion of profit in
such cases is therefore likely to be substantially less than in the case of an
adventure in the nature of trade where the realization of the profit or loss
may not take place for a number of years.  This distortion can, for those with
profits and losses emanating from other non-related sources, effectively permit
individuals to avoid tax through a careful balancing of their varied isolated
investments.  I cannot accept that this is conduct Parliament intended to
encourage.  XLVIII.       I also find that the appellant's interpretation
undermines broad principles of symmetry.  If we permit the appellant to deduct
the losses he claims he is entitled to, then, if the taxation system is to
remain symmetrical, business gains on unrealized "inventory" would
also have to be filed.  This is not the case.  I am aware of the fact that the
appellant points out that, if in a year subsequent to acquisition but prior to
disposition, a property which in a previous year fell in value then increases
in value, any increase up to original cost will have to be taken into account
in the income calculation.  However, I observe that no unrealized increase
beyond original cost is ever taxed, thereby giving rise to an asymmetry since
any drop below cost would, on the appellant's interpretation, immediately give
rise to a business loss.  XLIX.         It was submitted before this Court that
denying the appellant the benefit of s. 10 impinges upon the principle of
conservatism which constitutes a principal element of the generally accepted accounting
procedures used to calculate profit/loss under s. 9 .  In response, I note
that this Court, in Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at p. 723,
held that it is more appropriate in the taxation context to rely upon
well-accepted commercial principles given that strict adherence to accounting
conservatism might not be consonant with the purposes of the taxation system. 
This conclusion is echoed in the academic context.  Arnold, supra, at
pp. 332-33, concludes:  [T]he
lower of cost and fair market value rule...is a product of the conservatism of
accounting practice, which finds an understatement of income preferable to an
overstatement.  There is some justification for this conservatism for purposes
of financial accounting; however, substantial doubt has been raised as to the
validity of the lower of cost and fair market value rule even for financial
accounting purposes.  For tax purposes, there is no justification for either
the lower of cost and fair market value rule or the "all fair market value"
rule for the valuation of inventory.  L.                It is for this reason that the
lower of cost and market method of inventory valuation contained in
s. 10(1)  and Regulation 1801 is recognized as an exception limited only to
stock-in-traders.  I see no reason to extend its reach beyond this group, and
certainly not to adventures in the nature of trade.  The applicable method of
accounting within the taxation context should be that which best reflects the
taxpayer's true income position:  Ken Steeves Sales Ltd. v. M.N.R., 55
D.T.C. 1044 (Ex. Ct.); M.N.R. v. Publishers Guild of Canada Ltd., 57
D.T.C. 1017 (Ex. Ct.), at pp. 1026 and 1030; Associated Investors of Canada
Ltd. v. M.N.R., 67 D.T.C. 5096 (Ex. Ct.), at pp. 5098-99; and Maritime
Telegraph and Telephone Co. v. The Queen, 91 D.T.C. 5038 (F.C.T.D.).  In
the case at bar, the appellant's income position is best reflected by not
declaring the decline in the fair market value of the Styles Property as a
business loss in 1983 and 1984, but instead waiting until the year of
disposition to enter any such losses, this being 1986.  LI.               The appellant further alleges that
the respondent's interpretation of the expense scheme for inventory would lead
to a mathematical absurdity.  It is submitted that in determining the raw land
to be inventory yet in insisting that the inventory valuation can only be done
in the year of disposition, the Federal Court of Appeal has created a situation
in which the real loss suffered by the taxpayer can never be realized.  I have
two responses to this line of argument.  LII.              First, the problem is entirely
obviated if the land is not held to be "inventory" or the taxpayer is
precluded from utilizing the inventory valuation scheme for the purposes of
s. 9 ; in such a scenario, the loss in the year of disposition is simply
calculated by subtracting the proceeds of the disposition from the original
amount disbursed to purchase the property (and vice versa for profits). 
Second, upon closer scrutiny, it is the appellant's interpretation which yields
mathematical improbabilities: it would recognize a negative cost of goods sold,
something of a surprise, in a year in which there were in fact no sales, an
even greater surprise.  Furthermore, it would seem that a negative cost of
goods sold would render askew the entire deemed realization formula contained
within s. 10(1) .  LIII.            In closing, I emphasize my discomfort
with a ruling that would permit speculative investments constituting
"adventures in the nature of trade" to be written down to the lower
of cost and market value in years in which their value declines yet they are
not sold.  This discomfort appears to be shared by the drafters of the Act as
well as the authors of much of the jurisprudence and academic commentaries
dealing with the computation of profit under s. 9 of the Act.  Both the
application of s. 10(1)  as well as the definition of "inventory"
must be very sensitive to these considerations.                            (iii)       Is
the Land "Inventory"?  LIV.            With an eye to the aforementioned
principles of profit and loss within the context of income taxation, I turn to
the question whether the Styles Property could be considered to be
"inventory".  Section 248(1)  defines "inventory" as
follows:  "inventory"
means a description of property the cost or value of which is relevant
in computing a taxpayer's income from a business for a taxation year; 
[Italics and underlining added.]  LV.             In my mind the key element of this
definition is that the property, in order to be properly classified as
"inventory", must have a cost or value which, in the particular
taxation year in question, bears some relevance to the amount of the taxpayer's
income (profit or loss) for that particular year.  Under the principles of tax
accounting, the value of inventory bears no direct relationship with
profit/loss.  Rather, profit or loss is calculated by subtracting the cost of
sales (the value of the inventory at the beginning of the year plus the cost of
acquisitions, less the value of the inventory at the end of the year) from the
proceeds of sale: Shofar, supra.  Thus, the value of inventory
(which, according to s. 10(1) , can be based on cost or fair market value)
only plays a part in calculating the cost of sales.  Ostensibly, in order for
there to be "costs of sales", there must have been a sale in the
first place.  Once again, the realization principle is triggered.  LVI.            In 1983 and 1984 there was no sale of
the land.  Nor was there a purchase.  The land was not involved in any
transaction whatsoever.  To this end, the drop in the fair market value of the
land had no effect whatsoever on the income of the appellant.  It may have
affected the appellant's wealth or the size of his asset portfolio, but neither
of these constitute his "income" for the taxation years in question. 
In a sense, I find that the appellant has neglected the importance of the
phrase "for a taxation year" inserted in the definition in
s. 248(1) .  LVII.           In fact, at para. 7(d) of his factum,
the appellant submits that his "interest in the Styles Property was
inventory because the cost or value of that property is relevant in determining
his income from a business".  Of course, over the lifetime of the
business, the purchase of that property might very well have a significant
impact on that business's income.  But the Income Tax Act  does not levy
funds based upon the lifetime of a business.  Rather, taxation is organized in
discrete yearly units; the ability to carry over deductions/inclusions from one
year to the other is highly circumscribed.  This rationale appears to have
infused the definition of "inventory" since, in order to fit within
this definition,  there must be relevance to the income for that
taxation year.  This is plainly not the case in the appeal at bar.  In
short, the appellant should be able to claim, under the ordinary tracing
formula (proceeds less the purchase cost), the drop in the value of the land in
the year in which the property is disposed of, but not in years where the
property remains dormant.  LVIII.          At this juncture, it must be remembered
that the Act's definition of "inventory" is not identical to the
definition proposed for accounting or real estate purposes.  After all, as this
Court concluded in Symes, supra, at p. 723, the Income Tax Act 
is motivated by the purpose of raising public revenues and, as such, differs
from the goals of the accounting world.  I note in this regard that the
Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants has defined "inventory"
as including, inter alia, "[i]tems of tangible property which are
held for sale in the ordinary course of business":  Terminology for
Accountants (3rd ed. 1983), at p. 81.  Similarly, a publication entitled Canadian
Institute of Public Real Estate Companies Recommended Accounting Practices for
Real Estate Companies (November 1985) states that land currently held for
sale and land held for future development and sale is inventory.  Under both of
these definitions, the appellant's land would likely be included as
"inventory".  But the Income Tax Act  has taken a very
different approach.  It has expressly codified (and hence, in cases of
conflict, overruled the principles that underlie the accounting or commercial
worlds) a definition that clearly connects the property to the yearly income
and, in the appellant's case, this link is missing for the taxation years 1983
and 1984.  So, too, is the principal condition precedent to the applicability
of the inventory valuation scheme, namely that the taxpayer be a
stock-in-trader.  LIX.            The appellant relies on a series of
cases in support of the proposition that even undisposed property which is the
subject matter of an adventure in the nature of trade can constitute inventory
and, thus, should its fair market value drop, the taxpayer is entitled to
register that unrealized decline in value as a business loss for that year: Bailey,
supra; Weatherhead, supra; Van Dongen, supra;
and Skerrett v. M.N.R., 91 D.T.C. 1330 (T.C.C.).  I note in passing that
the Federal Court of Appeal has never heard any of these cases; in fact, the
only Federal Court of Appeal authority in this area of the law is its decision
in the case at bar.  With respect, I choose not to follow this line of
authority.  I note that in none of these decisions was the meaning of
"inventory" under s. 248(1)  properly placed within the context
of the principles of profit and loss (developed under s. 9  and the
predecessor sections thereto) discussed supra which I have found to be
of crucial importance.  LX.             For the reasons discussed above, I
find the distinction drawn by Rouleau J. in the instant appeal between
taxpayers holding one or a few items of inventory (such as the appellant) and
those with thousands of items (a retail store) to be instructive.  Retail
companies do not purchase items and then retain them for years should the
market turn against them.  Items are generally purchased in bulk and then sold
with quick turnaround.  To this end, in such a situation it can be safely
assumed that there is a relation between the value of the goods claimed to be
inventory and the overall income of the taxpayer for the year in question (thus
the definition of "inventory" would be met and s. 10(1)  would be
applicable), even though in each individual case it might be impossible to
trace the actual moment when the item in question was sold.  It is consequently
appropriate to rely upon averaging calculations.  Thus, the "cost of
sales" formula yields constructive and practical results; on the other hand,
in a business with relatively few transactions such as the appellant's, the
cost of sales formula "does not reflect the true picture of [the]
business' income position" (per Rouleau J., at p. 559).  VI.  Conclusions and Disposition  LXI.            To summarize, I arrive at the
following conclusions:  1.The
appellant's initiative is a "business" pursuant to the definition
thereof in s. 248(1) of the Act since it amounts to an adventure in the
nature of trade.  2.The
exception to the realization principle carved out by s. 10(1)  and
Regulation 1801 is not a method of valuation the benefit of which should accrue
to adventurers such as the appellant.  Instead, this exception is to permit
cost of sale inventory valuations only for dealers in stock-in-trade, these
persons necessarily being engaged in the "carrying on of a business".  3.The land is not inventory for the taxation
years in question under the Income Tax Act 's definition (s. 248(1) )
since it bears no relation whatsoever to the appellant's "business
income" for tax purposes in those years.  This conclusion is mandated by
the principles underlying s. 9 .  Consequently, the appellant cannot benefit
from the application of the valuation system established by s. 10(1) .  LXII.           I would therefore dismiss the appeal
with costs.  It should, however, be noted that, by rejecting this taxpayer's
appeal, this Court is not denying him the right to claim any losses (that are
otherwise available) on the Styles Property as business losses.  Rather, this
Court is simply ensuring that these losses can only be recorded on his 1986 tax
return, the only year in which they actually relate to his income.  LXIII.          Finally, with respect to my colleague
Major J.'s reasons, I have the following comments.  First, I do not dispute
that the Income Tax Act  is based on a system that recognizes only two
broad categories of property, inventory or capital property.  In my opinion,
the analysis I have set out above is not inconsistent with this basic
division.  I agree that the Styles Property could be viewed as inventory in the
year of disposition.  In fact, I would note my disagreement with the trial
judge and Marceau J.A. about the applicability of the inventory valuation
method embodied in s. 10(1)  to an adventure in the nature of trade.  Section
10(1)  applies to a business which includes an adventure in the nature of
trade.  However, the real question is not whether the Styles Property is
inventory, or whether s. 10(1)  is applicable, but whether the appellant is
entitled to claim the decline in value under s. 9 , the defining section on
business income.  The analysis turns not upon whether the property is
inventory, but upon determining the most appropriate method for determining a
taxpayer's profit.  In the case of an adventurer in the nature of trade, who is
not carrying on business, and who has made no disposition, it is not
appropriate to determine profit using the inventory valuation method, for the
reasons I have outlined above.  LXIV.         Second, I have difficulty with my
colleague's reasoning with respect to the difference between the phrasing
"for the taxation year", and "for a taxation year".  Income
is determined under the Act each year, and the characterization of property can
change from year to year.  I fail to understand how property that has received
a particular characterization in one year ipso facto receives that
characterization in another, or all other, years.  LXV.           Third, I disagree with my colleague
that the inventory valuation method is an anachronism in this age of computer
technology; rather, it is my view that the method is still a vital tool for
businesses with significant and complex inventories.                     Appeal allowed with
costs, Gonthier and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Thorsteinssons, Vancouver.                     Solicitor
for the respondent:  George Thomson, Ottawa.  