                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Mathew v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 643, 2005 SCC 55  Date:  20051019 Docket:  30067  Between: Eugene Kaulius,
Steven M. Cook, Charles E. Beil, Craig C. Sturrock,
Amalio De Cotiis, John N. Gregory, 347059 B.C. Ltd.,
Frank Mayer, John R. Owen, Verlaan
Investments Inc., William John Millar, NSFC Holdings Ltd.,
TFTI Holdings Limited, Douglas H. Mathew, Ian H. Pitfield,
Estate of the late Lorne A. Green and Innocenzo De
Cotiis Appellants v. Her Majesty the
Queen Respondent  Coram:
McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella
and Charron JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 64)  McLachlin C.J. and Major J. (Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel,
  Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ. concurring)    ______________________________ Mathew v.
Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 643, 2005 SCC 55  Eugene Kaulius,
Steven M. Cook, Charles E. Beil, Craig C. Sturrock,
Amalio De Cotiis, John N. Gregory, 347059 B.C.
Ltd., Frank Mayer, John R. Owen, Verlaan Investments
Inc., William John Millar, NSFC Holdings
Ltd., TFTI Holdings Limited, Douglas H. Mathew, Ian H. Pitfield,
Estate of the late Lorne A. Green and Innocenzo De Cotiis                                                                                        Appellants  v.  Her Majesty
The Queen                                                                               Respondent  Indexed
as:  Mathew v. Canada  Neutral
citation:  2005 SCC 55.  File
No.:  30067.  2005:  March 8;
2005: October 19.  Present:  McLachlin
C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and
Charron JJ.  on appeal from
the federal court of appeal    Held: The appeal should be dismissed.    Cases Cited  Followed: Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Canada, [2005] 2
S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC 54; not followed: OSFC Holdings Ltd.
v. Canada, [2002] 2 F.C. 288, 2001 FCA 260.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income Tax Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 18(13) , 96 , 245(1)  to
(4) , 248(10) .  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (Linden,
Rothstein and Sexton JJ.A.), [2004] 1 C.T.C. 115,
311 N.R. 172 (sub nom. Kaulius v. Minister of National Revenue),
2003 D.T.C. 5644 (sub nom. Kaulius v. The Queen), [2003]
F.C.J. No. 1470 (QL), 2003 FCA 371, affirming a decision of
Dussault J.T.C.C., [2003] 1 C.T.C. 2045, 2002 D.T.C. 1637,
[2002] T.C.J. No. 222 (QL).  Appeal dismissed.  Kim Hansen, for the appellants.   The judgment of the Court was delivered by  The Chief Justice and Major J.
—  1.      Introduction  1                                  
This appeal, like its companion case Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v.
Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC 54 (“Canada Trustco”)
(released concurrently), raises the issue of the interplay between the general
anti-avoidance rule (“GAAR”) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985,
c. 1 (5th Supp .), and specific provisions of the Act conferring tax
benefits.  2                                  
As discussed more fully in Canada Trustco, a tax benefit may be
denied under the GAAR if allowing the tax benefit would frustrate or defeat the
object, spirit or purpose of the provisions that are relied upon for the tax
benefit.  The central issue in this appeal is the proper interpretation of  s.
18(13)  and the provision that allows for loss sharing among partners under s.
96(1).  For the reasons that follow, the appeal is dismissed with costs.  2.      Facts  3                                  
As a result of a series of transactions, the appellants lowered their 
incomes by deducting losses from the sale of mortgaged properties originally
belonging to Standard Trust Company (“STC”). The overall arrangement  involved
three stages. At the first stage, STC transferred a portfolio of mortgages with
unrealized losses to a non-arm’s length partnership, Partnership A, thereby
acquiring a 99 percent interest in it. At the second stage, STC relied on s.
18(13)  to transfer the unrealized losses to Partnership A and then sold its 99
percent interest in it  to an arm’s length party.  At the third stage,
Partnership B was formed to acquire the 99 percent interest in Partnership A. 
The appellants joined Partnership B and were thus able to claim their
proportionate shares of the losses from the eventual sale or write-down of the
mortgaged properties.  In this way, STC’s losses were transferred through s.
18(13)  and the partnership vehicle to arm’s length taxpayers who offset them
against their own incomes, while STC recovered a portion of the losses
associated with the defaulted mortgages.  4                                  
STC carried on a business which included the lending of money on the
security of mortgages on real property.  By May 1991, STC was insolvent and
Ernst & Young was appointed as its liquidator.  At that time, STC owned a
portfolio of 17 non-performing loans with 9 underlying real estate properties
having a fair market value of approximately $33 million, the “Portfolio
Assets”.  The cost to STC of the Portfolio Assets was approximately $85
million.  Since STC was being liquidated, it could not use the approximately
$52 million in unrealized losses from the Portfolio Assets.  5                                  
The liquidator devised and oversaw the execution of a series of
transactions to realize maximum returns on the disposal of the Portfolio
Assets.  The transactions are described in greater detail in a statement of
admitted facts, which is reproduced at para. 5 of the decision of the Tax Court
of Canada ([2003] 1 C.T.C. 2045).  In sum, the appellants who are partners in a
relatively passive partnership that dealt with STC at arm’s length deducted
over $10 million of STC’s losses against their own incomes.  6                                  
On October 21, 1992, STC incorporated a wholly owned subsidiary, 1004568
(the “subsidiary”).  On October 23, 1992, STC and its subsidiary entered into a
partnership agreement to create the STIL II Partnership (“Partnership A”).  On
that date, STC contributed the Portfolio Assets as capital for a 99 percent
interest in Partnership A and the subsidiary borrowed $417,318 from STC to make
its capital contribution for a 1 percent interest.  At its inception,
Partnership A did not deal with STC at arm’s length.  7                                  
Section 18(13)  of the Income Tax Act  prohibits a taxpayer whose
ordinary business includes the lending of money from deducting a loss on the
disposition of a mortgage if at the end of a specified period, the mortgage is
owned by a partnership that does not deal at arm’s length with the transferor. 
Under such circumstances, the loss is added to the cost of the mortgage to the
partnership.  8                                  
STC relied on s. 18(13)  to transfer the Portfolio Assets into
Partnership A at their historical cost of $85 million.  From the outset, it was
STC’s goal to use this transaction to preserve the unrealized losses of the
Portfolio Assets of $52 million and to transfer them into Partnership A so that
STC could eventually sell its 99 percent interest in Partnership A to an arm’s
length party.  9                                  
The partnership rules under s. 96 of the Act provide that a
partnership’s income or losses flow through to its partners at the end of the
taxation year. Partners are entitled to claim their proportionate shares of
partnership losses, provided they are partners at the end of the taxation year,
regardless of when they joined the partnership. 10                              
It was STC’s plan to sell its 99 percent interest in Partnership A to an
arm’s length party so that Partnership A would dispose of the Portfolio Assets
and realize losses of up to $52 million, and the new partner would rely on s.
96 of the Act to claim 99 percent of the losses.  Between August 1992 and
January 1993, STC contacted 38 prospective purchasers for its 99 percent
interest in Partnership A.  11                              
In January 1993, STC began negotiations with OSFC Holdings Ltd.
(“OSFC”), an arm’s length corporation.  On May 31, 1993, STC and OSFC agreed on
the purchase and sale of the 99 percent interest in Partnership A.  One of the
terms of the purchase agreement was that OSFC would pay to STC an adjustable
“Additional Payment” of up to $5 million if Partnership A realized losses from
the disposition of the Portfolio Assets for income tax purposes.  The result of
this term was to convert STC’s $52 million in unrealized losses into up to $5
million in cash for STC.  12                              
OSFC had planned from the outset to syndicate its interest in
Partnership A.  Before describing the remaining transactions, it is useful to
describe the 4 corporate and 13 individual appellants.  13                              
TFTI Holdings Ltd. (“TFTI”) and NSFC Holdings Ltd. (“NSFC”), are
controlled by Peter Thomas, who also controlled OSFC.  Mr. Thomas, who is not a
party to this appeal, is very experienced in real estate, having founded the
Century 21 real estate firm in Canada.  14                              
Mr. Kaulius is a chartered accountant by training and was, from 1992
until 1998, president of OSFC, NSFC and TFTI.  15                              
Verlaan Investments Inc. and 347059 B.C. Ltd. are real estate
development companies.  16                              
Messrs. Amalio and Innocenzo De Cotiis are brothers who are heavily
involved in the real estate business.  17                              
Mr. Mayer is an investment analyst who has been specializing in real
estate for over 28 years.  18                              
Mr. Gregory, Mr. Cook, and the seven remaining appellants were all
lawyers with the firm of Thorsteinssons.  Mr. Gregory testified that he was
fairly experienced in the real estate business and Mr. Cook testified that he
was familiar with real estate through his training.  19                              
On July 5, 1993, OSFC and TFTI formed the SRMP Realty & Mortgage
Partnership (“Partnership B”), to acquire and manage OSFC’s 99 percent interest
in Partnership A.  The capital of Partnership B was divided into 35 class A
units and 15 class B units.  The class B units were allocated as follows:  Class B unitholder          No. of class
B units OSFC                                                                                                12.0 TFTI                                                                                                    
2.0 NSFC                                                                                                 
0.5 Eugene Kaulius                                                                       
0.5  20                              
TFTI, NSFC and Eugene Kaulius were issued their class B units for $1 per
class B unit.  OSFC was issued 12 class B units as part of its consideration
for transferring its 99 percent interest in Partnership A to Partnership B. 
OSFC was managing partner for Partnership B and was authorized to raise capital
for Partnership B in order to purchase OSFC’s 99 percent interest in
Partnership A by offering and selling class A units.  OSFC approached a number
of potential investors to participate as partners in Partnership B, including
the appellants.  21                              
On July 7, 1993, OSFC sold its 99 percent interest in Partnership A to
Partnership B for cash, 12 class B units in Partnership B, and other
consideration.  Partnership B also assumed the obligation to pay the
“Additional Payment” for realized losses to STC.  22                              
On or about July 9, 1993, the class A unit holders described in
Appendix A (see para. 5 of the Tax Court decision) subscribed for the
stated number of class A units, for $110,000 per class A unit plus additional
subscription proceeds to Partnership B to fund their proportionate shares of
the “Additional Payment”.  23                              
The appellants are class A and class B unit holders in Partnership B and
their shares are set out in the following table:     Contribution  Closing
  Balance Class
  A     TFTI  $       
  110,000 -$           
  937,689  NSFC  $       
  110,000 -$           
  937,689  A. De Cotiis  $        
  36,667 -$           
  312,528  I. De Cotiis  $        
  36,667 -$           
  312,528  F. B. Mayer  $       
  330,000 -$        
  2,813,068  347059 B.C. Ltd. and Verlaan
  Investments Inc.  $       
  330,000 -$        
  2,813,068  C. E. Beil  $        
  88,000 -$           
  750,152  S. M. Cook  $        
  77,000 -$           
  656,383  L. A. Green  $        
  44,000 -$           
  375,076  J. N. Gregory  $        
  55,000 -$           
  468,845  D. H. Mathew  $        
  44,000 -$           
  375,076  W. J. Millar  $        
  55,000 -$           
  468,845  J. R. Owen  $        
  44,000 -$           
  375,076  I. H. Pitfield  $        
  55,000 -$           
  468,845  C. C. Sturrock  $        
  88,000 -$           
  750,152  Total
  Class A  $    
  1,503,334  -$      
  12,815,020     Class
  B     TFTI  $                2 -$        
  2,095,377  NSFC  $                1 -$           
  523,844  Kaulius  $                1 -$           
  523,844  Total
  Class B   $                 4  -$        
  3,143,065              
  Total Class A and B  $    
  1,503,338 -$      
  15,958,085  24                              
During the relevant period, neither Partnerships A nor B ever acquired
or sold any property other than the Portfolio Assets.  25                              
By September 30, 1993, as a result of the sale of some of the Portfolio
Assets and the write-down of the remaining assets to fair market value,
Partnership A realized losses in excess of $52 million. Partnership A allocated
99 percent of its losses to Partnership B which then allocated these losses to
its partners, including the appellants.  26                              
The appellants together deducted over $10 million of the Partnership B
losses against their own incomes in 1993 or 1994.  Some of the appellants, in
addition to reducing their taxable incomes for the relevant year to NIL, also
computed non-capital losses to be carried forward or back.  27                              
The Minister of National Revenue reassessed the appellants, applied the
GAAR, and disallowed the deduction of their share of the Partnership B losses.  3.      Legislative Provisions  28                              
Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)  18. . . .  (13) [Superficial loss] Subject to subsection
138(5.2) and notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, where a taxpayer  (a)  who was a resident of Canada at any time in a taxation year
and whose ordinary business during that year included the lending of money, or  (b)  who at any time in the year carried on a business of
lending money in Canada  has sustained a loss on a disposition of property used or held in that
business that is a share, or a loan, bond, debenture, mortgage, note, agreement
of sale or any other indebtedness, other than a property that is a capital
property of the taxpayer, no amount shall be deducted in computing the income
of the taxpayer from that business for the year in respect of the loss where  (c)   during the period commencing 30 days before and ending 30
days after the disposition, the taxpayer or a person or partnership that does
not deal at arm’s length with the taxpayer acquired or agreed to acquire the
same or identical property (in this subsection referred to as the “substituted
property”), and  (d)  at the end of the period described in paragraph (c),
the taxpayer, person or partnership, as the case may be, owned or had a right
to acquire the substituted property,  and any such loss shall be added in computing the cost to the taxpayer,
person or partnership, as the case may be, of the substituted property.   96. (1) [General Rules] Where a taxpayer is
a member of a partnership, the taxpayer’s income, non-capital loss, net capital
loss, restricted farm loss and farm loss, if any, for a taxation year, or the
taxpayer’s taxable income earned in Canada for a taxation year, as the case may
be, shall be computed as if                                                                     .
. .  (g)  the amount, if any, by which  (i)  the loss of the partnership for a taxation year from any source or
sources in a particular place,  exceeds  (ii) in the case of a specified member (within the meaning of the
definition “specified member” in subsection 248(1) if that definition were read
without reference to paragraph (b) thereof) of the partnership in the
year, the amount, if any, deducted by the partnership by virtue of section 37
in calculating its income for the taxation year from that source or sources in
the particular place, as the case may be, and  (iii)    in any other case, nil  were the loss of the taxpayer from that source or from sources in that
particular place, as the case may be, for the taxation year of the taxpayer in
which the partnership’s taxation year ends, to the extent of the taxpayer’s
share thereof.  245. (1) [Definitions] In this section,  “tax benefit” means a reduction, avoidance or
deferral of tax or other amount payable under this Act or an increase in a
refund of tax or other amount under this Act;                                                                     .
. .  “transaction” includes an arrangement or event.   (3) [Avoidance transaction] An avoidance
transaction means any transaction  (a)  that, but for this section, would result, directly or
indirectly, in a tax benefit, unless the transaction may reasonably be
considered to have been undertaken or arranged primarily for bona fide purposes
other than to obtain the tax benefit; or  (b)  that is part of a series of transactions, which series, but
for this section, would result, directly or indirectly, in a tax benefit,
unless the transaction may reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or
arranged primarily for bona fide purposes other than to obtain the tax
benefit.  (4) [Where s. 2 does not apply] For greater
certainty, subsection (2) does not apply to a transaction where it may
reasonably be considered that the transaction would not result directly or
indirectly in a misuse of the provisions of this Act or an abuse having regard
to the provisions of this Act, other than this section, read as a whole.  4.      Judicial Decisions  4.1    Tax Court of Canada, [2003] 1 C.T.C.
2045  29                              
The appeal before the Tax Court of Canada proceeded solely on the issue
of whether the GAAR could be applied to deny the tax benefit.  The Tax Court
judge found (at para. 233) that the transactions at issue were “basically the
same” as those that were considered in OSFC Holdings Ltd. v. Canada, 
[2002] 2 F.C. 288, 2001 FCA 260 (“OSFC”).  The Tax Court judge followed
the decision of the majority in OSFC and dismissed the appeal.  4.2    Federal Court of Appeal, [2004] 1
C.T.C. 115, 2003 FCA 371  30                              
The Federal Court of Appeal agreed that the facts in this case were
essentially the same as those in OSFC; it followed the decision of the
majority in OSFC and dismissed the appeal.  In OSFC, the Federal
Court of Appeal applied a two-step approach to the GAAR: it held at the first
step that s. 18(13)  and s. 96  allowed the appellants to claim the losses at
issue, but held at the second step that the appellants should be denied those
losses because allowing the tax benefit would contravene the overriding policy
of the Income Tax Act  against the trading of losses between taxpayers.  5.      Analysis  5.1    The Interpretation and Application of the
GAAR  31                              
Our conclusions on the interpretation and application of the GAAR are
summarized at para. 66 of the Canada Trustco appeal, released
concurrently.  1.                                
Three requirements must be established to permit application of the
GAAR:  (1)   A tax benefit resulting from a
transaction or part of a series of transactions (s. 245(1) and (2));  (2)   that the transaction is an avoidance
transaction in the sense that it cannot be said to have been reasonably
undertaken or arranged primarily for a bona fide purpose other than to
obtain a tax benefit; and  (3)   that there was abusive tax avoidance in
the sense that it cannot be reasonably concluded that a tax benefit would be
consistent with the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions relied upon by
the taxpayer.  2.                                
The burden is on the taxpayer to refute (1) and (2), and on the Minister
to establish (3).  3.                                
If the existence of abusive tax avoidance is unclear, the benefit of the
doubt goes to the taxpayer.  4.                                
The courts proceed by conducting a unified textual, contextual and
purposive analysis of the provisions giving rise to the tax benefit in order to
determine why they were put in place and why the benefit was conferred.  The
goal is to arrive at a purposive interpretation that is harmonious with the
provisions of the Act that confer the tax benefit, read in the context of the
whole Act.  5.                                
Whether the transactions were motivated by any economic, commercial,
family or other non-tax purpose may form part of the factual context that the
courts may consider in the analysis of abusive tax avoidance allegations under
s. 245(4) .  However, any finding in this respect would form only one part of
the underlying facts of a case, and would be insufficient by itself to
establish abusive tax avoidance.  The central issue is the proper
interpretation of the relevant provisions in light of their context and
purpose.  6.                                
Abusive tax avoidance may be found where the relationships and
transactions as expressed in the relevant documentation lack a proper basis
relative to the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions that are purported
to confer the tax benefit, or where they are wholly dissimilar to the
relationships or transactions that are contemplated by the provisions.  7.                                
Where the Tax Court judge has proceeded on a proper construction of the
provisions of the Income Tax Act  and on findings supported by the
evidence, appellate tribunals should not interfere, absent a palpable and
overriding error.  (Emphasis in
original.)  32                              
As in the Canada Trustco appeal, the first two requirements, that
there be a tax benefit and an avoidance transaction, were conceded. The tax
benefits are the losses, in excess of $10 million, that were deducted by the
appellants, who are unitholders in Partnership B (the “tax benefit”).  33                              
A “series of transactions” is explained at paras. 25 and 26 of Canada
Trustco.  The GAAR may apply to a tax benefit that is the result of a
“series of transactions” which includes events “completed in contemplation of
the series” (s. 248(10)  of the Income Tax Act ).  In the instant
appeal, the series of transactions includes all the transactions, as described
earlier, from the transfer of losses by STC into Partnership A to the losses
claimed by the  unitholders in Partnership B.  The Tax Court judge found that
the primary purpose of each transaction in the series was to obtain a tax
benefit.  5.2    The Issue  34                              
As stated, the primary purpose of each transaction in the series was to
transfer STC’s losses into Partnership A so that Partnership A could serve as a
vehicle to sell the losses to arm’s length taxpayers.  Ultimately, the
appellants, who dealt with STC at arm’s length, purchased the tax losses
through the use of Partnership B. The appellants deducted those losses against
other income and some also computed non-capital losses to be carried forward or
back.  In return they provided funds which found their way back to STC, which
thus recovered a portion of its loss on the non-performing mortgages.  The
appellants relied on a combination of s. 18(13)  and the partnership provisions
of the Income Tax Act  to claim the losses.  This was essentially a
series of transactions aimed at transferring unrealized losses from one arm’s
length taxpayer to another.  The tax consequences of the transactions are the
issue, not the status of the partnerships.  35                              
The question is whether these transactions, which it is agreed are
avoidance transactions giving rise to a tax benefit, result in abusive tax
avoidance within s. 245(4) .  More specifically, in the context of this
series of transactions, would allowing the appellants to deduct these losses
frustrate the object, spirit or purpose of s. 18(13)  and the partnership
provisions of the Act?  As stated at para. 44 of Canada Trustco,  “[t]he
heart of the analysis . . . lies in a contextual and purposive
interpretation of the provisions of the Act that are relied on by the taxpayer,
and the application of the properly interpreted provisions to the facts.”  36                              
Section 18(13) will apply to a partnership if the following conditions
are met: (1) a taxpayer in the money-lending business disposes of a mortgage
(or similar non-capital property); (2) a partnership owns or has a right to
acquire the property at the end of the prescribed period; and (3) the
partnership does not deal at arm’s length with the taxpayer.  37                              
When s. 18(13) applies, it produces two tax consequences. First, the
transferor cannot deduct the loss from the disposition.  Second, the loss is
added to the cost of the property to the transferee.  38                              
The effect of the first result is to prevent the transferor from
claiming the loss that would ordinarily result from the transfer.  This result
is not at issue in this case, since STC did not claim the losses on this
transaction.  The second result, however, is at issue.  39                              
The appellants, who ultimately claimed the losses, seek to rely in part
on the loss-preservation aspect of s. 18(13).  They argue that all the
conditions under s. 18(13) were met and that in particular, since
Partnership A did not deal at arm’s length with STC at the end of the period
prescribed, the unrealized losses were properly transferred to Partnership A. 
Further, once the losses were preserved for the benefit of Partnership A under
s. 18(13), they were entitled to claim losses in proportion to their interest
in Partnership B, under the partnership provisions. The Minister, on the other
hand, argues that the series of transactions results in abusive tax avoidance
and should be precluded under the GAAR.  5.3      Interpretation of Section 18(13)  and Section 96(1)  of the
Income Tax Act  5.3.1   The Proper Interpretive Approach  40                              
To resolve the dispute arising from the combined operation of s. 18(13) 
and s. 96  of the Income Tax Act , it is necessary to determine
Parliament’s intention in enacting these provisions by interpreting them
purposively, in light of their context. 41                              
The majority of the Federal Court of Appeal in the related case of OSFC
interpreted s. 18(13) and s. 96 of the Act in a literal manner at the first
stage of its two-part test. It concluded that since s. 18(13)  does not on its
face restrict the losses once they are transferred, the losses may be
subsequently transferred to an arm’s length taxpayer.  Similarly, it reasoned
that the partnership rules in s. 96 of the Act would allow the appellants to
claim the losses on the basis that they provide for a distribution of income
and losses from the partnership to the partners at the end of the partnership’s
fiscal year, without any further restriction.  The Federal Court of Appeal then
went on to disallow the benefits under the GAAR at the second stage of its
analysis, where it considered the policy of the Act as a whole.  42                              
In effect, the majority conducted a narrow textual analysis of the
specific provisions at issue, s. 18(13)  and s. 96  (stage 1), and supplemented
this by a broad purposive analysis having regard to what it considered to be a
policy of the Act as a whole (stage 2).  While it reached the correct result,
we reject its two-stage method in favour of a unified textual, contextual and
purposive approach to interpretation.  There is an abiding principle of
interpretation: to determine the intention of the legislator by considering the
text, context and purpose of the provisions at issue.  This applies to the Income
Tax Act  and the GAAR as much as to any other legislation.  43                              
We add this. While it is useful to consider the three elements of
statutory interpretation  separately to ensure each has received its due, they
inevitably intertwine.  For example, statutory context involves consideration
of the purposes and policy of the provisions examined.  And while factors
indicating legislative purpose are usefully examined individually, legislative
purpose is at the same time the ultimate issue — what the legislator intended.  5.3.2   The Text of the Provisions  44                              
As outlined above, the appellants submit that they are entitled to
deduct the losses because of the wording of s. 18(13)  and s. 96 . It is clear
that the preservation of the loss under s. 18(13)  is for the benefit of a
person or partnership who does not deal  at arm’s length with the transferor. 
Since the words of s. 18(13)  do not expressly restrict the ability to claim the
loss to the immediate non-arm’s length transferee, the appellants argue that
they may use the partnership provisions to claim it.  The Minister, on the
other hand, argues that the section addresses a non-arm’s length relationship
and an arm’s length taxpayer cannot use the partnership provisions to claim the
loss preserved by that section.  45                              
On their face, the partnership provisions found in s. 96 of the Act
impose no restrictions on loss sharing between partners, except for foreign
partnerships under s. 96(8).  Accumulated losses are available to all partners,
provided they entered the partnership before the end of the taxation year.  It
is agreed that the appellants claimed losses in proportion to their interests
in Partnership B.  Nevertheless, a question arises as to whether these
provisions can apply in conjunction with s. 18(13)  to allow the appellants to
claim losses that originated with the original transferor, STC.  46                              
The requirement that a partnership “not deal at arm’s length with the
taxpayer” under s. 18(13)  and the partnership rules must be purposively
construed in relation to each other and in the context of other provisions of
the Income Tax Act  that address the transfer of losses. The task is to
determine, in light of the series of transactions, whether to allow the
appellants to claim the losses would frustrate or defeat the object, spirit or
purpose of the treatment of losses under s. 18(13)  and the partnership rules,
notwithstanding that the tax benefit might arise from the application of a
literal interpretation of these provisions.  5.3.3   The Context of the Provisions  47                              
The basic rules of statutory interpretation require that the larger
legislative context be considered in determining the meaning of statutory
provisions.  This is confirmed by s. 245(4) , which requires that the question
of abusive tax avoidance be determined having regard to the provisions of the
Act, read as a whole.  48                              
The question is whether other provisions of the Income Tax Act 
shed light on whether Parliament intended s. 18(13)  and s. 96  to be used to
preserve an unrealized loss for future sale to an arm’s length party.  The
government argues that other provisions of the Act show that the transfer of
losses to arm’s length parties is generally against the policy of the Act.  It
is allowed only exceptionally in specific circumstances for specific purposes. 
The appellants counter that where Parliament wished to prevent the transfer of
losses to arm’s length parties, it did so explicitly, and that the absence of
explicit prohibitions in s. 18(13)  and s. 96  permits the inference that
Parliament intended to allow such transfers.  49                              
The Federal Court of Appeal considered other provisions of the Income
Tax Act  that address the transfer or sharing of losses between taxpayers. 
It properly concluded that the general policy of the Income Tax Act  is
to prohibit the transfer of losses between taxpayers, subject to specific
exceptions.  It also correctly concluded that under such exceptions, Parliament
intended to promote a  particular purpose concerning a distinct relationship
between the transferor and the transferee under specifically described
circumstances.  However, we note that it cannot be automatically inferred from
the general policy against the transfer of losses between taxpayers that s.
18(13)  must be read as preventing the appellants from claiming the losses in
this case.  This policy is but one consideration to be taken into account in
determining Parliament’s intent with respect to s. 18(13)  and s. 96 .  50                              
In summary, the legislative context surrounding s. 18(13)  and s. 96  of
the Income Tax Act , while perhaps not in itself conclusive, suggests
that Parliament would not likely have intended arm’s length parties to be able
to buy losses generated by s. 18(13)  transfers.  5.3.4   The Purpose of Section 18(13)  and
Section 96  of the Income Tax Act  and Parliament’s Intent  51                              
The partnership rules under s. 96  are predicated on the requirement that
partners in a partnership pursue a common interest in the business activities
of the partnership, in a non-arm’s length relationship.  Although, on its face,
s. 96(1)  imposes no restriction on the flow of losses to its partners, except
for the treatment of foreign partnerships under s. 96(8), it is implicit that
the rules are applied when partners in a partnership carry on a business in
common, in a non-arm’s length relationship.  52                              
The purpose for the broad treatment of loss sharing between partners is
to promote an organizational structure that allows partners to carry on a
business in common, in a non-arm’s length relationship.  53                              
The purpose of s. 18(13) in particular is to prevent a taxpayer who is
in the business of lending money from claiming a loss upon the superficial
disposition of a mortgage or similar non-capital property.  This purpose is
achieved by confining the loss that would ordinarily be claimed by the
transferor to a non-arm’s length transferee.  Where s. 18(13) does not apply,
only the transferor may claim the loss on the disposition, which would be
consistent with the general policy of the Act against the transfer of losses.  54                              
Under s. 18(13), the loss is generally under the control of the
transferor or traceable to the business of the transferor and is preserved
because of its special relationship with the transferee partnership.  The
section in effect denies the loss to the transferor because it originated and
remains in the transferor’s control before and after the transfer.  To allow a
new arm’s length partner to buy into the transferee partnership and thus to
benefit from the loss would violate the fundamental premise underlying s.
18(13) that the loss is preserved because it essentially remains in the
transferor’s control.  It would contradict the main purpose of s. 18(13) and
the premise on which it operates.  Section 18(13) allows the preservation and
transfer of a loss because of the non-arm’s length relationship between
transferor and transferee.  Absent that relationship, there is no reason for
the provision to apply.  5.3.5   Conclusion on Interpretation of Section
18(13) and Section 96 of the Act  55                              
These observations suggest that the combined effect of s. 18(13) and the
partnership provisions do not allow taxpayers to preserve and transfer
unrealized losses to arm’s length parties. Section 18(13) relies on the premise
that the partners in the transferee partnership pursue a business activity in
common other than to transfer the loss and that the partnership and the
transferor deal in a non-arm’s length relationship with respect to the
property.  5.4    Application  56                              
This brings us to the ultimate question of whether the only reasonable
conclusion is that the series of transactions on which the appellants rely for
the tax benefits they claim results in abusive tax avoidance when s. 18(13)  and
s. 96(1)  are interpreted purposively, in the context of the Act as a whole.  57                              
As stated at para. 59 of Canada Trustco, a determination of
whether there was abusive tax avoidance under s. 245(4)  requires a close
examination of the facts in order to determine whether allowing a tax benefit
would be within the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions relied upon by
the taxpayer.  Although no single factual element is in itself determinative of
whether there was abusive tax avoidance, the GAAR may be applied to deny a tax
benefit “where the relationships and transactions as expressed in the relevant
documentation lack a proper basis relative to the object, spirit or purpose of
the provisions that are purported to confer the tax benefit, or where they are
wholly dissimilar to the relationships or transactions that are contemplated by
the provisions” (Canada Trustco, at para. 60).  58                              
We are of the view that to allow the appellants to claim the losses in
the present appeal would defeat the purposes of s. 18(13) and the partnership
provisions, and that the Minister properly denied the appellants the losses
under the GAAR.  Interpreted textually, contextually and purposively, s. 18(13) 
and s. 96  do not permit arm’s length parties to purchase the tax losses
preserved by s. 18(13) and claim them as their own.  The purpose of s. 18(13)
is to transfer a loss to a non-arm’s length party in order to prevent a
taxpayer who carries on a business of lending money from realizing a
superficial loss.  The purpose for the broad treatment of loss sharing between
partners is to promote an organizational structure that allows partners to
carry on a business in common, in a non-arm’s length relationship.  Section
18(13) preserves and transfers a loss under the assumption that it will be
realized by a taxpayer who does not deal at arm’s length with the transferor. 
Parliament could not have intended that the combined effect of the partnership
rules and s. 18(13) would preserve and transfer a loss to be realized by a
taxpayer who deals at arm’s length with the transferor.    To use these
provisions to preserve and sell an unrealized loss to an arm’s length party
results in abusive tax avoidance under s. 245(4) .  Such transactions do not
fall within the spirit and purpose of s. 18(13)  and s. 96 , properly construed.  59                              
The appellants’ submission that nothing in s. 18(13) limits subsequent
dispositions of the property to arm’s length parties depends on a literal
interpretation of the section and fails to address the main inquiry under the
GAAR, which rests on a contextual and purposive interpretation of the
provisions at issue.  As discussed above, the text of the provision is open to
a competing interpretation offered by the Minister and does not itself resolve
the dispute. To do so, we must refer to the purposive construction of the
provisions.  The interplay of s. 18(13)  and s. 96  requires us to look at the
entire factual context of the series of transactions to determine whether it
frustrates the object and spirit of these provisions.  60                              
The backdrop to the impugned transactions was the failure of STC,
leaving non-performing mortgages in its wake. STC transferred $52 million in
unrealized losses to Partnership A in a notionally non-arm’s length
transaction.  Partnership A was to serve as a holding tank for the unrealized
losses and STC planned from the outset to sell its interest in Partnership A
after the application of s. 18(13) so that the losses preserved in Partnership
A could be transferred to arm’s length parties through a substitution of
partners in Partnership A.  The subsequent transactions involving Partnership B
were executed “in contemplation of” the transactions between STC and
Partnership A.  61                              
By these subsequent transactions, the losses preserved in Partnership A
were transferred to Partnership B which sold units to the appellants, who dealt
with STC at arm’s length.  The new partnership, Partnership B, was relatively
passive.  From its inception, the purpose of Partnership B was simply to
realize and allocate the tax losses, without any other significant partnership
activity.  Nor are these conclusions negated by the fact that (1) the
underlying properties to the mortgages were appraised and sold or written off,
(2) the appellants paid substantial amounts in order to acquire their interests
in Partnership B, or (3) the appellants sought to minimize their exposure to
risk, should the tax losses not be accepted by the authorities.  62                              
The abusive nature of the transactions is confirmed by the vacuity and
artificiality of the non-arm’s length aspect of the initial relationship
between Partnership A and STC.  A purposive interpretation of the interplay
between s. 18(13)  and s. 96(1)  indicates that they allow the preservation and
sharing of losses on the basis of shared control of the assets in a common
business activity.  In this case, the absence of such a basis leads to an
inference of abuse.  Neither Partnership A nor Partnership B ever dealt with
real property, apart from STC’s original mortgage portfolio.  Nor was STC ever
in a partnership relation with either OSFC or any of the appellants, having
sold its entire interest to OSFC.  The only reasonable conclusion is that the
series of transactions frustrated Parliament’s purpose of confining the
transfer of losses such as these to a non-arm’s length partnership.  63                              
As discussed in the companion case of Canada Trustco, where the
Tax Court  judge has applied the law correctly and made findings and inferences
supported by the evidence, an appellate court should not interfere.   Here the
Tax Court judge, Dussault J.T.C.C., was obliged to apply the two-step approach
mandated by the Federal Court of Appeal in OSFC.  He was also obliged,
at the first step, to accept the majority’s conclusion that the avoidance
transactions at issue did not violate the spirit and purpose of  s. 18(13). 
However,  he went on to state at para. 304 that he preferred the minority view
in OSFC that Parliament could not have intended for s. 18(13) to permit
the transfer of losses between arm’s length taxpayers.  In the result, had it
been open to him, he would have applied the GAAR to disallow the losses on the
basis of his interpretation of s. 18(13).  We agree with these conclusions and
endorse them.  6.      Conclusion  64                              
We would dismiss the appeal with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellants:  Kim Hansen, Vancouver.  Solicitor for the respondent:  Deputy Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.  