Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336  Hickman Motors Limited                                                                  Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada  File No.:  24994.  1996:  October 30; 1997:  June 26.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal    Held (Sopinka, Cory and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be
allowed.    “Income from a business” includes “income from an
undertaking of any kind whatever except an office or employment”, as
distinguished from another source which would be excluded from the s. 248(1)
definition.  Here, the income is corporate, so the presumption that income is
sourced from business applies.  No evidence rebutting this presumption was
before the courts.  The issue of "income from property" does not
arise in this case.    If an item of property produces income, then its
purpose is indeed to produce income.  The test is as follows.  Does the
property produce income?  In the affirmative, the deduction is allowable.  Where
the property does not produce income, was it acquired for the purpose of
producing income?  This is determined by an objective evaluation of the
specific facts and circumstances of each case in relation to appropriate
jurisprudence, having regard to whether the taxpayer acted in accordance with
reasonably acceptable principles of commerce and business practices.  In the
affirmative, the deduction is allowable.  In the negative, the deduction is not
allowable.  The appellant adduced clear, uncontradicted evidence
that the property produced revenue.  The CCA deduction was allowable because
the requirements of Regulation 1102(1)(c) were met.  Therefore it was
not necessary to conduct the second part of the test dealing with the objective
purpose.  The test for determining the purpose of producing
income is not similar to the test for determining the question of whether a
business has a reasonable expectation of profit.  They differ in terms of their
general thrust.  The “reasonable expectation of profit” test is principally
directed at differentiating between a business and a personal pursuit such as a
hobby, etc., whereas the “purpose of producing income” test presupposes a
business and is directed at determining whether an asset is appropriately used
in the business.  The “reasonable expectation of profit” criteria cannot be
mechanically transferred into the “purpose of producing income” requirement in
Regulation 1102(1)(c) for CCA purposes.  Under Regulation 1102(1)(c), the property does
not have to produce revenue during a specified minimum period:  where revenue
is produced, it is sufficient that it be produced during a time period of any
duration. Whether the income produced by an item of property is
material or immaterial, in relation to the taxpayer’s other income, is
irrelevant to the application of Regulation 1102(1)(c).  Under
Regulation 1102(1)(c), where the revenue produced by an item of property
is immaterial in relation to the overall business income, the taxpayer is not
required to show this specific item of property separately in the financial
statements.  The appellant’s cost/benefit decision with respect to materiality
was not unreasonable.  Since the Act does not require that revenue be shown in
financial statements, and absent any issue of credibility, the evidence adduced
by the appellant was sufficient.   The appellant’s initial onus of proof is met where a prima
facie case is made out.  The onus shifts to the Minister to rebut the prima
facie case made out by the taxpayer and to prove the assumptions.  The
appellant adduced clear, unchallenged and uncontradicted evidence.  The
respondent adduced no evidence whatsoever. Where the onus has shifted to the
Minister and the Minister has adduced no evidence whatsoever, the taxpayer is
entitled to succeed.  Per Sopinka, Cory and
Iacobucci JJ. (dissenting):  The capital cost allowance claimed was not
applicable to a business source of income as required by s. 20(1).  The relevant business source therefore must be
identified and the capital cost shown to be wholly applicable to it.  The
taxpayer must compute income or loss separately from each individual business. 
On this point, the Act is clear.  The capital cost allowance must be shown to
be generally applicable to a particular business and not just to “business”,
generally speaking.  Here, the appellant’s car and truck business was one
potential business source.  The existence of another business, the heavy
equipment leasing business, was disputed by the Crown.  The trial judge found
that the appellant did not continue to operate the business previously run by
Equipment.  The Federal Court of Appeal reinforced this finding.  Thus, the
courts below made concurrent findings of fact which should not be interfered
with absent palpable error or fundamental error of law.  Not only did the trial
judge commit no such palpable error, his finding on this point is strongly
supported by the evidence.  First, there is no evidence that the appellant ever
received any income from the assets.  Second, even if the appellant did receive
such income, that income cannot be characterized as income from business. 
Unless the taxpayer actually uses the asset as part of a process that combines
labour and capital, any income earned therefrom does not qualify as income from
a business, but rather falls into the category of income from property.  Here,
the appellant did nothing at all with the Equipment assets.  It simply assumed
ownership of the property and, allegedly, passively received income from the
outstanding leases.  Therefore, with regard to the alleged heavy equipment
leasing business, the evidence does not establish that the appellant engaged in
the kind of economic activity which constitutes a business for the purposes of
the Income Tax Act.  The evidence also does not show that the appellant
used the heavy equipment assets in its automobile business.  Accordingly, it
cannot deduct capital cost allowance in respect of those assets from the income
earned from its car and truck dealership.  Cases Cited  By McLachlin J.     By Iacobucci J. (dissenting)  Moldowan v. The Queen,
[1978] 1 S.C.R. 480; C.B.A. Engineering Ltd. v. M.N.R., [1971] C.T.C.
504; Poulin v. The Queen, 94 D.T.C. 1674; Vincent v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1965] 2 Ex. C.R. 117; Boma Manufacturing Ltd.
v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 727.  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Income
Tax Regulations, C.R.C., c. 945, ss. 107(1),
1100(1)(a)(xvi), 1102(1)(c), (14).  Authors Cited  Arnold, Brian J., Tim Edgar and
Jinyan Li, eds.  Materials on Canadian Income Tax, 10th ed.  Toronto:
Carswell, 1993.  Beechy, Thomas H.  Canadian
Advanced Financial Accounting, 2nd ed.  Toronto:  Holt, Rinehart and
Winston of Canada, 1990.  Bennion, F. A. R.  Statutory
Interpretation: A Code, 2nd ed.  London:  Butterworths, 1992.  Canada.  Department of Finance.  A
Corporate Loss Transfer System for Canada.  Michael Wilson, Budget Papers,
Budget Speech, May 1985.  Ottawa:  Department of Finance, 1985.   Chasteen, Lanny G., et al.  Intermediate
Accounting, 1st Canadian ed.  Toronto:  McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1992  Couzin, Robert.  “Current Tax
Provisions Relating to Deductibility and Transfer of Losses”, in Policy
Options for the Treatment of Tax Losses in Canada. Toronto:  Clarkson
Gordon Foundation, 1991, p. 3:3.  Driedger on the Construction of
Statutes, 3rd ed.  By Ruth Sullivan.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1994.  Durnford, John.  “The Distinction
Between Income from Business and Income from Property, and the Concept of
Carrying On Business” (1991), 39 Can. Tax J. 1131.  Harris, Edwin C.  Canadian
Income Taxation, 4th ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1986.  Hogg, Peter W., and Joanne E.
Magee.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law.  Scarborough:  Carswell,
1995.  Kerans, Roger P.  Standards
of Review Employed by Appellate Courts.  Edmonton:  Juriliber, 1994.  Krishna, Vern.  The
Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax, 5th ed.  Scarborough:  Carswell, 1995.  Owen, John R.  “The Reasonable
Expectation of Profit Test:  Is There a Better Approach?” (1996), 44 Can.
Tax J. 979. APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal
(1995), 95 D.T.C. 5575, [1995] 2 C.T.C. 320, 185 N.R. 231, dismissing an appeal
from a judgment of Joyal J., [1993] 1 F.C. 622, (1993), 59 F.T.R. 139, 93
D.T.C. 5040, [1993] 1 C.T.C. 36, dismissing an appeal of tax assessments. 
Appeal allowed, Sopinka, Cory and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting.  James R. Chalker, for
the appellant.  Roger Taylor and André
LeBlanc, for the respondent.  //McLachlin J.//  The judgment of La Forest, McLachlin and Major JJ. was
delivered by   1                                          McLachlin J. -- While I concur in the
general approach and the conclusion of Justice L’Heureux-Dubé, I prefer to
decide the appeal on somewhat narrower grounds.  2                                          In
order to deduct the capital cost allowance at issue, (1) Hickman Motors Ltd.
must have had a business source of income to which the assets related (s. 20(1)
of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63); and (2) the assets must
have been acquired for the purpose of producing income (Income Tax
Regulations, C.R.C., c. 945, Regulation 1102(1)(c)).  3                                          On
the first question, I agree with L’Heureux-Dubé J. that the evidence
establishes that Hickman Motors Ltd. carried on the business of leasing
equipment and hence possessed a business source of income related to the assets
for which capital cost allowance was claimed.  This established, it is
unnecessary to enter on the “sub-source” issue.  4                                          The
second question is whether the assets for which the capital cost allowance was
claimed were acquired for the purpose of producing income, so as to avoid the
exclusion established by Regulation 1102(1).  The exclusion is aimed at
ensuring that the asset for which the deduction is claimed is an asset
associated with income production as distinguished from an asset acquired for a
non-income producing purpose, such as pleasure or personal needs.  5                                          In
this case, Hickman Motors Ltd. is deemed to have acquired the assets for the
purpose of gaining or producing income under Regulation 1102(14), which states
that where property is acquired as the result of the winding-up of a Canadian
corporation under s. 88(1) of the Act, and the property, immediately before it
was so acquired, was property of a prescribed class, the property shall be
deemed to be the property of that same prescribed class.  Since the property
was depreciable property in the hands of Hickman Equipment just prior to the
winding-up, it is deemed to be acquired by Hickman Motors Ltd. as depreciable
property-- i.e., for the purpose of gaining or producing income.  6                                          So
long as Hickman Motors Ltd. did not commence to use the property for some
purpose other than the production of income (s. 13(7)(a)), the property
remains eligible for a capital cost allowance deduction.  There is no evidence
that this occurred.  7                                          The
fact that the assets produced revenue, as the reasons of L’Heureux-Dubé J.
demonstrate, establishes that they continued to be used for the purpose of
producing income, avoiding the effect of s. 13(7)(a) and the exclusion
under Regulation 1102(1)(c).  The fact that the revenue was small or
earned over a short period of time does not take them out of this category.  We
need not decide whether a different result might flow if the evidence viewed as
a whole showed that the assets possessed a non-revenue function:  see Clapham
v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 1012 (T.A.B.); Bolus-Revelas-Bolus Ltd. v. M.N.R.,
71 D.T.C. 5153 (Ex. Ct.).  Nor is the case of assets held for such a short
period of time that the revenue produced was too small to calculate (e.g., the
case of the instantaneous or same day rollover) before us.  Here the assets
served only one function, to produce income.  That Hickman Motors may have
intended to retransfer the assets to Hickman Equipment (1985) Ltd. is of no
moment.  The evidence admits of only one conclusion:  that the assets were
business assets associated with the production of income.  8                                          The
fact that the directors of the taxpayer may have intended to obtain a tax
saving by acquiring the asset is irrelevant.  It is a fundamental principle of
tax law that “[e]very man is entitled if he can to order his affairs so as that
the tax attaching under the appropriate Acts is less than it otherwise would
be”:  Inland Revenue Commissioners v. Westminster (Duke of), [1936] A.C.
1 (H.L.), at p. 19, per Lord Tomlin.  As Wilson J. put it in Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at p. 540, “[a]
transaction may be effectual and not in any sense a sham (as in this case) but
may have no business purpose other than the tax purpose”.   Conclusion  9                                          I
would allow the appeal and allow the claimed deduction, with costs throughout
to the appellant.  //L’Heureux-Dubé J.//  The following are the reasons delivered by  L’Heureux-Dubé J. --  I.   Introduction  10                      This
appeal involves a fact-driven technical question of income taxation.  The
narrow issue is whether the appellant can claim Capital Cost Allowance (CCA)
from a specific business it operated for a period of five days.  This depends
upon proper application of the “purpose of . . . producing income” requirement
set out in s. 1102(1)(c) of the Income Tax Regulations,
C.R.C., c. 945, read together with the phrases “from a business or property”
and “applicable to that source” in s. 20(1) of the Income Tax Act, S.C.
1970-71-72, c. 63 (ITA), in the factual context of this appeal.  In my
opinion, the CCA deduction is allowable.   II.   Background  A.   Factual Context  11                      The
appellant Hickman Motors Ltd. (Hickman Motors) is a General Motors automobile
and truck distributor in St. John’s, Newfoundland.  It is a member of a group
of associated companies held by Hickman Holdings Ltd. (Hickman Holdings), which
is controlled by brothers Albert Hickman and Howard Hickman. In 1980, Hickman
Holdings owned A. E. Hickman Ltd. (AEH).  AEH, at that point, was itself acting
as a holding company:  it held the shares of Hickman Motors, Atlanta Insurance
Ltd., Verdun Sales Ltd. and Hickman Equipment Ltd. (Equipment).  AEH also had a
number of operating divisions in different business areas, operating out of
Cornerbrook, Fortune and Grand Falls, Newfoundland.  Equipment was in the
business of construction equipment.  It had four franchises:  John Deere for
construction equipment such as backhoes and bulldozers, Tree Farmer for
forestry equipment, Ingersoll-Rand for rock-drilling equipment and P&H Ltd.
for crane operations.  At one point in the mid-1970s, Equipment operated as a
division of AEH, rather than as a separate corporation set up as a subsidiary
of AEH.  12                      The
Hickman name is well-known in Newfoundland.  The business started in 1905, and
until now the Hickmans have been proud to have honoured their commitments and
met all their responsibilities to other people.  Beginning in the early 1980s,
the Hickman Group began to experience dramatic change, serious financial
losses, and difficulties with its creditors and its bankers.  The consolidated
financial statements of AEH showed a profit, but the non-consolidated ones
showed significant losses.  Equipment lost $1.8 million in 1981, and $122,000
in 1984.  These losses were described by the appellant’s witness as “pretty
significant operating losses . . . frightening losses” that had the potential
of making Equipment go bankrupt.  13                      The
Group strived to ensure that this bankruptcy would not occur because it would
have had a spill-over effect on Hickman Motors and AEH.  As a condition for the
operating line of credit for Equipment, the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce
(CIBC) had guarantees from most of the Group’s subsidiary companies.  In the
event of Equipment’s going bankrupt, the income streams of all the companies in
the Group would have been impacted because both Hickman Motors and AEH could
have been called to honour the bank guarantees.  Also, John Deere required the
guarantee of AEH as a condition of Equipment’s having the John Deere
franchise. There would have been a tremendous loss of customer confidence in
the business of Hickman Motors as the Hickman name was involved in three of the
businesses.  In 1982-83,  it was decided to remove both Hickman Motors and
Equipment as subsidiaries of AEH, thus allowing it to focus on its building
supply operation.  14                      On
November 30, 1984, the Hickman Group’s auditing firm presented a “package
proposal” to get financing from CIBC.  This involved a corporate reorganization
which occurred as follows.  On December 14, 1984, the appellant Hickman Motors
acquired all the shares of Equipment.  On December 28, 1984, Equipment was
voluntarily liquidated and wound up into its parent Hickman Motors.  Its
assets, including non-capital losses in the amount of $876,859 and depreciable
property with an undepreciated capital cost of $5,196,422, became the property
of the appellant. On January 2, 1985, those same assets, net of the liabilities
of Equipment, were sold to the appellant’s newly created and wholly owned
subsidiary, Hickman Equipment (1985) Ltd. (Equipment 85).  In its 1984 tax
return, the appellant claimed a capital cost allowance of $2,029,942 in respect
of the assets it had received from Equipment on the winding-up, which was
disallowed by the Minister of National Revenue.  B.   Issues  15                      The
only issues to be resolved are the following:  1.               Does s. 88 ITA
create any rights for the appellant;  if so, what are they?  2.               Is the capital
cost of the assets acquired in the winding-up applicable to the income from the
appellant’s business, within the meaning of s. 20(1)(a) ITA?  By consent the parties withdrew all the other issues that were
raised in the courts below.  C.   Judgments Appealed From  16                      As
regards the s. 88 issue, both the Trial Division, [1993] 1 F.C. 622,  and the
Federal Court of Appeal, 95 D.T.C. 5575,  held that, in themselves, the s. 88
provisions do not create a right to deduct CCA.  17                      As
regards the s. 20 issue, both judgments focused on the taxpayer’s “intention to
earn income” from the equipment-related items of property.  The Trial Division
found, at p. 633, that the appellant never intended to carry on the business of
a heavy equipment dealer:  . . . it is difficult to see how the assets . . . were
used in the business of the plaintiff to produce income. . . . The mere fact
that these assets were available for leasing does not . . . affect the real
purpose of the acquisition.  I should find that the short turnover period
of some four days is a pretty clear indication that there was neither an
intention nor, for practical purposes, any more than a notional attempt to
earn income from the assets acquired on the winding-up. [Emphasis added.]  18                      The
Federal Court of Appeal, at p. 5579, substantially applied the “reasonable
expectation of profit” test set forth by this Court in Moldowan v. The Queen,
[1978] 1 S.C.R. 480, and inferred that,  [w]hile I would not wish to be taken as suggesting
that there is any temporal requirement to a taxpayer’s holding of property for
the purposes of earning income, the fact that this taxpayer held the
property here in issue only over the period of a long holiday week-end
is surely indicative of the fact that it had no intention of actually earning
income from the property. [Emphasis added.]  I will deal in greater detail with specific parts of these judgments
in the appropriate sections infra.  D.   Positions of the Parties Before This Court  19                      The
appellant claims that the scheme of the ITA as a whole should apply in
the case of related groups to permit the transfer of accumulated pools of
undeducted expenses, loss carry overs, or tax credits:  Michael Wilson,  A
Corporate Loss Transfer System for Canada, Department of Finance Budget
Papers, Budget Speech, Canada, May 1985, at p. 3:  In the Canadian corporate income tax system, each
corporation is taxed as a separate entity.  This can lead to situations in
which one corporation in a commonly-owned group has tax losses or unused
deductions or tax credits while other corporations in the group face tax
liabilities.  If the businesses within the separate corporations were
instead operated as divisions within a single corporation, the unused losses,
deductions or credits from one line of business could generally be used to
reduce the amount of corporate tax payable on income from another.                                                                     .
. .  The corporate tax system in the United States
provides for tax consolidation.  The United Kingdom has a system of loss
transfers.  Many other countries also have systems to provide for the transfer
of losses, deductions or tax credits.  [Emphasis
added.]   20                      One
of the reasons why Canada has not been able to achieve a more liberal system of
corporate group taxation is the two-tier federal-provincial income tax system: 
Robert Couzin, “Current Tax Provisions Relating to Deductibility and Transfer
of Losses”, in Policy Options for the Treatment of Tax Losses in Canada
(1991), p. 3:3,  at p. 3:12.  21                      According
to the respondent, the party who should be taking CCA is Equipment 85, not the
appellant Hickman Motors.  In the respondent’s opinion, the interposition for a
few days of Hickman Motors in the transfer of the assets from Equipment to
Equipment 85 should not make any difference, and the CCA deductions could be
taken by Equipment 85 in subsequent years.  However, during the oral hearing
before us, counsel for the respondent conceded that it is always possible that
the deduction might end up being lost forever. 22                      The
respondent relies quite heavily on the findings and inferences of fact made by
the trial judge, and confirmed by the Court of Appeal.  The respondent argues
that the courts below made no palpable and overriding error in their findings.  That
deference argument was strongly emphasized both in the respondent’s brief and
in argument before us.  It is quite clear that the respondent advocates a
formalistic application of the principle of appellate deference to trial-level
findings of fact.  Accordingly, before addressing the substantive legal issues,
it is necessary to review this principle briefly.  III.   Trial-Level Findings of Fact  23                      Counsel
for the appellant pointed out in oral argument that some of the trial-level
factual findings were wrong.  The uncontradicted evidence shows that Hickman
Motors held the assets during five days, not four days as found by the trial
judge at p. 633. Also, counsel pointed out that Hickman Motors’ leasing revenue
was not 1.9%, as the trial judge found, but $1.9 million, which in reality
makes 2.5% of the total revenue.  It is noteworthy that in addition to these
factual errors, the trial judge stated at least four times during the hearing
that he was “overwhelmed” or “confused”, which  is quite understandable given
the complexity of the case.  I consider that the appellant is right about the
above errors, although they do not affect the substance of the decision. 
Except for these errors, I wish to emphasize that I take the facts as found by
the trial judge, and confirmed by the Court of Appeal, as they appear in the
record.  However, we ought to look at those facts through the prism of the
appropriate law.  24                      A
reviewable error of law exists where there has been a mistake of law, such as
addressing the wrong question, applying the wrong principle, failing to apply
or incorrectly applying a legal principle, or drawing an improper inference
from established facts.  In the case at bar, both courts below drew improper
inferences from the established facts, asked the wrong questions and
incorrectly applied the law.  25               
      It is to be noted at the outset that in the present case, the credibility
or reliability of witnesses is not an issue.  There was only one witness for
the appellant and the respondent called no witnesses.  Neither the Trial
Division nor the Court of Appeal raised any issue of credibility.  Where
credibility is not in question, an appeal court is in as good a position to
evaluate the evidence as the trial judge:  Lessard v. Paquin, [1975] 1
S.C.R. 665, at pp. 673-75.  Accordingly, in my view, our Court is in as good a
position as the Trial Division to evaluate the evidence in the record, should
the need arise.  26                      The
following statement by Roger P. Kerans, a Justice of the Alberta Court of
Appeal, aptly describes the appropriate relief in the present case (Standards
of Review Employed by Appellate Courts (1994), at p. 203):  Often, the error of the first
tribunal was about a question of law.  In that case, its findings of
fact remain undisturbed.  Usually, the reviewing court will, in such a
case, refuse to order a new trial.  It will instead vary the conclusion, or
affirm the conclusion, after applying the correct view of the law to the facts
found by the first tribunal.  [Emphasis added.]   27                      While
accepting the findings of fact (after correcting the errors), if the courts
below have misapplied the law to the facts, it is open to an appeal court to
examine the “proper inferences to be drawn from the evidence”, by looking at
the facts as they appear on the record and assessing them through the prism of
the appropriate law, which is what I will now turn to.  IV.   Analysis  1.   Section 88  28                      The
provision at issue here reads as follows:  88. (1)
Where a taxable Canadian corporation (in this subsection referred to as the
“subsidiary”) has been wound up after May 6, 1974 and not less than 90% of the
issued shares of each class of the capital stock of the subsidiary were,
immediately before the winding-up, owned by another taxable Canadian
corporation (in this subsection referred to as the “parent”) and all of the
shares of the subsidiary that were not owned by the parent immediately before
the winding-up were owned at that time by persons with whom the parent was
dealing at arm’s length, notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the
following rules apply:  (a) subject to paragraph (a.1), each
property of the subsidiary that was distributed to the parent on the winding-up
shall be deemed to have been disposed of by the subsidiary for proceeds equal
to,                                                                     .
. .  (iii) in the case of any other property, the cost
amount to the subsidiary of the property immediately before the winding-up;  . . .  (c) the cost to the parent of each property of
the subsidiary distributed to the parent on the winding-up shall be deemed to
be the amount deemed by paragraph (a) to be the proceeds of disposition
of the property. . . .   29                       Hugessen
J.A., speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal, came to the conclusion, at pp.
5577-78, that this provision creates no rights to any deductions at all:  While I am prepared, in general
terms, to agree with the appellant’s characterization of the purpose and intent
of subsection 88(1), I cannot agree that it gives rise to the results
contended for.  In and of itself, the subsection creates no rights to any
deductions at all.                                                                     .
. .  I conclude, accordingly, that
section 88 does not create for the appellant an independent right to claim
capital cost allowance on the property which it acquired on the winding-up of
its subsidiary “Equipment”.  Such a claim can only succeed if the appellant can
demonstrate that it otherwise meets the requirements of the Act and
Regulations.    30                       I
agree with this analysis of s. 88(1).  The relevant parts of s. 88(1)(a)(iii)
are the following:  88. (1)
. . .  (a) . . . property . . .
shall be deemed to have been disposed of by the subsidiary for proceeds equal
to,  . . .  (iii) . . . the cost amount
to the subsidiary. . . .   [Emphasis added.]   31                       The
cost amount is defined in s. 248(1):   248. (1) . . .  “cost amount” to a taxpayer of any
property at any time means. . . .  (a) where the property was depreciable property
of the taxpayer of a prescribed class, that proportion of the undepreciated
capital cost. . . . [Emphasis added.]   32                       Section
88(1)(a)(iii) provides that the property disposed of by a subsidiary on
winding-up is deemed to have been disposed of for proceeds equal to its
undepreciated capital cost (UCC).  This implies that there can be neither a
recapture, nor a terminal loss, as far as the subsidiary is concerned.  As far
as the parent company is concerned, the relevant parts of s. 88(1)(c)
are the following: 88. (1) . . .  (c) the cost to the parent .
. . shall be deemed to be the amount deemed by paragraph (a). . . .   33                       The
property acquired from the subsidiary by the parent on winding-up is deemed to
have been acquired at a cost equal to the above-stated amount, as determined
pursuant to s. 88(1)(a)(iii), that is, the UCC.  In other words, the
whole transaction is deemed to have occurred at the UCC rather than some other
value such as, for example, the laid-down acquisition cost or the fair market
value.  34                       It
is appropriate to distinguish the instant case from R. v. Mara Properties
Ltd., [1996] 2 S.C.R. 161.  In so far as its interrelation with the present
case is concerned, in my opinion Mara stands for the following
proposition:  upon winding-up, a subsidiary automatically distributes its
assets to its parent pursuant to s. 88(1), and those assets should be grouped
with the parent’s assets of the same character.  Here, Equipment’s assets were
distributed to the appellant and should be grouped with the parent’s assets of
the same character.  But that is not the issue here.  The issue here is this: 
once the winding-up is done and the assets are distributed, what happens afterwards? 
Can the parent claim CCA on those assets?  This issue is outside the scope of
both Mara and s. 88 itself.  35                       In
my opinion, and I agree with both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal in
this respect, s. 88(1) does not create any right for the parent company, in
this case the appellant Hickman Motors, to claim a CCA deduction for property
acquired from the subsidiary Hickman Equipment.  If there is such a right, it
is to be found in s. 20 ITA, which I will now discuss.  2.   Section 20  36                       Section
20(1)(a) and the Regulations must be read in conjunction, as is clearly
stated in the provision:   20.
(1) Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a), (b) and (h), in
computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from a business or property, there
may be deducted such of the following amounts as are wholly applicable to
that source or such part of the following amounts as may reasonably be regarded
as applicable thereto:  (a) such part of the capital cost to the
taxpayer of property, or such amount in respect of the capital cost to
the taxpayer of property, if any, as is allowed by regulation. . . .  
[Emphasis added.]    37              
        Section 20(1)(a) creates a deduction for the capital cost of
property, “as is allowed by regulation”.  Section 20(1)(a) cannot be
read in a vacuum:  the applicable regulations must be read concurrently. 
Because of its language, reading it without considering the regulations would
not be in accordance with appropriate principles of statutory interpretation: 
F. A. R. Bennion, Statutory Interpretation: A Code (2nd ed. 1992), at
pp. 805 et seq.;  see also Ruth Sullivan, Driedger on the
Construction of Statutes (3rd ed. 1994), at p. 198; 2747-3174 Québec
Inc. v. Quebec (Régie des permis d’alcool), [1996] 3 S.C.R. 919, at pp.
1011-15.  38                       At
this stage, I must stress that both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal did
not examine the facts through the appropriate legal landscape.  According to s.
20 ITA and the Regulations, the following questions had to be asked.  Is
there “income from a business”?  What is the appropriate “business source” of
income?  What is the “part of the capital cost” that can be deducted?  Is the
amount “wholly” or “partly” applicable to the source?  Was the item of property
“acquired for the purpose of producing income”?  In order to address this last
question, the following had to be asked:   Does the item of property produce
any revenue?  If it does not, is its purpose to produce income?  By not asking
the proper questions, and by not drawing the appropriate inferences from the
established facts as regards the legal landscape, both courts below made errors
of law which must be reviewed by looking at the facts through the prism of the
applicable law.  39                       In
my opinion, the applicable law as regards the case at bar is as follows.  Where
a parent acquires depreciable property from a subsidiary as a result of a
wind-up pursuant to s. 88(1), the deductibility of CCA is not automatic.  The
nature of the property and the nature of its income are not forever fixed as a
result of a s. 88(1) rollover.  The nature of the property and the nature of
its income may change.  To claim CCA,  the parent must satisfy the requirements
of s. 20(1)(a), that is, the property must be held by the parent for the
purpose of producing income from the parent’s business.  As I see it, both my
colleague Justice Iacobucci and I agree on that statement of the law.  However,
we disagree on the application of that proposition of law to the facts of the
case at bar.  In my opinion, a proper analysis of the evidence as it appears in
the record, to which I will now turn, can only lead to the conclusion that, in
the case at bar,  the appellant met the requirements for CCA.  A.   Income From a Business Source  40                       Is
there “income from a business”?  From the evidence, the appellant had, for the
1984 fiscal year, sales of $75,275,000 and an income before extraordinary items
of $1,528,000.   Next, the deduction in s. 20(1) can only apply to “income
from a business or property”.  The issue of “income from property” has not been
argued and does not arise in our case.  We must now determine whether the
source of the above income is in fact a “business”.  It is appropriate to look
at the definition of “business” in s. 248(1):   248. (1) . . .  “business” includes a profession, calling, trade, manufacture or undertaking of any
kind whatever and . . . an adventure or concern in the nature of trade but
does not include an office or employment. . . . [Emphasis added.]   41                       “Income
from a business” accordingly includes “income from an undertaking of any kind
whatever except an office or employment”, as distinguished from another source
which would be excluded from the s. 248(1) definition.  As discussed by Vern
Krishna, The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax (5th ed. 1995), at pp.
277 and 772, there is a rebuttable presumption that corporate income derives
from business:  Canadian Marconi v. R.,  [1986] 2 S.C.R. 522;  Smith
v. Anderson (1879), 15 Ch. D. 247 (C.A.).  Here, the income is corporate,
so the presumption that income is sourced from business applies.  42                       Of
course, the above presumption is rebuttable.  However, neither the
examination-in-chief nor the cross-examination of the appellant’s witness
revealed evidence to that end, and the respondent adduced no evidence
whatsoever.  As the presumption was not rebutted, I conclude that the
appellant’s income is sourced from business, as distinguished from another
source. 43                       Moreover,
the record discloses positive evidence that Hickman Motors did indeed carry on
the equipment-related sales and rental activities during the period: (1)  the
equipment rental business was in fact carried on;  (2) Hickman Motors assumed
the business risk and other obligations;  (3)  it is a common practice in the
construction industry to buy the rented equipment just before the December 31
year-end, so there was a clear opportunity for doing business during that
specific period; (4) Equipment in fact sold a backhoe on December 21, 1984; (5)
evidence of rental revenue, and a bundle of rental invoices applicable to the
period, as detailed infra; (6) the equipment was available for sale, and
was advertised as such; (7) on December 31, 1984, Hickman Motors accepted an
order for rental of at least one piece of equipment.  44                       While
my colleague Iacobucci J. asserts, at paras. 145 and 157 of his reasons, that
the appellant “did nothing at all with the Equipment assets”, his reasons do
not explicitly refer to any evidence, adduced by the respondent, that would
rebut the appellant’s clear evidence and prove that the appellant “did
[nothing] at all with these assets”.  At paras. 147 and 148 of his reasons,
Iacobucci J. challenges one piece of evidence, the December 31 invoice.  Even
without the December 31 invoice, I am satisfied that the rest of the evidence,
viewed as whole, shows that the appellant did in fact actively carry on the
equipment-related business activities.  45                       Nevertheless,
it is true that Equipment 85 renegotiated the dealership agreement with John
Deere, and Hickman Motors did not do so.  However, this is not evidence that
Hickman Motors “did [nothing] at all with these assets”, or did not otherwise
carry on the equipment-related business.  Clear, uncontradicted evidence
was adduced that the other dealership agreements had remained unchanged since
the mid-1970s, and remained so even after Equipment 85 had assumed them.  46                       The
trial judge, asking the wrong questions, inferred the absence of business
purpose, and the absence of intention to earn income, from the fact that the
property was merely “available for leasing”.  This inference is incorrect and
constitutes an error of law.  Where machinery is rented out, the essential core
operations may at times be limited to accepting rental revenue and assuming the
business risk and other obligations.  At any time during that period, any
client could demand the execution of any of the contractual obligations, such
as fixing an engine, for example.  Where, because a rental business is
fortunate enough to experience no mechanical breakdowns or accidents during a
period of time, it “passively” accepts rental revenue and assumes business risk
and obligations, it does not necessarily follow that it is not carrying on a
business during that period.  Holding otherwise would imply that rental
businesses are “intermittent”, that is, that they carry on a business only when
something goes wrong in the operations.  Such a proposition is unacceptable.  47                       Contrary
to my colleague Iacobucci J.’s opinion at paras. 145 and 158 of his reasons,
even if the appellant “passively” received rental income during a period of
time, it does not necessarily follow that it did not carry on an active
business.  In Carland (Niagara) Ltd. v. M.N.R., 64 D.T.C. 139, at p.
141, the Tax Appeal Board stated that:  It is not necessary that there be sustained activity
before it can be maintained that a business is carried on;  there may be and
often are periods of quiescence in almost any business enterprise. . . . [The
Commissioner of Inland Revenue v. The South Behar Railway Co., Ltd., (1925)
12 T.C. 657] indicates how little need be done to constitute a carrying on of
business.  I find, as a fact, that some measure of business, be it greater or
lesser, never ceased to be conducted at any material time.  Always, the
premises were open to any customer who might call there.  Also, I note the following comment in John Durnford, “The
Distinction Between Income from Business and Income from Property, and the
Concept of Carrying On Business” (1991), 39 Can. Tax J. 1131, at p.
1191:  Indeed, depending on the nature of
the business, the mere presence of long periods of inactivity will not alone
indicate that a business is not being carried on.   48                       I
am satisfied that the evidence, viewed as a whole, shows that the appellant has
discharged its burden of proving that it did in fact actively carry on the
equipment-related business.  Moreover, the respondent adduced no evidence
whatsoever that could be weighed against that of the appellant.  However, the
respondent could have adduced evidence, as it did for example in Attridge v.
The Queen, 91 D.T.C. 5161 (F.C.T.D.), where it used two experts;  see also Bay
Centre Apartments Ltd. v. M.N.R., 81 D.T.C. 489 (T.R.B.), where it
used an expert-employee. Therefore, the appellant’s evidence must stand, and
the proper inference from that evidence is that Hickman Motors did in fact
carry on the equipment-related business between December 28, 1984 and January
2, 1985.  B.   Determining the Appropriate Business Source  49                       The
next step is to ensure that the deduction is applied to the appropriate
business source.  Contrary to what my colleague Iacobucci J. states in paras.
136 to 138 of his reasons, there is no disagreement as to the words used in the
ITA.  In cases where two or more business sources exist, the relevant
business source must be identified, and the income from each individual source,
as the case may be, is to be computed separately.  However, I cannot agree with
my colleague as to his application of that principle to the facts of the case
at bar.   The trial judge at p. 633 inferred that the source was the
“automotive” operations, implying that this source was somehow distinct from
the “equipment” operations during the applicable period. Further, my colleague
Iacobucci J. asserts that the appellant has several “business ‘sub-sources’” of
income.  This “sub-source” issue need not be decided in order to resolve the
present case, and should be left for another day, for two reasons.  50                       Firstly,
the business activities here in question can, if necessary, be categorized into
a single business source, as is clearly shown by the uncontradicted evidence:  Q.     You described earlier the
business of Hickman Motors Limited, Mr. Grant, during the period of
December 29th, 1984 to January 2, 1985.  Could you tell us what the
business of Hickman Motors Limited was?  A.     Well, it would have been the
sales and servicing, the leasing and rental of cars, light-duty trucks,
medium-duty trucks, heavy-duty trucks, and also construction equipment, John
Deere equipment, also forestry equipment and also rock drilling equipment. 
[Emphasis added.]   51              The
above testimonial evidence is clear, was not shaken in cross-examination, no
question of credibility was ever raised and the respondent did not adduce any
evidence whatsoever.  Furthermore, the uncontradicted evidence adduced by the
appellant clearly shows the following.  Equipment’s market for backhoes and
bulldozers, and Hickman Motors’ market for heavy-duty trucks, have the same
customer base.   There is a natural fit in combining Hickman Motors’
heavy-duty trucks with Equipment’s machinery.  This combination is not
unusual.   As even the trial judge recognized, “if you’re buying a backhoe,
you need a heavy truck to transport it”.  This uncontradicted evidence adduced
by the appellant speaks for itself:  the “automobile” franchise, the “truck”
franchise and the “equipment” franchises were associated into a single
integrated business.  Accordingly, the inference drawn by the trial judge is
incorrect and constitutes an error of law.  The proper inference from the above
evidence is that from December 29, 1984, to January 2, 1985, Hickman
Motors was a single integrated business of sales, servicing, leasing and rental
of cars and trucks, and of construction, forestry and rock-drilling equipment,
which was in fact an “undertaking of any kind whatever” that complied with the
definition of “business” in s. 248(1).  52                   From
this clear, unchallenged and uncontradicted evidence of “one  business”, absent
any evidence to the contrary, in my view, it is fallacious and irrational to
conclude that there are “two businesses”.  The fallacy that the Trial Division
fell into, upheld by the Court of Appeal and deferred to by Iacobucci J., 
appears to be as follows:  the appellant adduced evidence that there is one 
business, therefore, it follows that there are two businesses.  I cannot accept
such reasoning.  I note that neither the Trial Division, nor the Court of
Appeal, has cited any evidence from the record that would point towards two
businesses.  Similarly, my colleague Iacobucci J.’s reasons do not explicitly
provide any evidence in the record upon which his conclusion of
“two businesses” is based.  In the case at bar, the idea of two businesses
is merely an unproven assumption, not a proven fact.  The proven fact is that
there is one business, as evidenced in the record.  53                   In
view of this evidence in chief, the respondent should have adduced some
evidence.  By way of example, as I stated in para. 11 above, Equipment used to
be a division of AEH -- a building supply operation.  Surely, the respondent
could have adduced evidence that it had considered Equipment and AEH as two
businesses, if that was the case, but it failed to do so.  Such evidence, or
some expert evidence, had it been properly adduced, might have pointed towards
two businesses, but in this case we are left with a total absence of evidence
on the part of the respondent.  54                   Secondly,
as my colleague Iacobucci J. states in para. 129, the respondent departed from
the line of argument pursued in the courts below.  Neither the parties nor the
courts below cited any case law with respect to sub-sources.  The case law
cited by Iacobucci J. relates to the very specific area of farming businesses
which are singled out for special treatment in s. 31 ITA.  In the
present case, we do not have the benefit of argument with respect to the
various criteria for sub-sources that may or may not be applicable
generally to corporations outside of the farming context.  55                   As
a matter of fact, in Gloucester Railway Carriage and Wagon Co. v. Comrs.
Inland Revenue (1923), 129 L.T. 691 (K.B.), aff’d (1924), 40 T.L.R. 435
(C.A.), it was suggested that, prior to that case, it had never been decided
that a company can have two businesses.  In that case, the appellant
corporation was selling, and letting out for hire, various kinds of wagons. 
The corporation argued that it had two businesses.  The appeal was dismissed: 
there was one single business of making a profit generally out of wagons in one
way or another.  That case, which was cited with approval in Anderson
Logging Co. v. The King, [1925] S.C.R. 45, at p. 55, relates to
corporations outside of the farming context, and could arguably be seen as
governing the case at bar.  The evidence is that Hickman Motors is in the
business of making a profit generally out of machines, in one way or
another.  56                   Given
the evidence, and the incomplete argument, I do not want to pronounce on the
issue of sub-sources in the context of the present case, inter alia
because I have not had the benefit of full argument on the possible
difficulties.  For instance, “sub-sources” might be interpreted inappropriately
to second-guess legitimate business decisions of taxpayers from a position of
hindsight.  C.   Deductibility of Capital Cost Allowance  57                   Once
the “income from a business source” is established, the next step is to
determine what, if anything, can be deducted therefrom in order to arrive at
the taxable income.  Section 20(1) provides that,  20. (1)
. . . there may be deducted such of the following amounts as are wholly
applicable to that source or such part of the . . . amounts
... as applicable thereto. . . . [Emphasis added.]   58                   The
“following amount” may be either “wholly applicable” or “partly applicable” to “that
source”, that is, the business source.  So a specific amount could be “partly
applicable” to income from a business source, and “partly applicable” to income
from another source such as, for example, income from a property source.  Or a
specific amount could be “wholly applicable” to the business source only. 
Here, this distinction is not at issue:  the amount sought to be deducted would
be “wholly applicable” to income from the business source identified above.  59                   Next,
it is appropriate to examine the relevant “following amount” that is sought to
be deducted, as provided in s. 20(1)(a):   20.
(1) . . .  (a) such part of the capital cost to the
taxpayer of property . . . as is allowed by regulation. . . . [Emphasis
added.]   60                   We
must now determine what “part of the capital cost” is “allowed by regulation”. 
Regulation 1100 provides that:  1100. (1) For the purposes of
paragraph 20(1)(a) of the Act, there is hereby allowed to a
taxpayer, in computing his income from a business or property, as the case may
be, deductions for each taxation year equal to                                                                     .
. .  (a)  such amounts as he may claim in respect
of property of each of the following classes in Schedule II not
exceeding in respect of property                                                                     .
. .  (xvi) of Class 22, 50 per cent. . . .  
[Emphasis added.]                  In the present
case, the evidence reveals that, for the most part, the capital property was
included in Class 22.  The corollary of Regulation 1100(1) is that if an item
of property is not included in any of the classes, then no CCA deduction is
allowed for such property.  Regulation 1102(1) designates groups of items of
property that are deemed to be excluded from all the classes:   1102. (1)  The classes of
property described in this Part and in Schedule II shall be deemed
not to include property                                                                     .
. . (c) that was not acquired by the
taxpayer for the purpose of gaining or producing income. . . .   
[Emphasis added.]   61                         The
corollary of Regulation 1102(1)(c) is that, in order for any item of
property to be included in any class, it must have been acquired for the
purpose of producing income.  Otherwise, the item of property is deemed not to
be included in any class, so no CCA is allowed for such property.  Therefore,
within the scope of s. 20(1)(a), the word “property” cannot mean
anything other than “property acquired for the purpose of producing income”. 
Accordingly, in the present case, s. 20(1)(a) must be understood as
follows:  . . . there may be deducted . . . such part of the
capital cost . . . of property [acquired for the purpose of producing income].
. . .   D.   The “Purpose of Producing Income” Test  62                         In
Bolus-Revelas-Bolus Ltd. v. M.N.R., 71 D.T.C. 5153 (Ex. Ct.), the corporate
taxpayer was operating various concerns and decided to buy two “exhibition-park
amusement rides”.  But these two assets were never erected nor operated:  they
had been acquired and then dismantled and put in storage, out of service, and
did not produce any income whatsoever.  The Exchequer Court found that the
taxpayer had not acquired these items of property for the purpose of producing
income and held that no CCA was available.  63                   Bolus-Revelas-Bolus
Ltd. stands for the following proposition:  where property does not produce
income, courts will ascertain objectively whether the taxpayer acquired the
property for the purpose of producing income;  where there is no such objective
purpose, CCA deduction will not be allowed.  However, while Bolus-Revelas-Bolus
Ltd. seems analogous to the instant case, it is clearly distinguishable
because, as will be shown below, here the property did produce income. 
Absent extraordinary circumstances, if a business owns an item of property that
produces income, then presumably its purpose is indeed to produce income.  The
converse proposition would be absurd;  see also Royal Trust Co. v.
M.N.R., 57 D.T.C. 1055 (Ex. Ct.);  Ghali v. Canada (Minister of
Transport), [1996] F.C.J. No. 1404 (T.D.).  In other words, to avoid
absurdity in the context of the present case, s. 20(1)(a) must be
understood as follows:  . . . there may be deducted . . . such part of the
capital cost . . . of  [income-producing]  property  [or,
alternatively, property acquired for the purpose of producing income]. . .
.   64                         In
my view, the above formulation of the rule in s. 20(1)(a) applies in the
present circumstances and the first part of the test is:  does the property
produce income?  In the affirmative, the deduction is allowable.   The word
“income” is susceptible of two meanings:  “gross income” (revenue) or “net
income” (profit):  see Mark Resources Inc. v. The Queen, 93 D.T.C. 1004
(T.C.C.); see also Bellingham v. Canada, [1996] 1 F.C. 613 (C.A.), at
pp. 627-28; Canada v. McLaren, [1991] 1 F.C. 468 (T.D.), at pp. 480-81. 
While an item of property may produce revenue, it does not necessarily produce
profit by itself, and it would be absurd to demand that each individual item of
property actually yield “net income” (profit) in and of itself.   Accordingly,
to satisfy this first part of the test, it is sufficient to presume that if the
property produces revenue, it indeed meets the requirements of Regulation
1102(1)(c).  65                   The
second part of the test is:  where the item of property does not produce
income, was it acquired for the purpose of producing income?  This is
determined by an objective evaluation of the specific facts and circumstances
of each case in relation to appropriate jurisprudence, having regard to whether
the taxpayer acted in accordance with reasonably acceptable principles of
commerce and business practices.  In the affirmative, the deduction is
allowable.  In the negative, the deduction is not allowable.  66                         Both
the Trial Division and Court of Appeal (at p. 5579), however, being of the
opinion that “any attempt by the appellant to earn income from the assets” was
“notional”, inferred that “the appellant did not acquire the property . . . for
the purpose of . . . producing income”.  With respect, I cannot agree with that
inference.  Both the Trial Division and the Court of Appeal asked the wrong
question and drew an incorrect inference.  In doing so, with respect, both
courts erred in law.  E.   Distinctions Between the
“Reasonable Expectation of Profit” Test and the “Purpose of Producing Income”
Test  67                   The
Court of Appeal held at p. 5579 that the appropriate test to be applied in
determining whether property has a purpose of producing income is
“similar” to the test for determining the “analogous” question of whether a
business has a reasonable expectation of profit.  With respect, these
two tests are not “similar”, but “dissimilar”.  68                   Both
“revenue-producing” and “non-revenue-producing” assets can be acquired “for the
purpose of producing income”.  A typical example would be  an administrative
photocopier (non-revenue producing) as opposed to a self-service pay-per-use
photocopier (revenue-producing).  Both kinds of assets can be used in the same
business for the purpose of producing income.  One asset directly produces
income, the other is used for the objective purpose of producing income. 
However, this is no guarantee that the business itself will make a profit. 
Both kinds of assets can be held by a business that shows a profit or by one
that does not show a profit.  This is where the “purpose of producing income”
test and the “reasonable expectation of profit” test must be clearly
distinguished.  69                   These
two tests differ in terms of their general thrust.  A business that has a
profit does not need to demonstrate that it has a “reasonable expectation of
profit”.  Where a business does not have a profit, however, it must have a
“reasonable expectation of profit”, to be determined by an application of the Moldowan
test (see Krishna, supra, at p. 261).  In a nutshell, the “reasonable
expectation of profit” test is principally directed at differentiating between
a “business” and a “personal pursuit such as a hobby, etc.”, whereas the
“purpose of producing income” test is directed at determining whether an asset
is appropriately used in the business.  70                   The
“reasonable expectation of profit” test questions whether there is a
business, whereas the “purpose of producing income” test presupposes a
business and questions the usage of a piece of business-owned property. 
The “reasonable expectation of profit” test looks at the historical and
anticipated results of several years of operations, and asks:  “will the
revenue of this operation ever be greater than  its expenses, such that a
profit will occur?”  The “purpose of producing income” test looks at an item of
property and asks:  “does it produce revenue, or is it at least used for that
purpose?”  These two tests address very different issues.  Both tests could be
applied separately to the same taxpayer at the same time. 71                   Most
of the “reasonable expectation of profit” criteria would be repugnant to the
“purpose of producing income” test.  For instance, the “profit and loss
experience in past years” criterion is irrelevant to the “purpose of producing
income” test for CCA, because a business may very well include items of
property used only for a short-term period.  Similarly, the “taxpayer’s
training” criterion is irrelevant to the “purpose of producing income” for CCA,
because some items of property may require no particular training other than
the general knowledge possessed by anyone.  72                   In
my view, the words and scheme of the ITA support an application of the
“reasonable expectation of profit” criteria to ascertain whether a taxpayer is
carrying on a business or a hobby, but not to determine the deductibility of
CCA per se.  See also generally John R. Owen, “The Reasonable
Expectation of Profit Test:  Is There a Better Approach?” (1996), 44 Can.
Tax J. 979.  With respect, mechanically transferring the “reasonable
expectation of profit” criteria into the “purpose of producing income”
requirement in Regulation 1102(1)(c) for CCA purposes is incorrect in
law.  In doing so, both the Trial Division and the Court of Appeal erred in
law.  F.   Did the Property Produce Any Revenue?  73                   As
I said earlier, both the Trial Division and the Court of Appeal put the cart
before the horse  in not addressing the first part of the test.  Consequently,
the inferences they drew are incorrect and we must look at the evidence in
order to draw the appropriate ones.  The first part of the test is:  did the
property produce any revenue?  In the case at bar, revenue was produced by the property:  Q. The assets that were
distributed to Hickman Motors Limited on December 28, 1984, the assets of
Hickman Equipment Limited, were they being used by Hickman Equipment Limited in
the carrying on of business immediately prior to liquidation?  A. Yes.  Q. Were these assets generating
income?  A. Yes.  Q. Now what about following
December 28, 1984, with respect to these assets that have been
distributed to Hickman Motors Limited as a result of the liquidation?  A. They would have been used
for the same income producing purposes that they had been used for
previously.  . . .  THE COURT:  7.2 million of total sales in 1984; there
was about 1.5 million representing income accruing from rentals
and leases?  A. Yes.  Q. And the rentals, that income
accruing from the rentals and leases would have come from those Class 22
assets? . . .  A. Yes.   [Emphasis  added.]    74                         Reviewing
the evidence through the appropriate prism, it is clear that the property
produced revenue.  Furthermore, in addition to this uncontradicted testimonial
evidence, the appellant adduced clear documentary evidence of revenue from the
property during the period:  Q. Perhaps you might just explain
those invoices and why you are submitting them to the Court, Mr. Grant?  A. Well, if we take invoice 59762
and we look down, and it states that the rental period is from December the
5th, 1984, to January the 4th, 1985. . . .  And these are only representative,
I might add;  most of the records have been destroyed since 1985.  So we are
just fortunate enough to find these samples really. Q.       And they’re similar
samples of statements or invoices sent out for other pieces of equipment for
rental?  A. Yes.  [Emphasis added.]   75                   Several
invoices showing equipment rentals during the period were adduced in evidence. 
Furthermore, these invoices were but a mere sampling of the actual equipment-rental
activity that occurred during the period.  The above testimonial and
documentary evidence speaks for itself and was not contradicted by the
respondent.  The proper inferences to be drawn are as follows.  The Class 22
property produced revenue, on an annual basis, during the 1984 fiscal year,  in
the amount of $1.5 million.  Hence, the pro-rated daily revenue therefrom was
approximately $4,110.  Therefore, during the five days that the appellant held
the assets for doing business, the approximate pro-rated revenue was $20,550.  76                   While
my colleague Iacobucci J. concludes, at para. 143 of his reasons, that there
was no income, his reasons do not explicitly provide any evidence from the
respondent that would rebut the above evidence from the appellant.  In the case
at bar, this conclusion of “no income” is an unsubstantiated assumption, not a
proven fact in the record.  The proven fact is that there was income, as
evidenced in the record.  77                   As
revenue is produced by the property, it is not necessary to conduct the second
part of the test dealing with the objective purpose, which is the one applied
by the trial judge, and the inferences made by the courts below are
irrelevant.  The proper inferences to be drawn show that revenue was produced
and that the requirements of Regulation 1102(1)(c) are met.  Therefore,
the CCA deduction is allowable.  I will now turn to the issues of the time
period and the amount of revenue, which were incorrectly addressed by the Trial
Division and the Court of Appeal.  G.  Time Period Requirement  78                   The
Trial Division, in holding at p. 633 that “the short turnover period of some
four days is a pretty clear indication that there was neither an intention nor,
for practical purposes, any more than a notional attempt to earn income from
the assets”, was answering the second part of the test dealing with the
objective purpose, which is not the proper first question.   Similarly, the
Court of Appeal held at p. 5579 that holding the property “only over the period
of a long holiday week-end is surely indicative of the fact that it had no
intention to earn income from the property”.  While the time period and the
days of the week might be relevant factors as regards the second part of the
test, I would prefer to leave this issue for another day.  As regards the first
part of the test, should the above revenue of $20,550 have been received during
a period of time of any minimum duration, say six days or six weeks, or during
specific days of the week?  I cannot find any such reference in Regulation
1102(1)(c).  Furthermore, holding otherwise here could create absurd
results, given that Class 22 equipment can be used in 24-hour, continuous
operations.  79                   When
Parliament or the executive wish to set time periods in tax law, they do so
quite clearly and precisely.  For example, as regards Capital Cost Allowance per
se, see the following time periods:  Regulation 1100(2.2)(f)(i), 364
days, and  Schedule II, CCA, Class 12 (r), 7 days and 30 days.  More
generally, the ITA and the Regulations provide as follows:  s.
232(4)(b):  6 days;  Regulation 107(1):  7 days;  s. 116(3):  10 days; 
s. 232(4)(a):  14 days;  s. 62(3)(c):  15 days;  s. 232(4)(a)(i): 
21 days;  Regulation 231(3):  30 days;  s. 85(8):  a month;  s. 40(2)(g)(iv)(B): 
60 days;  s. 33.1(3):  90 days;  s. 130.1(1)(a)(ii):  91 days;  s.
129(2.1)(a):  120 days;  s. 78(4):  180 days;  s. 112(3)(a):  365
days;  s. 85(7):  3 years.  As regards very short time periods, I also note the
following:  s. 118.6(1):  10 hours;  s. 8(4):  12 hours;  s. 231.4(4):  24
hours;  s. 6(6)(a)(ii):  36 hours;  s. 225.2(5):  72 hours; 
Regulation 7303(7)(b)(iii) (revoked SOR/93-440):  3 days;  s.
225.2(2)(a) (amended S.C. 1988, c. 55, s. 170):  3 days.  80                   In
view of the above, in the absence of any other indication, I would hesitate to
read any time period requirement into the Regulation, since, on the one hand,
there is no clear legislation to that effect, and, on the other hand, the legislator
is in the best position to determine such requirements.  Had Parliament
intended such time restrictions to apply to CCA, it would have said so -- expressio
unius est exclusio alterius;  for an application of implied exclusion in
tax law, see generally The Queen v. Vancouver Art Metal Works Ltd., 93
D.T.C. 5116 (F.C.A.), at p. 5117.  Therefore, under Regulation 1102(1)(c),
the property does not have to produce revenue during a specified minimum
period:  where revenue is produced, it is sufficient that it be produced during
a time period of any duration.  81                   Holding
otherwise would likely introduce considerable uncertainty in this area of the
law.  The judgment of the Trial Division stands for the proposition that
five days is not enough, but it does not set forth exactly what would be
sufficient.  It introduces uncertainty as to what time period would be
sufficient in order for a taxpayer to claim CCA successfully.  It is incumbent upon
Parliament or the executive to specify a cut-off period if they find it
expedient.  Therefore, with respect, the undefined time period requirement
introduced by the Federal Court Trial Division, and upheld by the Court of
Appeal, constitutes an error of law and, in my view, is encroaching upon
Parliament’s legislative function.  H.  Materiality of the Assets’ Revenue in Relation to the Total
Revenue  82                   The
Trial Division found at p. 633 that the amount of equipment-related revenue was
“meagre” in terms of percentage of total revenue.  Does Regulation 1102(1)(c)
require that the revenue meet some specified minimum amount, or that it be
“material” in relation to the taxpayer’s other income?  I am unable to see 
such a requirement in Regulation 1102(1)(c).  Therefore, I conclude that
the question as to whether the income produced by an item of property is
“material” or “immaterial”, in relation to the taxpayer’s other income, is
irrelevant to the application of Regulation 1102(1)(c).  Holding
otherwise could lead to absurd results in situations of rapid growth in
revenue.  I.    Does Every Item of Property Have to be Shown in the
Financial Statements?  83                   The
Court of Appeal held at p. 5579 that “the appellant itself did not at the time
treat the property which it acquired from the winding-up of ‘Equipment’ as
being a potential or actual source of income: no such income was shown in the
appellant’s books for either its 1984 or its 1985 taxation years”.  Where the
revenue produced by an asset is “immaterial” in relation to the taxpayer’s
other income, does Regulation 1102(1)(c) require that it be shown
distinctly in the financial statements?  This issue has been aptly described in
Lanny G. Chasteen et al., Intermediate Accounting (1st Canadian ed.
1992), at p. 35:  Materiality implies
that generally accepted accounting principles need to be strictly followed only
in accounting for and reporting material items.  Lack of materiality
justifies expedient, cost-effective treatment of immaterial items.  . . .  Materiality is a somewhat elusive concept because it is dependent on (1)
the relative dollar amount of an item . . . (3) some combination of the
relative dollar amount and nature of an item. . . .  Finally, the
materiality threshold may vary from company to company.  For example, a
$20,000 loss from a  lawsuit could be material for many companies but might not
be material for a company as large as Air Canada.  Because materiality
judgments often involve factors peculiar to a particular situation, the
CICA has not yet found it feasible to develop a set of general materiality
guidelines, and materiality decisions are a matter of professional judgment
in the particular circumstances.  [Emphasis added.]   (See also Thomas H. Beechy, Canadian Advanced Financial
Accounting (2nd ed. 1990), at pp. 38-40.)  84                   In
my opinion, under Regulation 1102(1)(c), where the revenue produced by
an item of property is immaterial in relation to the overall business income,
the taxpayer is not required to show this specific item of property separately
in the financial statements.  The underlying cost/benefit and policy rationales
are clearly expressed in the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP): 
“[t]he benefits . . . from providing information in financial statements should
exceed the cost[s]. . . . [T]he evaluation of the nature and amount of benefits
and costs is substantially a judgmental process”:  CICA Handbook, vol.
1, s. 1000.16.  85                   In
the case at bar, the appellant decided not to show the specific revenue, the
matched expenses, and the net income related to the specific equipment property
in its financial statements:   Q. Well, if the business of
Hickman Equipment Limited was wound up into Hickman Motors Limited effective
December 28, 1984, why did you not show the revenues and expenses of
Hickman Equipment Limited as part of the revenues and expenses of
Hickman Motors Limited as at December 31, 1984?  A. Well, in our judgment at
that time, the revenue -- the income and/or loss that may have been generated
would not have adjusted the auditing expense and the accounting expense to
reconstruct the records for the three-, four-day period.  We would have had to
have had our external auditors involved for a period of time and we would have
had to have had our own staff involved.  . . .  A. Well, if we take invoice 59762
and we look down, and it states that the rental period is from December the
5th, 1984, to January the 4th, 1985.  And one thing that it does, it
illustrates some of the cost that would have been involved in prorating the
revenue from the period December 29th, 1984, up to January the 2nd, 1985.
[Emphasis added.]   86                   The
equipment-related revenue attributable to the appellant is approximately
$20,550.  The total revenue of the appellant is $75,275,000.  Bearing in mind
the GAAP, supra, I cannot find that the appellant’s cost/benefit
decision with respect to materiality is unreasonable.  Showing a specific 
property item’s revenue in the financial statements is not the only way to
prove that it produced revenue.  There may be other admissible evidence, such
as the uncontradicted testimonial and documentary evidence in the case at bar. 
Holding otherwise would be unreasonable and could lead to absurd and
unmanageable results where a large number of items of property produce revenue.  87                   My
colleague Iacobucci J., at para. 143 of his reasons, repeats the Court of
Appeal’s opinion that because the revenue was not shown in the financial
statements, there is no evidence of revenue.   I cannot agree with that
statement.  For example, see Docherty v. M.N.R., 91 D.T.C. 537 (T.C.C.),
at p. 539, where, in the absence of entries in the appellant’s financial
statements reflecting a transaction, the court accepted the working papers and
the testimony of the corporation’s accountant as evidence that the transaction
had occurred.  The law is well established that accounting documents or
accounting entries serve only to reflect transactions and that it is the
reality of the facts that determines the true nature and substance of
transactions:  Vander Nurseries Inc. v. The Queen, 95 D.T.C. 91
(T.C.C.);  Mountwest Steel Ltd. v. The Queen (1994), 2 G.T.C. 1087
(T.C.C.); Uphill Holdings Ltd. v. M.N.R., 93 D.T.C. 148 (T.C.C.);  M.N.R.
v. Wardean Drilling Ltd., 69 D.T.C. 5194 (Ex. Ct.);  M.N.R. v. Société
Coopérative Agricole de la Vallée d’Yamaska, 57 D.T.C. 1078 (Ex. Ct.). 
Furthermore, where the ITA does not require supporting documentation,
credible oral evidence from a taxpayer is sufficient notwithstanding the
absence of records:  Weinberger v. M.N.R., 64 D.T.C. 5060 (Ex. Ct.);  Naka
v. The Queen, 95 D.T.C. 407 (T.C.C.);  Page v. The Queen, 95 D.T.C.
373 (T.C.C.).  88                   In
the case at bar, the ITA does not require that the revenue be shown in
the financial statements and, accordingly, since no issue of credibility was
raised, the evidence adduced by the appellant is clearly sufficient.  J.    Proportionality of the Assets’ Revenue in relation to Their
Own Value  89                   The
remaining issue is whether the revenue is unreasonably low in relation to the
property’s value, such as to make it tantamount to no revenue at all.  For
example, in Clapham v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 1012 (T.A.B.), a motel valued
at $50,000 was rented to a controlled corporation for only $600 per year.  By
virtue of renting the property for much less than its fair annual rental, the
appellant in Clapham showed that it was not acquired for the purpose of
producing income.  CCA was disallowed, even though the item of property
produced some revenue.  In my opinion, if the revenue is unreasonably low in
relation to the value of the revenue-generating property, then it is deemed not
to produce income, and the second part of the  test, dealing with the objective
purpose, is to be applied.  90                   In
the case at bar, is the revenue unreasonably low in relation to the property’s
value?  Cross-examination established that Hickman Motors’ leasing revenue was
$1,900,000, the value of its leasing assets being $5,220,000, and that
Equipment’s rental revenue was $1,500,000, the value of its Class 22 assets
being $2,700,000.  Thus, the fixed asset ratios (ratio = revenue ) asset) are
respectively .36 for Hickman Motors and .55 for Equipment.  These two ratios
contrast sharply with the fixed asset ratio in Clapham, which is .01. 
Accordingly, I  cannot infer from the evidence that the revenue produced by
Equipment’s property is unreasonably low in relation to that property’s value 
--  and the respondent adduced no evidence to that end.  It is to be noted that
I am using the above numbers for showing the clear distinction between the
present case and Clapham.  These ratios and values will not
necessarily apply in the context of other cases.  K.  Onus of Proof 91                   As
I have noted, the appellant adduced clear, uncontradicted evidence, while the
respondent did not adduce any evidence whatsoever.  In my view, the law on that
point is well settled, and the respondent failed to discharge its burden of
proof for the following reasons.  92                   It
is trite law that in taxation the standard of proof is the civil balance of probabilities: 
Dobieco Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1966] S.C.R. 95, and that
within balance of probabilities, there can be varying degrees of proof required
in order to discharge the onus, depending on the subject matter:  Continental
Insurance Co. v. Dalton Cartage Co., [1982] 1 S.C.R. 164;  Pallan v.
M.N.R., 90 D.T.C. 1102 (T.C.C.), at p. 1106.  The Minister, in making
assessments, proceeds on assumptions (Bayridge Estates Ltd. v. M.N.R.,
59 D.T.C. 1098 (Ex. Ct.), at p. 1101) and the initial onus is on the taxpayer
to “demolish” the Minister’s assumptions in the assessment (Johnston v.
Minister of National Revenue, [1948] S.C.R. 486;  Kennedy v. M.N.R.,
73 D.T.C. 5359 (F.C.A.), at p. 5361).  The initial burden is only to “demolish”
the exact assumptions made by the Minister but no more:  First
Fund Genesis Corp. v. The Queen, 90 D.T.C. 6337 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 6340.  93                   This
initial onus of “demolishing” the Minister’s exact assumptions is met
where the appellant makes out at least a prima facie case:  Kamin
v. M.N.R., 93 D.T.C. 62 (T.C.C.);  Goodwin v. M.N.R., 82 D.T.C. 1679
(T.R.B.).  In the case at bar, the appellant adduced evidence which met not
only a prima facie standard, but also, in my view, even a higher one. 
In my view, the appellant “demolished” the following assumptions as follows: 
(a) the assumption of “two businesses”, by adducing clear evidence of only one
business;  (b) the assumption of “no income”, by adducing clear evidence of
income.  The law is settled that unchallenged and uncontradicted evidence
“demolishes” the Minister’s assumptions:  see for example MacIsaac v. M.N.R.,
74 D.T.C. 6380 (F.C.A.), at p. 6381;   Zink v. M.N.R., 87 D.T.C. 652
(T.C.C.).  As stated above, all of the appellant’s evidence in the case at bar
remained unchallenged and uncontradicted.  Accordingly, in my view, the
assumptions of  “two businesses” and “no income” have been “demolished” by the
appellant.  94                   Where
the Minister’s assumptions have been “demolished” by the appellant, “the
onus . . . shifts to the Minister to rebut the prima facie case”
made out by the  appellant and to prove the assumptions:  Magilb Development
Corp.  v. The Queen, 87 D.T.C. 5012 (F.C.T.D.),  at p. 5018.  Hence, in the
case at bar, the onus has shifted to the Minister to prove its assumptions that
there are “two businesses” and “no income”.  95                   Where
the burden has shifted to the Minister, and the Minister adduces no evidence
whatsoever, the taxpayer is entitled to succeed:  see for example MacIsaac,
supra, where the Federal Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the
Trial Division, on the grounds that (at p. 6381) the “evidence was not
challenged or contradicted and no objection of any kind was taken thereto”. 
See also Waxstein v. M.N.R., 80 D.T.C. 1348 (T.R.B.);  Roselawn
Investments Ltd. v. M.N.R., 80 D.T.C. 1271 (T.R.B.).  Refer also to Zink,
supra, at p. 653, where, even if the evidence contained “gaps in logic,
chronology, and substance”, the taxpayer’s appeal was allowed as the Minister
failed to present any evidence as to the source of income.  I note that, in the
case at bar, the evidence contains no such “gaps”.  Therefore, in the case at
bar, since the Minister adduced no evidence whatsoever, and no question of
credibility was ever raised by anyone, the appellant is entitled to succeed. 96                   In
the present case, without any evidence, both the Trial Division and the Court
of Appeal purported to transform the Minister’s unsubstantiated and unproven
assumptions into “factual findings”, thus making errors of law on the onus of
proof.  My colleague Iacobucci J. defers to these so-called “concurrent
findings” of the courts below, but, while I fully agree in general with the
principle of deference, in this case two wrongs cannot make a right.  Even with
“concurrent findings”, unchallenged and uncontradicted evidence positively
rebuts the Minister’s assumptions:  MacIsaac, supra.  As Rip
T.C.J., stated in Gelber v. M.N.R., 91 D.T.C. 1030, at p. 1033, “the
[Minister] is not the arbiter of what is right or wrong in tax law”.  As Brulé
T.C.C.J., stated in Kamin, supra, at p. 64:    . . . the Minister should be able to rebut such [prima
facie] evidence and bring forth some foundation for his assumptions.                                                                     .
. .   The Minister does not have a carte blanche in
terms of setting out any assumption which suits his convenience.  On being
challenged by evidence in chief he must be expected to present something more
concrete than a simple assumption.  [Emphasis added.]   97                   In
my view, the above statement is apposite in the present case:  the respondent,
on being challenged by evidence in chief, failed to present anything more
concrete than simple assumptions and failed to bring forth any foundation.  The
respondent chose not to rebut any of the appellant’s evidence.  Accordingly,
the respondent failed to discharge her onus of proof.  98                   I
note that, in upholding the Minister’s unproven assumptions, my colleague
Iacobucci J. may be seen as reversing the above-stated line of case law,
without explicitly providing the rationale for doing so.  With respect for the
contrary opinion, in my view, changes in the jurisprudence regarding the onus
of proof in tax law should be left for another day.  Furthermore, on the facts
of the case at bar, sanctioning the respondent’s total lack of evidence could
seem unreasonable and perhaps even unjust, given that the appellant complied
with a well-established line of jurisprudence as regards its onus of proof.  V.  Summary  99                   Section
88(1)(c) does not create any right for the parent company to claim a CCA
deduction as a result of the winding-up of a subsidiary.  This right is to be
found in s. 20(1)(a), read concurrently with the applicable Regulations.
The appellant has discharged its burden of proving that the property was held
for the purpose of producing income from its business.  The appellant proved
that between December 28, 1984, and January 2, 1985,  it did in fact carry on
an integrated car, truck and equipment business.  The appellant proved that the
equipment-related property produced revenue from that business during that
period.  Accordingly, the requirements of Regulation 1102(1)(c) and s.
20(1)(a) are met.  Therefore, the CCA deduction is allowable.  100                       Both
the Trial Division and the Court of Appeal failed to take the revenue into
consideration and, in determining whether the equipment-related assets met the
requirements of Regulation 1102, made incorrect inferences, asked the wrong
questions of law and applied the wrong test, which constitute reviewable errors
of law.  In as technical a piece of legislation as the ITA, had
Parliament or the executive wanted to specify any minimum period of time,
materiality requirement, or financial statement content requirement, they would
have used clear language to that effect.  VI.   Disposition  101                       Since
the appellant is entitled to a capital cost allowance deduction as claimed, I
would allow the appeal with costs throughout, set aside the judgments of the
Federal Court of Appeal and the Trial Division, and remit the matter back to
the Minister of National Revenue for reassessment in conformity with these
reasons.  //Iacobucci J.//  The reasons of Sopinka, Cory and Iacobucci JJ. were
delivered by  102                    Iacobucci J. (dissenting) -- I have
read the reasons written by my colleagues, Justice L’Heureux-Dubé and Justice
McLachlin, and, with respect, find myself unable to concur with most of their
reasoning or with their conclusion.  In my opinion, the appellant’s attempt to
deduct capital cost allowance from its income from a business fails for the
primary reason that the capital cost allowance is not, as required by s. 20(1)
of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, applicable to a business
source of income.  Because of my disagreement with my colleagues’ respective
approaches to this case, I will set forth the relevant factual and judicial
background.  1.  Facts  103                         The
appellant, Hickman Motors Ltd., is a General Motors distributor in St. John’s,
Newfoundland.  It sells, services, rents and leases cars and trucks.  104                    On
December 14, 1984, Hickman Motors acquired all of the outstanding shares of an
associated corporation, Hickman Equipment Ltd. (hereinafter “Equipment”). 
Equipment’s business consisted of leasing heavy equipment, such as backhoes,
bulldozers, rock drilling equipment and cranes.  105                    On
Friday, December 28, 1984, Equipment was voluntarily wound up into Hickman
Motors.  Upon the winding-up, all of Equipment’s assets passed to Hickman
Motors.  Among these assets were certain items of depreciable property (in this
case, backhoes, bulldozers, etc.) with an undepreciated capital cost of $5,196,422. 
Hickman Motors retained Equipment’s assets for five days and then, on January
2, 1985 (the following Wednesday, after the New Year’s holiday), sold
everything to a newly incorporated, related company called Hickman Equipment
(1985) Ltd. (hereinafter “Equipment 85”).  From January 2, 1985, Equipment 85
carried on the same heavy equipment leasing business which had formerly been
carried on by Equipment.  106                    In
the 1984 taxation year, the appellant, Hickman Motors, claimed $2,092,942 for
capital cost allowance in respect of the Equipment assets.  The Minister of
National Revenue disallowed this claim, and held that Hickman Motors was not
entitled to claim capital cost allowance on any of the Equipment property on
the ground that Hickman Motors had not acquired the property for the purpose of
gaining or producing income.  107                    Hickman
Motors appealed the Minister’s decision to the Federal Court (Trial Division),
arguing that, since it had acquired the assets as part of a business
reorganization pursuant to ss. 88(1) and (1.1) of the Act, it did not need to
show that it had carried out this acquisition with the purpose of gaining or
producing income therefrom.  In the alternative, the company alleged that it
had, in fact, acquired and used the assets in order to gain or produce income. 
Joyal J. ([1993] 1 F.C. 622) dismissed the taxpayer’s appeal.  A subsequent
appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal (95 D.T.C. 5575) was similarly dismissed.  2.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  108             Income
Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63:  3. 
The income of a taxpayer for a taxation year for the purposes of this Part is
his income for the year determined by the following rules:  (a)       determine the aggregate of  amounts
each of which is the taxpayer’s income for the year (other than a taxable
capital gain from the disposition of a property) from a source inside or
outside Canada, including, without restricting the generality of the foregoing,
his income for the year from each office, employment, business and property;  4.
(1)  For the purposes of this Act,  (a)       a taxpayer’s income or loss for a
taxation year from an office, employment, business, property or other source,
or from sources in a particular place, is the taxpayer’s income or loss, as the
case may be, computed in accordance with this Act on the assumption that he had
during the taxation year no income or loss except from that source or no income
or loss except from those sources, as the case may be, and was allowed no
deductions in computing his income for the taxation year except such deductions
as may reasonably be regarded as wholly applicable to that source or to those
sources, as the case may be, and except such part of any other deductions as
may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto; . . .  9.  (1) 
Subject to this Part, a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from a business
or property is his profit therefrom for the year.  20.
(1)  Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a), (b) and (h), in
computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from a business or property,
there may be deducted such of the following amounts as are wholly applicable to
that source or such part of the following amounts as may reasonably be regarded
as applicable thereto:  (a)       such part of the capital cost to the
taxpayer of property, or such amount in respect of the capital cost to the
taxpayer of property, if any, as is allowed by regulation;  85. . . .  (5.1)  Where a person or a
partnership (in this subsection referred to as the “taxpayer”) has disposed of
any depreciable property of a prescribed class of the taxpayer to a transferee
that was  (a)       a corporation that, immediately after
the disposition, was controlled, directly or indirectly in any manner whatever,
by the taxpayer, by the spouse of the taxpayer or by a person, group of persons
or partnership by whom the taxpayer was controlled, directly or indirectly in
any manner whatever, . . . and the fair market value of the property at the time
of the disposition is less than both the cost to the taxpayer of the property
and the amount (in this subsection referred to as the “proportionate amount”)
that is the proportion of the undepreciated capital cost to the taxpayer of all
property of that class immediately before the disposition that the fair market
value of the property at the time of the disposition is of the fair market
value of all property of that class at the time of disposition, the following
rules apply:                                                                     .
. .  (e)       the lesser of the cost to the
taxpayer of the property and the proportionate amount in respect of the
property shall be deemed to be the taxpayer’s proceeds of disposition and the
transferee’s cost of the property; 3.  Judgments Below  A.  Federal Court (Trial Division), [1993] 1 F.C. 622  109                    At
trial, Hickman Motors called only one witness, Mr. Brian Grant, who manages the
financial affairs of all the Hickman companies.  The Crown called no witnesses.  110                    Having
reviewed the evidence relating to the relevant transactions, Joyal J. found
that Hickman Motors had never intended to expand its business to include a
heavy equipment dealership.  It had always planned to hold onto Equipment's
assets for only a few days prior to a subsequent transfer to Equipment 85 (at
p. 632):  According to the evidence, the plaintiff, a General
Motors dealer in cars and trucks, had no intention of carrying on the business
of a heavy equipment dealer, which had been Equipment's mainstay and which
Equipment 85 was to inherit.  111                    Given
that Hickman Motors had never intended to run a heavy equipment dealership, the
trial judge considered whether the Act would, nonetheless, permit capital cost
allowance deductions for the heavy equipment in question.  Joyal J. looked
first at s. 20(1), which is headed “Deductions permitted in computing income
from business or property”.  In particular, Joyal J. noted that s. 20(1)
permits only those deductions which are wholly or partly applicable to the
source in question.  112                    Then,
Joyal J. turned to Regulation 1102(1)(c) of the Income Tax
Regulations, C.R.C., c. 945.  This regulation excludes from the definition
of depreciable property all assets which the taxpayer did not acquire
for the purpose of gaining or producing income.  In the opinion of the trial
judge at p. 632, this exclusion is “consonant with the sourcing
provision of section 20” (emphasis in the original).  113                    Considering
s. 20(1) in light of Regulation 1102(1)(c), Joyal J. held that, in order
to claim capital cost allowance in respect of the heavy equipment assets,
Hickman Motors must establish that it acquired the property for the purpose of
producing profit from a business which it was carrying on.  114                    Based
on the evidence before him, Joyal J. found that Hickman Motors had not acquired
the property for the purpose of producing income from its business.  He
emphasized two factors: first, the fact that Hickman Motors derived only a
small portion of its revenues from leasing; and, second, that it held on to the
assets for only five days.  Joyal J. said at p. 633, “there was neither an
intention nor, for practical purposes, any more than a notional attempt to earn
income from the assets acquired on the winding-up.”  Therefore, he held that
Regulation 1102(1)(c) and, in particular, its requirement that the
taxpayer acquire the property in question for the purpose of gaining or
producing income operate to bar Hickman Motors’ claim for capital cost
allowance.  115                    Before
leaving his analysis of s. 20(1)(a) and Regulation 1102(1)(c),
Joyal J. made one final comment.  He said at p. 633, “[i]t is evident to me
that the capital cost of the assets is not applicable to the income of the
plaintiff’s business of automotive sales and services which it carried on in
its 1984 taxation year.”  116                    The
balance of the trial judge’s reasons deals with whether or not s. 88(1.1) of
the Act allows Hickman Motors to claim capital cost allowance on the assets. 
The wording of s. 88(1.1)(e) and s. 88(1)(c) led Joyal J. to
conclude that the rollover provisions of s. 88 apply only when the  parent uses
the subsidiary’s assets in its business.  Since he had already found that
Hickman Motors had not used Equipment’s depreciable property in its car sales
and leasing business, the trial judge found that Hickman Motors could not use the
s. 88 rollover provisions as a springboard to claiming capital cost allowance.  117                    In
the opinion of Joyal J., to allow Hickman Motors’ claim would lead to
inconsistency within the Act as a whole.  He said at p. 637:  I conclude that the specific processes found in
subsection 88(1.1) with respect to the roll-over of assets and liabilities can
only be applied in light of the other provisions of the Act which I have
cited.  To do otherwise would simply result in artificiality and create an
imbalance or non-conformity in the application of the more generic provisions
of the statute which Parliament had no intention of creating.   118                    In
conclusion, Joyal J. said that Hickman Motors could not claim capital cost
allowance in respect of Equipment’s assets because it failed to satisfy the
“business purpose test” contained within the sourcing provisions of s. 20(1)
and within the definition of depreciable property in Regulation 1102(1)(c).  B.  Federal Court of Appeal, 95 D.T.C. 5575  119                    Writing
for the Court of Appeal, Hugessen J.A. considered but ultimately rejected
Hickman Motors’ argument that s. 88(1) creates a right to claim capital cost
allowance which operates independently of s. 20(1)(a).  The appellant’s
claim failed for the basic reason that s. 88(1) contains no language which
either charges or relieves the taxpayer from tax liability.  Hugessen J.A. said
at p. 5577, “[i]n and of itself, the subsection creates no rights to any
deductions at all.”  120                    In
his view, all that s. 88(1) does is to effect a “flow-through” of the cost of
property from a wound-up subsidiary to the parent corporation.  Neither the
fact that the subsidiary’s depreciable property has become depreciable property
in the parent company’s hands, nor the fact that the parent has “inherited” the
subsidiary’s undepreciated capital cost assists in determining whether the
parent can claim capital cost allowance in respect of the property.  121                    Hugessen
J.A. pointed out that a taxpayer’s right to claim capital cost allowance arises
only by virtue of s. 20(1)(a).  This section incorporates the more
detailed rules laid out in the Regulations, in particular, Regulation 1102(1)(c)
which limits the classes of depreciable property to those assets which the
taxpayer acquired for the purpose of gaining or producing income.  In the
opinion of the Court of Appeal at p. 5578, this regulation is “wholly
consonant” with s. 18(1)(a), which limits deductions from income from a
business or property to those outlays which were made for the purpose of
gaining or producing income from the business or property.  122                    Hugessen
J.A. rejected Hickman Motors’ argument that Regulation (14) operates so as to
deem the subsidiary’s assets to be depreciable property of a prescribed class
in the hands of the parent company.  In his opinion, this regulation has only
one purpose:  to prevent the acquirer of depreciable property from switching
the property from one class to another.  123                    Accordingly,
Hugessen J.A. concluded that s. 88 did not create an independent right for
Hickman Motors to claim capital cost allowance on the assets acquired on the
winding-up of Equipment.  He held that Hickman Motors could only deduct capital
cost allowance if it met the standard requirements contained in the Act and the
Regulations. 124                    Hugessen
J.A., therefore, turned to consider whether Hickman Motors had acquired the
property in question for the purpose of gaining or producing income, as
required by Regulation 1102(1)(c).  He first looked at the reasons of
the trial judge which describe as “notional” any attempt by Hickman Motors to
earn income from the assets in question.  Acknowledging the deference due to
this finding of fact, Hugessen J.A. nonetheless carried out his own examination
of Hickman Motors’ intention in acquiring Equipment’s depreciable property.  125                    In
order to determine the company’s intention, Hugessen J.A. applied a modified
version of the test laid down by Dickson J., as he then was, in Moldowan v.
The Queen, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 480.  This test takes into account a number of
factors, including profit and loss experience in past years, the taxpayer’s
training, and the taxpayer’s intended course of action.  Hugessen J.A. at p.
5579 found that these criteria “argue strongly against” Hickman Motors’ claim
and he could not see any evidence which might “point the other way”. 
Specifically, the Court of Appeal noted that Equipment had, for several years,
lost substantial sums of money.  Furthermore, Hickman Motors was not in and had
no intention of getting into the business of leasing heavy equipment (Hugessen
J.A. at p. 5579):  . . . the intended course of action of the appellant,
at the time the assets of “Equipment” were acquired by it, was admittedly to
turn such assets over to “Equipment (1985)” within five days time.  126                    Adding
to the evidence which suggested that Hickman Motors had never intended to earn
income from the Equipment assets was the fact that the parent company never
showed any such income in its books for either the 1984 or the 1985 taxation
years.  Accordingly, Hugessen J.A. found at p. 5579 that the trial judge’s
conclusion with regard to the intention of Hickman Motors in acquiring the
property in question was “concordant with the applicable principles of law and
is solidly based in the evidence”.  127                    Finally,
Hugessen J.A. rejected Hickman Motors’ alternative argument that it was
entitled to claim a terminal loss equal to the undepreciated capital cost of
the property which it received from Equipment.  4.  Issue  128                    In
the hearing before this Court, the parties argued only one issue:  Was the capital cost of the property acquired in the
winding-up of Hickman Equipment Ltd. applicable to the income from the
appellant’s business, within the meaning of s. 20(1)(a), in its 1984
taxation year?  5.  Analysis  129                    I
should like to commence my reasons with a discussion of what is not in
issue before this Court.  During oral argument, Crown counsel conceded that, by
virtue of s. 88(1), when Hickman Motors assumed ownership of its subsidiary’s
heavy equipment assets, it acquired depreciable property of a prescribed
class.  Departing from the line of argument pursued in the courts below, the
Crown has not based its opposition to the appellant’s claim on anything
contained in the Regulations.  Rather, the dispute revolves entirely around the
opening words of s. 20(1) of the Act, more specifically, around whether the
capital cost allowance in question is applicable to a business source of
income.  130                    Before
proceeding to an examination of the issues which arise out of s. 20(1), I ought
to express my agreement with L’Heureux-Dubé J. as to the effect of s. 88(1).  I
agree with her and with the Federal Court of Appeal and the Trial Division
judge that s. 88(1) creates no right in a taxpayer to claim capital cost
allowance.  In the event of a transfer of property between related
corporations, s. 88(1) permits a “flow-through” of both the property’s cost
amount and its undepreciated capital cost.  Thus, in this case, when Hickman
Motors acquired the depreciable property from Equipment, s. 88(1) deemed
Hickman Motors to have “inherited” Equipment’s cost amount and undepreciated
capital cost.  However, while s. 88(1) does fix the undepreciated capital cost
of the property at a certain level, nothing in the section gives the parent
corporation the right to depreciate the property further.  To repeat and adopt
the comments of Hugessen J.A., s. 88(1) in and of itself creates no rights to a
tax deduction.  Any right to claim capital cost allowance must be based in s. 20(1)
because, before this Court, the parties agreed to put aside other provisions of
the Act and Regulations which might otherwise come into play, and confined
their respective submissions to the effect of s. 20(1).  131                    Section
20(1), which contains the specific authority for claiming capital cost
allowance (at s. 20(1)(a)), provides:  Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a), (b)
and (h), in computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from a
business or property, there may be deducted such of the following amounts as
are wholly applicable to that source or such part of the following amounts as
may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto. . . .  In this case, the appellant will succeed in its claim only if the
capital cost allowance in question was, as required by s. 20(1), “wholly
applicable” to a business source of income.  I say “wholly applicable”
because this case raised no issue with regard to whether the capital cost
allowance was partly applicable to a business source of income.  132                    In
order to show that the capital cost allowance in question was wholly applicable
to a business source of income, the appellant must demonstrate two things:
first, the appellant must identify the relevant business source; and second,
the appellant must show that the capital cost allowance is wholly applicable to
that particular business source.  A.   Identifying the Relevant Source of Income  133                    It
is trite to say that s. 3(a) defines a taxpayer’s income as income from all
sources.  The section goes on to specify the most common sources of income,
namely, business, property, and office or employment.  Generally speaking, for
tax purposes, when calculating income from business, a taxpayer may not lump
together the revenues and expenses from all of that person’s various business
enterprises.  Rather, the taxpayer must compute, separately, his or her income
or loss from each individual business.  This provides the appropriate figure
which the taxpayer then “plugs in” to the s. 3 formula for computing income for
the taxation year.  134                    This
requirement to treat each business as a separate source arises from the wording
of the applicable statutory provisions.  For example, s. 3(a) states
that a taxpayer must “determine the aggregate of amounts each of which is the
taxpayer’s income for the year . . . from each office, employment,
business and property” (emphasis added).  Similarly, s. 4(1)(a)
provides:  . . . a taxpayer’s income or loss for a taxation year
from an office, employment, business, property or other source, . . . is
the taxpayer's income or loss . . . computed in accordance with this Act on the
assumption that he had during the taxation year no income or loss except from
that source.... [Emphasis added.]  Section 9(1) contains similar wording, as does s. 20(1), which lists
a number of deductions permitted from a taxpayer’s income “from a
business or property” (emphasis added).  135                    This
need to segregate business income according to its various “sub-sources” has
been discussed in both academic writings and the jurisprudence.  In Canadian
Income Taxation (4th ed. 1986), Edwin C. Harris says at p. 99:  . . . the Act provides that a taxpayer's income for a
taxation year is his income from all sources, including but not limited to his
income from each office or employment, each business, and each
property.  His income from each source-type is to be computed separately.
[Emphasis added.]  In C.B.A. Engineering Ltd. v. M.N.R., [1971] C.T.C. 504
(F.C.T.D.), at p. 511, Cattanach J. explained, “[w]hen there is more than one
business, each business is a source of income.”  See also, Poulin v. The Queen,
94 D.T.C. 1674 (T.C.C.), at pp. 1677-78; Vincent v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1965] 2 Ex. C.R. 117, at p. 125; and B. J. Arnold et. al., Materials
on Canadian Income Tax (10th ed. 1993), at p. 189.  136                    However,
my colleague, L’Heureux-Dubé J., suggests that it is uncertain whether a
taxpayer must calculate separately his or her income from each business
source.  I cannot agree.  Indeed, I do not know how the Act could speak any
more clearly on this point.  As noted above, s. 3 requires a taxpayer to
calculate income from “each . . . business”.  Similarly, s. 9(1) refers
to a taxpayer’s income from “a business”. 137                    Certainly,
the tax courts have not shown any confusion in this regard.  For example, Garon
T.C.J. in Poulin, supra, said at p. 1677:  It is known that the Income Tax Act requires
income to be computed based on each source of income.  See in particular ss. 3
and 4 of the Income Tax Act.   Accordingly, pursuant to that Act, the
income from each business, for example, must be computed separately.
[Emphasis added.]  138                    The
requirement to calculate income from each “sub-source” separately is
fundamental to the entire taxing scheme set up by Parliament.  To suggest
otherwise, as my colleague does, is to ignore the plain words of the Act.  139                    Therefore,
it is not enough for the appellant to state that the capital cost allowance,
claimed in regard of the Equipment assets, is applicable to income from
“business”.  Instead, the appellant must show that the allowance is applicable
to income from a particular business.  In this case, the facts suggest
two potential business sources of income: first, the appellant unquestionably
operated a car and truck sales and leasing business; second, the appellant
claims to have briefly operated a heavy equipment leasing business, a business
which was previously carried on by the appellant’s subsidiary, Equipment.  140                    Because
the Crown disputes the existence of this second business source, I will now
turn to consider whether the appellant has a second source of business income,
in the form of a heavy equipment leasing enterprise, separate and distinct from
the long-standing General Motors dealership.  In my opinion, the appellant’s
argument with regard to this alleged second business fails for two reasons. 
First, the trial judge made a finding of fact, and properly so, in my view,
that Hickman Motors did not continue to operate the business previously run by
Equipment.  This finding of fact deserves the deference of appellate courts. 
Second, having examined the facts of the case myself, I fully agree with the
trial judge’s conclusion.  Although the appellant owned all of Equipment’s
assets, it did not use those assets in a business.  I shall discuss each of
these reasons in turn.  141                    As
mentioned above, the trial judge held that Hickman Motors never intended to
carry on Equipment’s leasing business.  He said at p. 632:  According to the evidence, the plaintiff, a General
Motors dealer in cars and trucks, had no intention of carrying on the business
of a heavy equipment dealer, which had been Equipment’s mainstay and which
Equipment 85 was to inherit.  The Federal Court of Appeal, although giving deference to the trial
judge, reinforced this finding of fact.  Thus, the courts below made concurrent
findings of fact on this issue.  Only just recently, this Court restated its
reluctance to interfere with such concurrent findings of fact, absent palpable
error or fundamental error of law:  Boma Manufacturing Ltd. v.
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, [1996] 3 S.C.R 727, at para. 60.  142                    In
this case, the trial judge committed no such error.  Indeed, I fully agree with
Joyal J. that Hickman Motors never carried on a heavy equipment leasing
business.  In reaching his conclusion, the trial judge relied on a number of
factors.  For example, he stressed the fact that Hickman Motors only owned the
Equipment assets for a very short period of time.  Joyal J. also noted that,
for 1984, the appellant corporation generated $75 million in sales and that
only a very small proportion of these sales was attributable to leasing. 
Finally, he observed that the appellant was a General Motors dealer in cars and
trucks and that it had no intention of expanding its business to include heavy
equipment leasing. 143                    In
an attempt to cast doubt on the trial judge’s finding, counsel for the
appellant emphasized the fact that, over the five days when Hickman Motors
owned the property in question, leases entered into by Equipment were still in
existence and were still providing income.  Counsel for the appellant argued
that this income flow gave a good indication of the presence of an on-going
business.  However, there was, in fact, no evidence that Hickman Motors
actually received any of this income.  The company’s 1984 financial statements
did not show any revenues or expenses from the Equipment assets.  In my view,
if there is no evidence that the taxpayer received any income, then the
taxpayer cannot rely on such alleged receipt as evidence that it carried on a
business.  144                    Furthermore,
even assuming that Hickman Motors did receive income from these assets, this
does not, for tax purposes, lead necessarily to the conclusion that Hickman
Motors earned income from a business.  As Professor Vern Krishna notes
in The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax (5th ed. 1995), income such
as rents may be either property income or business income.  He distinguishes
between the two on the basis that “business” connotes some kind of activity, at
p. 260:  . . . “business” refers to economic, industrial,
commercial, or financial activity and involves more than mere passive
ownership of property.  [Emphasis in original.]  In a similar vein, Harris, supra, says at p. 143:  Passive income from the mere holding of property is
classified as income from property rather than income from business.  And Peter W. Hogg and Joanne E. Magee say in Principles of
Canadian Income Tax Law (1995), at p. 195: A gain acquired without systematic effort is not
income from a business.  It may be income from property, such as rent, interest
or dividends.   Unless the taxpayer actually uses the asset “as part of a
process that combines labour and capital” (Krishna, supra, at p. 276),
any income earned therefrom does not qualify as income from a business, but
rather falls into the category of income from property.  As the point was not
argued either before us or in the courts below, I need not go on to discuss
whether the appellant could claim capital cost allowance on the basis that it
was applicable to income from property.  145                    In
this case, Hickman Motors did nothing at all with the Equipment assets.  It
simply assumed ownership of the property and, allegedly, passively received
income from the outstanding leases.  This complete lack of activity contrasts
with Equipment 85’s course of action, following the January 2, 1985 transfer
date.  As soon as Equipment 85 obtained ownership of the property, it executed
a new dealership agreement with its most important supplier, John Deere Ltd. 
This business activity, which followed immediately upon Equipment 85’s
acquisition of the leasing assets, makes all the more apparent the complete
absence of any action taken by Hickman Motors during its tenure as owner.  146                    In
her reasons, my colleague, L’Heureux-Dubé J., disagrees with my conclusion that
Hickman Motors did nothing more than passively hold the Equipment assets. 
Relying on certain parts of the trial transcript, she maintains at para. 43
that there is “positive evidence that Hickman Motors did indeed carry on the
equipment-related sales and rental activities” over the crucial five-day period
stretching between December 28, 1984 and January 2, 1985.  Specifically, my
colleague points to testimony given on cross-examination by the sole witness,
Mr. Brian Grant, that Hickman Motors accepted some type of rental order on
December 31, 1984.  147                    The
testimony in question revolved around a bundle of invoices all of which were
sent out on Hickman Equipment letterhead.  Most of these invoices related to
heavy equipment which Hickman Equipment had rented to various customers in the
weeks preceding its winding-up.  The last invoice in the bundle was the subject
of a number of questions, during both examination-in-chief and
cross-examination.  In his examination-in-chief, Mr. Grant said that the last
invoice, for the sale of a backhoe loader, was dated December 21, 1984, seven
days before the winding-up of Equipment.  However, a discussion of this same
invoice, during cross-examination muddied the factual waters somewhat.  On cross-examination,
counsel seems to indicate that this same invoice was dated not December 21, but
rather December 31, 1984.  Mr. Grant, apparently contradicting his earlier
testimony, agreed with counsel.  148                    Thus,
with regard to the question of whether, on December 31, 1984, Hickman Motors
sent out an invoice of any kind, relating to the Equipment assets, the record
contains inconsistent, contradictory evidence.  In my opinion, such
contradictory testimony does not provide a satisfactory evidentiary foundation
upon which to base a conclusion that the appellant engaged in the kind of
economic activity which constitutes a business for the purposes of the Income
Tax Act.  Left, as I am, with no clear evidence that Hickman Motors did
anything other than passively hold property, I agree with the trial judge's
conclusion that the appellant did not carry on a separate, heavy equipment
leasing business.  149                    Having
determined that the appellant had only one source of business income, i.e., its
long-standing General Motors car and truck dealership, I now turn to consider
whether the capital cost allowance claimed is “wholly applicable to that
business source”, as required by s. 20(1).  B.                Is the
Capital Cost Allowance “Wholly Applicable” to the Appellant’s General Motors
Car Leasing and Sales Business?  150                    In
his reasons, Joyal J. found that the appellant never used the Equipment assets
in its business.  He said at p. 633, “it is difficult to see how the assets of
a John Deere franchise . . . were used in the business of the plaintiff to
produce income.”  And at p. 638, “the assets involved could not have been
realistically used in the plaintiff's business”.  I can see no reason to
disturb this holding as it finds ample support in the evidence presented at
trial.  151                    According
to the testimony of the appellant’s witness, Equipment dealt in construction,
forestry, rock-drilling and crane operation equipment, referred to by counsel
as “non-automobile” assets.  By contrast, Hickman Motors dealt in cars and
trucks.  Only $30,000 of the company’s $5,220,000 worth of leasing assets fell
into the “non-automobile” category.  The appellant’s witness testified that
Hickman Motors dealt in automobiles while Equipment dealt in
“non-automobiles”.  I agree with the trial judge that it is difficult, if not
impossible, to see how the appellant could possibly have used bulldozers,
backhoes and other “non-automobile” equipment in its General Motors car and
truck business.  152                    If
the appellant did not use the Equipment assets in its automobile business, then
I fail to see how the capital cost allowance claimed in respect of those assets
could be “wholly applicable” to that source of business income.  Accordingly,
in my opinion, the appellant may not deduct capital cost allowance, in respect
of the Equipment assets, from its income from the General Motors dealership
business.  153                    I
should point out that a rejection of Hickman Motors' claim in this case does
not mean that the $2,092,942 deduction in question is, somehow, lost forever to
the Hickman group of companies.  On the contrary, provided that Equipment 85
meets the relevant statutory requirements (as laid out in s. 20(1) and
elsewhere in the Act and Regulations), it can claim the capital cost allowance
which was denied to its parent corporation.  154                    To
explain more fully, when Equipment's assets passed to the appellant, in December
of 1984, s. 88(1) effected a “rollover” of the property from subsidiary to
parent.  Accordingly, Hickman Motors is deemed to have acquired the property at
the subsidiary's undepreciated capital cost, in this case, $5,196,422. 
Subsequently, when Hickman Motors sold the property to Equipment 85, in January
of 1985, s. 85(5.1) effected a further rollover and deemed Equipment 85 to have
acquired the assets at the parent's undepreciated capital cost, i.e.,
$5,196,422.  Thus, in Equipment 85's hands, the depreciable property has the
same undepreciated capital cost which it had in Equipment's hands, prior to the
winding-up.  Throughout the entire corporate reorganization, the undepreciated
capital cost has remained the same and no amount of capital cost allowance
entitlement has been lost.  This was conceded by counsel for the respondent
Minister.  155                    I
would like to add one final comment.  As my colleague, L’Heureux-Dubé J.
states, s. 88(1) does not, in and of itself, create any right to claim capital
cost allowance.  All that this subsection does is to preserve certain
CCA-related values.  She writes at para. 35: . . .  s. 88(1) does not create any right for the
parent company, in this case the appellant Hickman Motors, to claim a CCA
deduction for property acquired from the subsidiary Hickman Equipment.  If
there is such a right, it is to be found in s. 20 ITA. . . .  I agree with this statement of the law.  156                    However,
over the course of her reasons, my colleague appears to retreat somewhat from
this position.  Indeed, the back-tracking is such that the net effect of her
reasons is to turn s. 88(1) into a provision which does, in fact, give
the taxpayer a substantive right to a deduction.  157                    As
my colleague notes, prior to the December 28 wind-up, Equipment was carrying on
a business.  It is further agreed that Equipment was entitled to take capital
cost allowance on the property in question.  On December 28, Equipment was
wound up.  All of its assets reverted to the parent corporation, Hickman
Motors.  Hickman Motors held the assets for five days and then effected a
further transfer to a newly incorporated subsidiary.  The evidence does not
establish that Hickman Motors did anything at all with these assets over that
five-day period.  Moreover, and equally important for this Court to
acknowledge, both the Trial Court and the Federal Court of Appeal made
concurrent findings to this effect.  As previously stated, there is much
jurisprudence in our Court that generally prevents interfering with concurrent
findings of fact in the courts below.  158                    If
the company received any income from the assets, it did so passively.  It did
not use the property in the kind of “economic, industrial, commercial or
financial activity” which would imprint the resultant income with the character
of income from business.  Nevertheless, my colleague would allow Hickman Motors
to claim capital cost allowance as applicable to income from business.  The
chain of reasoning appears to be as follows: since the assets produced income
from business in the hands of the subsidiary, and since the parent company
carried on a business, the assets must have continued to produce income from
business in the hands of the parent.  159                    I
cannot agree.  All that s. 88(1) does is to displace the normal rules applying
to the disposition of property: it turns the transfer from subsidiary to parent
into a tax-free transaction.  What s. 88(1) does not do is to fix the
character of the transferred property immutably, nor does it fix the nature of the
income produced by that property.  Thus, it is possible that while the
transferred property produced income from business in the hands of the
subsidiary, Equipment 85, it may have produced income from property in
the hands of the parent.  It is quite possible that a taxpayer who carries on
business may receive both income from business and income from property.  As
Harris, supra, explains (at p. 159):  Where, however, a taxpayer who carries on a business
also owns property that is not used as an integral part of the business (e.g.,
long-term investments held by a manufacturing corporation), the income yielded
by this property will be considered property income and not business income.  Thus, the nature of the income produced from the property may change
following a s. 88(1) rollover.  However, my colleague’s reasons do not seem to
allow for this possibility.  160                    What
my colleague has put forward is, in effect, a system whereby, once a s. 88(1) rollover
occurs, the nature of the property and, more to the point, the nature of the
income produced by that property, is forever fixed.  Under her scheme, once it
is determined that the assets produced income from business in the hands of the
subsidiary, it necessarily follows that those assets will also produce income
from business in the hands of the parent.  With respect, I do not agree with
this reading of the Act.  Nothing in either s. 88(1) or s. 20(1) or in any
other provision supports such a conclusion.  161                    I
have addressed my comments chiefly to the reasons of L’Heureux-Dubé J. because
they are more specific and extensive.  However, my colleague, McLachlin J.
adopts in substance much of the reasoning of L’Heureux-Dubé J., and to that
extent, I would also respectfully disagree with her reasons.  6.  Conclusion  162                    For
all of the foregoing reasons, I would dismiss this appeal with costs.  Appeal allowed, Sopinka, Cory and Iacobucci
JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Chalker,
Green & Rowe, St. John’s.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The
Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.     