                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Caisse populaire
  Desjardins de l’Est de Drummond v. Canada, 2009 SCC 29, [2009] 2
  S.C.R. 94  Date:  20090619 Docket:  31787  Between: Caisse
populaire Desjardins de l’Est de Drummond and in
right of the Caisse populaire du Bon Conseil Appellant and Her Majesty The
Queen in Right of Canada Respondent  Official English Translation: Reasons of Deschamps J.  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Charron and Rothstein JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 64)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 65 to 158)   Rothstein J. (McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Fish and Charron
  JJ. concurring)  Deschamps J.
  (LeBel J. concurring)  ______________________________   Caisse populaire Desjardins de l’Est de Drummond v. Canada, 
2009 SCC 29, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 94  Caisse
populaire Desjardins de l’Est de Drummond, in Right of the Caisse populaire du Bon Conseil                                                              Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen in Right of Canada                                                                Respondent  Indexed as:  Caisse populaire Desjardins de l’Est de Drummond v.
Canada  Neutral citation:  2009 SCC 29.  File No.:  31787.  2008:  February 29; 2009:  June 19.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps,
Fish, Charron and Rothstein JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of
appeal  Taxation — Income tax — Trust for moneys deducted —
Employer defaulting on line of credit and financial institution exercising
right of compensation on employer’s term deposit pursuant to agreement — Deemed
trust in favour of Crown over property of employer that has deducted income tax
and employment insurance premiums at source — Crown seeking to collect amount
due by employer for unremitted source deductions from proceeds of term deposit
— Whether compensation agreement between financial institution and employer
created “security interest” within meaning of s. 224(1.3)  of Income Tax
Act — Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 224(1.3) 
“security interest”, 227(4.1).  On September 18, 2000, the Caisse granted Camvrac a
line of credit up to $277,000.  A week later, Camvrac deposited $200,000 with
the Caisse in accordance with a “Term Savings Agreement”.  Under the agreement,
the deposit was neither negotiable nor transferable.  On the same day, the
Caisse and Camvrac entered into a “Security Given Through Savings” agreement in
which Camvrac agreed to maintain and permit the Caisse to retain the deposit of
$200,000 for the duration of its indebtedness to the Caisse.  It also agreed
that, in the event it defaulted, there would be compensation between the credit
agreement and the term deposit.  Camvrac defaulted on the loan on
November 25, 2000, and later made an assignment in bankruptcy.  The Caisse
noted on its copy of the “Term Savings Agreement”:  “To be closed on 21/2/2001
to realize on security”.  Since Camvrac had failed to remit to the Crown income
tax and employment insurance premiums deducted at source, the Crown gave the
Caisse notice to pay the amount owing to the Crown from the proceeds of the
deposit.  Section 227(4.1)  of the Income Tax Act  (“ITA ”) and
s. 86(2.1)  of the Employment Insurance Act  (“EIA ”) create a
deemed trust in favour of the Crown over property of the employer that has
deducted income tax and employment insurance premiums at source.  This trust
applies to property of an employer and property held by any secured creditor of
the employer that, but for its security interest, would be property of the
employer.  The property is impressed with the deemed trust at the time the
unremitted amounts were deducted at source by the employer.  The Caisse
unsuccessfully challenged the recovery process.  The prothonotary, the Federal
Court and the Federal Court of Appeal held that the Crown was entitled to
recover the amounts due and the interest paid at the rate provided for in
ss. 36(2)  and 37(2)  of the Federal Courts Act.  Held (LeBel and Deschamps
JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be dismissed.  Per McLachlin C.J.
and Binnie, Fish, Charron and Rothstein JJ.:  The agreement between the
Caisse and Camvrac gave rise to a “security interest” for the purposes of
s. 224(1.3)  ITA . Camvrac’s property subject to the security
interest is thus deemed to be held in trust for the Crown under
s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  because Camvrac did
not remit to the Crown income tax and employment insurance premiums deducted at
source.  [1] [2]  The definition of “security interest” in
s. 224(1.3)  does not require that the agreement between the creditor and
debtor take any particular form, nor is any particular form expressly
excluded.  So long as the creditor’s interest in the debtor’s property secures
payment or performance of an obligation, there is a security interest within
the meaning of this section.  Parliament has chosen an expansive definition of
security interest in s. 224(1.3)  in order to enable maximum recovery by
the Crown under its deemed trust for unremitted income tax and employment insurance
premiums deducted at source by employers.  It is open to Parliament to define a
term in an area of its own legislative competence in order to ensure that there
is a rule of general application across all of the provinces.  [12] [14] [15]   The Caisse is liable to pay to the Crown the amounts for
employment insurance premiums and income tax deducted at source by Camvrac up
to, and including, any deductions not remitted as of February 21, 2001 — the date
on which the Caisse realized on its security.  The trust created by
s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  is deemed to be in
effect at any time.  It does not matter that the term deposit became the
property of Camvrac only after some of the employment insurance premiums and
income tax deductions went unremitted since the deemed trust encompasses
property which comes into the hands of the tax debtor after the trust arises. 
The proceeds of Camvrac’s term deposit are therefore available to the Crown to
discharge all of the outstanding employment insurance premiums and income tax
deducted at source by Camvrac, whether the unremitted deductions occurred
before or after Camvrac entered into the “Term Savings Agreement” and until
February 21, 2001.  Interest is calculated in accordance with ss. 36(2) 
and 37(2)  of the Federal Courts Act from February 21, 2001, when the
Caisse effected compensation, to the date of payment.  [59] [61] [63]  Per LeBel and
Deschamps JJ. (dissenting):  Compensation is not a “security interest” as
that term is defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  For the purposes of
s. 224(1.3) , it is not enough that compensation offers protection similar
to that of a security interest:  it must also confer a real right.  To limit
the concept of security interest in s. 224(1.3)  to rights that are real in
nature is consistent both with the shared meaning of the terms (“security
interest” and “garantie”) used in the two versions of the provision and
with Parliament’s purpose of giving the deemed trust priority over the security
interests referred to in s. 224(1.3) .  This deemed trust was created to
ensure that employers remit income tax deducted from their employees’ salaries
to the Receiver General for Canada.  [65] [98] [101]    Camvrac’s right to recover its claim was subject to the
right to compensation that had been granted to the Caisse in September 2000 in
the agreement to give savings as security.  In the context of that agreement,
the right to compensation was a right held by the Caisse that could not be
negated solely by the fact of the deemed trust becoming effective.  Her
Majesty, as a third party, could not demand that the Caisse discharge its debt
to Camvrac if the conditions for repayment had not been met.  The Caisse’s right
had to be respected by third parties who acquired rights after the agreement
was signed.  Consequently, Her Majesty must abide by the compensation
agreement, given that her right is subsequent to it.  [153]  On the interest issue, there is no need to vary the
decision of the Federal Court of Appeal. [157]  Cases Cited  By Rothstein J.   By Deschamps J. (dissenting)   Statutes and Regulations Cited   Civil Code of Lower Canada.  Civil Code of Québec,
S.Q. 1991, c. 64, arts. 875, 974, 1250, 1260, 1261, 1637, 1641, 1643,
1671, 1672, 1673, 1680, 1681, 2111 para. 2, 2123, 2329, 2330, 2543, 2660, 2683,
2702, 2703, 2710, 2714.7.   Constitution Act, 1867,
s. 91 (2A), (3) .  Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 111.  Employment Insurance Act, S.C. 1996, c. 23, s. 86 .    Federal Law — Civil Law Harmonization Act,
No. 1, S.C. 2001, c. 4, s. 8 .  Income Tax Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 224(1) , (1.3)  “security interest”, 227(4)
[repl. 1998, c. 19, s. 226(1)], (4.1) [ad. idem].   Personal Property Security Act, C.C.S.M., c. P35, s. 3(1).   Personal Property Security Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 359, s. 2(1).  Personal Property Security Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.10, ss. 1 “security interest”, “sûreté”,
2(a) “debenture”, 40.   Personal Property Security Act, R.S.Y. 2002, c. 169, s. 2.     Personal Property Security Act, S.N.W.T. 1994, c. 8, s. 2(1).   Authors Cited  Austin, John.  Lectures on Jurisprudence, or, The
Philosophy of Positive Law, 5th ed.  revised and edited by R. Campbell. 
London:  J. Murray, 1885.  Bastarache, Michel, et al.  The Law of Bilingual
Interpretation.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis Canada, 2008.    Bélanger, André.  Essai d’une théorie juridique de
la compensation en droit civil québécois.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon
Blais, 2004.  Black’s Law Dictionary,
6th ed.  St. Paul, Minn.:  West Publishing Co., 1990, “encumbrance”.  Bonneau, Thierry.  Droit bancaire, 7e
éd.  Paris:  Montchrestien, 2007.    Claxton, John B.  Studies on the Quebec Law of
Trust.  Toronto:  Thomson Carswell, 2005.    Cuerrier, Marc.  “The Harmonization of Federal Tax
Legislation”, in The Harmonization of Federal Legislation with the Civil Law
of the Province of Quebec and Canadian Bijuralism (Second publication),
Booklet 7.  Ottawa: Department of Justice, 2001.  Cuming, Ronald C. C., Catherine Walsh and Roderick J.
Wood.  Personal Property Security Law.  Toronto:  Irwin Law, 2005.  Davies, Paul L.  Gower and Davies’ Principles of
Modern Company Law, 7th ed.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 2003.  Denault, Philippe.  La recherche d’unité dans
l’interprétation du droit privé fédéral:  Cadre juridique et fragments du
discours judiciaire.  Montréal:  Thémis, 2008.   Deschamps, Michel. “Le nouveau régime québécois des
sûretés sur des valeurs mobilières”, conférence donnée le 19 mars 2009 à la
Chaire du notariat de l’Université de Montréal (en ligne:
www.chairedunotariat.qc.ca/fr/conferences/mois/032009/Deschamps.pdf).  Duboc, Guy.  La compensation et les droits des
tiers.  Paris:  L.G.D.J., 1989.  Dukelow, Daphne A.  The Dictionary of Canadian Law,
3rd ed.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Thomson Carswell, 2004, “debenture”, “encumbrance”.  Garner, Bryan A.  A Dictionary of Modern Legal
Usage, 2nd ed.  New York:  Oxford University Press, 1995, “debenture”.  Ghestin, Jacques.  Traité de droit civil
— Les obligations:  les effets du contrat, avec le concours de Marc
Billiau.  Paris:  L.G.D.J., 1992.  Goode on Legal Problems of Credit and Security, 4th ed.  by Louise Gullifer. London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 2008.   Hohfeld, Wesley Newcomb.  “Fundamental Legal
Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning” (1917), 26 Yale L.J. 710.  Holland, Thomas Erskine.  The Elements of
Jurisprudence, 12th ed.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1916.  Honorat,
Adrienne. “Redressement et liquidation judiciaires”, D. 1998.Somm.325.  Karim, Vincent.  Les obligations, 2e
éd., vol. 2, art. 1497 à 1707 C.c.Q.  Montréal:  Wilson &
Lafleur, 2002.    Lamoureux, Martin.  “The Income Tax Act , the Excise
Tax Act  and the Term Interest:  An Interesting Case for Harmonization”, in The
Harmonization of Federal Legislation with Quebec Civil Law and Canadian
Bijuralism — Collection of Studies in Tax Law 2001.  Montréal: 
Fiscal and Financial Planning Association/Department of Justice of Canada,
2002, 7:1.  Lluelles, Didier, et Benoît Moore.  Droit des
obligations.  Montréal:  Thémis, 2006.  Macdonald, Roderick A.  “Reconceiving the Symbols of
Property:  Universalities, Interests and Other Heresies” (1994), 39 McGill
L.J. 761.   Martel, Paul.  Business Corporations in Canada: 
Legal and Practical Aspects.  Toronto:  Thomson Carswell, 2005
(loose-leaf updated 2008, release 3).   Martin, Didier.  “Des techniques d’affectation en
garantie des soldes de comptes bancaires”, D. 1987.Chron.229.  Morel, André.  “La rédaction de lois bilingues
harmonisées avec le droit civil”, dans The Harmonization of Federal
Legislation with Quebec Civil Law and Canadian Bijuralism — Collection of
studies.  Ottawa:  Department of Justice, 1997, 309.    Payette, Louis.  Les sûretés réelles dans le
Code civil du Québec, 2e éd.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais,
2001.  Pineau, Jean, Danielle Burman et Serge Gaudet.  Théorie
des obligations, 4e éd. par Jean Pineau et Serge Gaudet. 
Montréal:  Thémis, 2001.  Pratte, Denise.  “L’hypothèque avec dépossession de
créances non représentées par un titre négociable ou le retour à une fiction
accommodante”, dans Sylvio Normand, dir., Mélanges offerts au professeur
François Frenette:  études portant sur le droit patrimonial. Québec: 
Presses de l’Université Laval, 2006, 421. Québec.  Assemblée nationale.  Journal des débats,
1re sess., 38e lég., vol. 40, no 46,
11 juin 2008, Étude détaillée du projet de loi no 47, Loi
sur le transfert de valeurs mobilières et d’autres actifs financiers,
p. 1.  Quebec Research Centre of Private and Comparative
Law. Private Law Dictionary and Bilingual Lexicons:  Obligations. 
Cowansville, Que.:  Yvon Blais, 2003, “accessory real right”.    Salmond, John William.  Jurisprudence, 10th
ed. by Glanville L. Williams.  London:  Sweet and Maxwell, 1947.  Sullivan, Ruth.  Sullivan on the Construction of
Statutes, 5th ed.  Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2008.   APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal
(Desjardins, Létourneau and Pelletier JJ.A.), 2006 FCA 366, 361 N.R. 77 (sub
nom. Minister of National Revenue v. Caisse populaire du Bon Conseil),
[2007] 3 C.T.C. 70, 2007 D.T.C. 5220, [2006] F.C.J. No. 1775 (QL), 2006
CarswellNat 5050, affirming a decision of Pinard J., 2005 FC 1563, [2007] 2
C.T.C. 44, 2007 D.T.C. 5664, [2005] F.C.J. No. 1933 (QL), affirming a
decision by Mireille Tabib, Prothonotary, 2005 FC 731, 293 F.T.R. 166, 2006
D.T.C. 6385, [2005] F.C.J. No. 900 (QL).  Appeal dismissed, LeBel and
Deschamps JJ. dissenting.   Pierre Cossette and
Guy Laperrière, for the respondent.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Fish, Charron
and Rothstein JJ. was delivered by  [1]    
Rothstein J. — The primary issue in this appeal is whether the agreements between
the Caisse populaire (“Caisse”) and its customer, Camvrac Enterprises Inc.
(“Camvrac”), give rise to a “security interest” within the meaning of that term
in s. 224(1.3)  of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”). 
The definition of “security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  has also been
incorporated by reference in s. 86(2.1)  of the Employment Insurance Act,
S.C. 1996, c. 23  (“EIA ”).  If the agreements between the Caisse and
Camvrac do fall within the definition of “security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA ,
then the property of Camvrac that is subject to the security interest of the
Caisse is deemed to be held in trust for the Crown under s. 227(4.1)  ITA 
and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  because Camvrac did not remit to the Crown income tax
and employment insurance premiums deducted at source by Camvrac.  [2]    
In my view, the agreements  between the Caisse and Camvrac gave
rise to a “security interest” for the purposes of s. 224(1.3)  ITA .
Camvrac’s property subject to the security interest was property that was
subject to the Crown’s deemed trust. I would dismiss the appeal.  I.       Facts  [3]    
On September 18, 2000, the Caisse granted Camvrac a line of
credit up to $277,000. On September 25, 2000, Camvrac deposited $200,000 with
the Caisse in accordance with a “Term Savings Agreement” providing that the
deposit would mature on October 16, 2005. The “Term Savings Agreement” sets out
the terms of Camvrac’s entitlement to the deposit and the Caisse’s obligation
to pay Camvrac $200,000. The relevant portions of the “Term Savings Agreement”
stated:  [translation]  Date of
maturity:  October 16, 2005  . . .  PROVISIONS
GOVERNING THE PRINCIPAL  2.    The member [Camvrac] agrees to make, on the date of
acquisition, a deposit in the amount of $200,000 (hereinafter referred to as
the “initial amount of deposit”).  3.    On the date of issue associated with the applicable term (“date
of issue”), the initial amount of deposit and the interest then accrued on that
amount shall be reinvested in the form of a deposit maturing on the maturity
date associated with the applicable term (“date of maturity”).  4.    This deposit may neither be negotiated nor transferred.  No
amount in principal or interest shall be redeemable or payable before the date
of maturity.  5.    This deposit may be hypothecated or given as security only in
favor of the issuing Caisse. . . .  [4]    
The Caisse and Camvrac also entered into a “Security Given
Through Savings” agreement.  The most relevant terms read:  [TRANSLATION]  1.    RIGHT
TO WITHHOLDING AND COMPENSATION  To secure the
repayment of any sum in principal, interest, costs and accessories owed or to
be owed the Caisse by:  :  the Depositor
[Camvrac]  . . .  under:                                                      .
. .  :    and under
any debts or obligations, present or future, direct or indirect held by:  :    the
Depositor                                                                        .
. .  (hereinafter
referred to as “the Credit Contract[s]”)  the Depositor
undertakes to maintain and consents to the withholding by the Caisse, in the
account(s) or on the certificate(s) of deposit mentioned below, of the amount
of $200,000.00 distributed as follows:  Account or
certificate of deposit                 Sum withheld by the Caisse identification (for deposit
certificates, state date issued amount
and certificate number)  ALTERNATIVE
TERM SAVINGS 5 YEARS IN
THE AMOUNT OF $200,000.00                                                  $200,000.00  ______________________________          $____________________ . . .  The Caisse
may withhold the sums shown above, . . . as long as all the amounts due under
the Credit Contract(s) have not been fully repaid and, in the case of a line of
credit, as long as it has not been cancelled.  In cases of default as provided
for below, there shall be compensation between the Credit Contract(s) and the
certificate(s) of deposit or the amounts deposited defined above, as provided
for in Section 7.  2.    SAFEKEEPING
OF CERTIFICATES  For the whole
term of this agreement, the above-mentioned certificate(s) of deposit shall be
kept by the Caisse.  3.    HYPOTHEC                                                                         .
. .  7.    DEFAULT  The Depositor
shall be in default in any of the following cases:  (a)   if any of the commitments under the Credit Contract(s) or these
presents is not fulfilled;  (b)   if the Depositor or the Borrower becomes insolvent or goes
bankrupt, or if he(she) makes a proposal and it is rejected or annulled;                                                                        .
. .  In the event
of any default:  (a)   any sums owing under the Credit Contracts shall immediately
become payable;  (b)   the Caisse may use the sums deposited or the certificate(s) of
deposit contemplated herein, regardless of its(their) having matured or not, to
compensate its claim under the Credit Contract(s);                                                                         .
. .  The
consequences of a default are for the exclusive benefit of the Caisse and the
latter may waive them expressedly.  The Caisse may, among others, without any
prejudice to its rights, wait for the maturity date of the certificate(s) of
deposit before exercising its rights as provided for in paragraphs (b) and (c)
above.  8.    RESERVE
OF RECOURSES  . . . Furthermore, failure by the Caisse to avail itself of any
of its rights in case of default shall not be interpreted as a waiver of such
rights.  [5]    
Camvrac failed to pay the interest on its line of credit on
November 25, 2000 and so was technically in default on that date. However, the
Caisse took no steps as a result of the default and, according to the Caisse’s
account summaries, Camvrac’s line of credit continued to accrue interest until
January 31, 2001.  On February 7, 2001, Camvrac made an assignment in
bankruptcy.   On February 21, 2001, the Caisse made the following note on its
copy of the “Term Savings Agreement” : [translation]
“To be closed on 21/2/2001 to realize on security.” Finally, on June 12, 2001,
the Crown gave the Caisse notice to pay the amount owing to the Crown for
unremitted employment insurance premiums and income tax deducted at source by
Camvrac from the proceeds of the term deposit the Crown said was subject to its
deemed trust.  [6]    
Prothonotary Tabib of the Federal Court, Justice Pinard of the
Federal Court, and Justice Létourneau writing for the Federal Court of Appeal
found in favour of the Crown: 2005 FC 731, 2006 D.T.C. 6385, aff’d 2005 FC
1563, 2007 D.T.C. 5664, aff’d 2006 FCA 366, 361 N.R. 77.  The Caisse now
appeals to this Court.  II.      The Primary Issue  [7]    
Under the “Security Given Through Savings” agreement, the Caisse
was entitled to effect compensation to reduce or eliminate Camvrac’s
indebtedness to it if Camvrac defaulted on its line of credit.  The Caisse did
so. The issue is whether the Crown is the beneficial owner of Camvrac’s term
deposit to the extent of the unremitted employment insurance premiums and
income tax deducted by Camvrac at source as a result of the deemed trust
created by s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA .  III.      Analysis  A.       The Definition of “Security Interest” in
Section 224(1.3)  of the Income Tax Act  [8]    
Parliament has defined “security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA .
This definition provides that:  “security interest” means any interest in
property that secures payment or performance of an obligation and includes an
interest created by or arising out of a debenture, mortgage, hypothec,
lien, pledge, charge, deemed or actual trust, assignment or encumbrance of
any kind whatever, however or whenever arising, created, deemed to arise or
otherwise provided for;  [9]    
Section 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  create a
deemed trust in favour of the Crown over property of the employer that has
deducted income tax and employment insurance premiums at source. The deemed
trust applies to property of the employer and property held by any secured
creditor of the employer that, but for its security interest, would be property
of the employer. The property is impressed with the deemed trust at the time
the unremitted amounts were deducted at source by the employer. Section
227(4.1)  ITA  provides:  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act  (except sections 81.1 and 81.2 of that Act), any other
enactment of Canada, any enactment of a province or any other law, where at
any time an amount deemed by subsection (4) to be held by a person in trust for
Her Majesty is not paid to Her Majesty in the manner and at the time provided
under this Act, property of the person and property held by any secured
creditor (as defined in subsection 224(1.3) ) of that person that but for a
security interest (as defined in subsection 224(1.3) ) would be property of the
person, equal in value to the amount so deemed to be held in trust is deemed  (a) to
be held, from the time the amount was deducted or withheld by the person,
separate and apart from the property of the person, in trust for Her Majesty
whether or not the property is subject to such a security interest, and  (b) to
form no part of the estate or property of the person from the time the amount
was so deducted or withheld, whether or not the property has in fact been kept
separate and apart from the estate or property of the person and whether or not
the property is subject to such a security interest  and is property beneficially owned by Her Majesty notwithstanding any
security interest in such property and in the proceeds thereof, and the
proceeds of such property shall be paid to the Receiver General in priority to
all such security interests.  Section 86(2.1)  EIA  is to
the same effect with respect to employment insurance premiums deducted by
employers at source.   [10]
While the definition of “security interest” is similar to legal
terminology used in the personal property security and other legislation of the
provinces, the definition in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  is the only relevant
definition of “security interest” for the purposes of s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and
s. 86(2.1)  EIA .  Both s. 227(4.1) ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA ,
which incorporate by reference the definition of “security interest” from s.
224(1.3)  ITA , apply  [n]otwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act  (except sections 81.1 and 81.2 of that Act), any other
enactment of Canada, any enactment of a province or any other law . . . . [s.
227(4.1)  ITA ]  [n]otwithstanding the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act  (except
sections 81.1 and 81.2 of that Act), any other enactment of Canada, any
enactment of a province or any other law . . . . [s. 86(2.1)  EIA ]   This is a clear
indication that the scope of the deemed trust created by these provisions over
property of the tax debtor is to be defined in terms of the statutory
definition of “security interest” provided by Parliament in s. 224(1.3)  ITA 
and not as the term security interest may be used in provincial legislation.  [11]
As Binnie J. recently noted in Saulnier v. Royal Bank of
Canada, 2008 SCC 58, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 166, at para. 16, “[f]or particular
purposes Parliament can and does create its own lexicon.”  Parliament’s
authority to define terms without reference to provincial law in areas of
federal legislative competency was considered with respect to bankruptcy in Husky
Oil Operations Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 453.
Gonthier J. held for the majority, at para. 32, that  the definition
of terms such as “secured creditor”, if defined under the Bankruptcy Act, must
be interpreted in bankruptcy cases as defined by the federal Parliament, not
the provincial legislatures. Provinces cannot affect how such terms are defined
for purposes of the Bankruptcy Act.   [12]
It is therefore open to Parliament to define a term in an area of
its own legislative competence (Constitution Act, 1867, s. 91 (2A)
“Unemployment Insurance” and s. 91(3)  “The raising of Money by any Mode or
System of Taxation”), as it has done here, in order to ensure that there is a
rule of general application across all of the provinces.  Were provincial law
used to define the meaning of “security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  and,
in turn, the scope of the deemed trust created by s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s.
86(2.1)  EIA , uniformity could not be achieved.  Rather, what constituted
a “security interest” for the purposes of s. 224(1.3)  ITA  could be
different from province to province.  The Minister’s ability to recover
unremitted source deductions would then vary depending on an employer’s
location.  [13]
Further, if provincial law were used to define the meaning of a
“security interest” under s. 224(1.3)  ITA , a change in the provincial
law of property security would affect the scope of the deemed trust created by
s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  from time to time. This
level of uncertainty cannot have been what Parliament intended with the words
“any interest in property that secures payment or performance of an obligation”
in s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  This definition is incorporated by reference in s.
227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  which create the deemed trust in
favour of the Crown “[n]otwithstanding  . . . any enactment of a province”.  [14]
In this case, Parliament has chosen an expansive definition of
“security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  in order to enable maximum
recovery by the Crown under its deemed trust for unremitted income tax and
employment insurance premiums deducted at source by employers. Parliament did
so, in part, in response to this Court’s decision in Royal Bank of Canada v.
Sparrow Electric Corp., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411, which interpreted the former
deemed trust provisions in the ITA  narrowly.  [15]
In order to constitute a security interest for the purposes of s.
227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA , the creditor must hold “any
interest in property that secures payment or performance of an obligation”. The
definition of “security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  does not require
that the agreement between the creditor and debtor take any particular form,
nor is any particular form expressly excluded. So long as the creditor’s
interest in the debtor’s property secures payment or performance of an
obligation, there is a “security interest” within the meaning of this section.
While Parliament has provided a list of “included” examples, these examples do
not diminish the broad scope of the words “any interest in property”: see Dagg
v. Canada (Minister of Finance), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 403, at para. 68, and R.
Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes (5th ed. 2008), at
pp. 61-68.  [16]
I agree with my colleague that the common linguistic meaning of
the defined term “security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  is the English
term “security interest”. A “security interest” is defined as any interest in
property or “droit sur un bien” (right over property) that secures the
performance of an obligation.  [17]
 For the reasons that follow, I conclude that the definition of
“security interest” in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  applies to the facts before this
Court.  B.     The Relationship Between Contractual Compensation or Set-Off
and a Security Interest  [18]
Compensation and set-off are terms of art which I do not purport
to define exhaustively in these reasons.  Compensation in Quebec is similar to
set-off in the common law provinces. There are a number of circumstances giving
rise to compensation or set-off.  There are also different kinds of
compensation and set-off. “Legal compensation” is defined in arts. 1672 ff. of
the Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64 (“C.C.Q.”).  Articles
1672 and 1673 state in part that:  1672.   Where two persons are reciprocally debtor and creditor
of each other, the debts for which they are liable are extinguished by
compensation, up to the amount of the lesser debt.  . . .  1673.   Compensation is effected by operation of law upon the
coexistence of debts that are certain, liquid and exigible and the object of
both of which is a sum of money or a certain quantity of fungible property
identical in kind.   [19]
In the common law provinces, “legal set-off” is similarly
statutorily defined. In the Ontario Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. C.43, for example, “legal set-off” is defined in s. 111:  111. — (1) In an action for payment of a debt, the defendant
may, by way of defence, claim the right to set off against the plaintiff’s
claim a debt owed by the plaintiff to the defendant.  (2) Mutual debts may be set off against each other even if they are of
a different nature.  (3) Where, on a defence of set off, a larger sum is found
to be due from the plaintiff to the defendant than is found to be due from the
defendant to the plaintiff, the defendant is entitled to judgment for the
balance.  [20]
“Equitable set-off” was compared and contrasted with legal
set-off by Wilson J. in Holt v. Telford, [1987] 2 S.C.R. 193. Wilson J.
said of equitable set-off, at pp. 205-6:  The distinction between set-off at law and set-off in equity was
canvassed by the British Columbia Court of Appeal in C.I.B.C. v. Tuckerr
Indust. Inc., supra, at p. 605:  Such a set-off has its origin in equity and does not rest on the statute
of 1728. It can apply where mutuality is lost or never existed. It can apply
where the cross obligations are not debts.  Equitable
set-off, like legal set-off, is also raised by way of cross-claim (see Holt,
at pp. 212-13).  [21]
There may be some differences between legal compensation (in
Quebec) and legal and equitable set-off (in the common law provinces). 
However, the differences between legal compensation and legal and equitable
set-off do not arise in this case because this Court is considering a right to
compensation conferred on the Caisse by a contract between the Caisse and
Camvrac (i.e. the “Security Given Through Savings” agreement). The Caisse and
my colleague use the term “compensation conventionnelle”. I translate “compensation
conventionnelle” as “contractual compensation”.  [22]
Contractual compensation achieves a similar goal to legal
compensation or legal or equitable set-off, the discharge of mutual debts.
However, contractual compensation achieves this goal through mutual consent. It
provides the contracting parties with a self-help remedy that avoids the
technical requirements of legal compensation or legal or equitable set-off :
see J.-L. Baudouin and P.-G. Jobin, Les obligations (5th ed. 1998), at
para. 981, and K. R. Palmer, The Law of Set-Off in Canada (1993), at pp.
263-64.  Both a contract providing for a right of compensation in Quebec and a
contract providing for a right of set-off in the common law provinces are to be
interpreted by a court in a manner that gives effect to the intentions of the
parties as reflected in the words of the contract.  [23]
I do not think it is correct to make a blanket determination that
a contractual right to compensation or a contractual right to set-off can never
be associated with a “security interest” or that they are always associated
with a “security interest”.  Whether a contract providing for a right to
compensation or a right to set-off also gives rise to a “security interest”
within the meaning of s. 224(1.3)  ITA  requires that the terms of the
contract be carefully considered to determine whether the parties intended to
confer on one party or the other “any interest in property [of the other party]
that secures payment or performance of an obligation”.  [24]
In The Law of Set-Off (3rd ed. 2003), Professor S. R.
Derham argues, I think persuasively, that some contracts including a right of
set-off (or, in this case, contracts including a right of compensation) should
be said also to involve security. As an example of a set-off agreement that
also contains a security interest, Professor Derham describes a situation very
similar to the one before this Court in the following words, at para. 16.82:  . . . a bank
as a condition to the grant of a facility requires that a deposit be made with
it which the depositor is not permitted to access until all indebtedness under
the facility has been paid, and the parties agree that the bank may appropriate
the deposit in discharge of the debt in the event of default in payment.  The
essence of the arrangement is that the depositor’s property, in the form of the
account in credit, is to function as a security.  Indeed, in the case of a
charge-back in which express words of charge are used, a contractual set-off is
the very remedy that would be contemplated . . . . [Emphasis added.]  [25]
The essence of contractual compensation or set-off is that the
terms of the contract reflect the mutual intention of the parties: see Derham,
at para. 16.86.  If their mutual intention is to create a security interest to
ensure that the right of  compensation or set-off will be an effective remedy,
there is no reason to think that a security interest does not exist simply
because the parties have chosen one mechanism for realizing on the security,
rather than another.  What must be considered is the substance of the agreement. 
If the substance of the agreement demonstrates that the parties intended an
interest in property to secure an indebtedness, then a security interest exists
within the meaning of s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  C.     Application of the Deemed Trust Provisions  [26]
In this case, the Caisse says that its contractual right to
effect compensation with Camvrac is not a “security interest” within the
meaning of s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  It says that this contractual right did not
confer on it an interest in Camvrac’s property with the intention of securing
the line of credit that it extended to Camvrac. Rather, the Caisse says that
the contractual right allowed it simply to extinguish its own indebtedness to
Camvrac.  [27]
The Crown submits that the definition of “security interest” in
s. 224(1.3)  ITA  is broad enough to include the Caisse’s contractual
right to effect compensation contained in the “Security Given Through Savings”
agreement between the Caisse and Camvrac.  It says that the deemed trust
created by s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  protected its
interest in the proceeds of Camvrac’s term deposit because the property of
Camvrac subject to the Caisse’s security interest is beneficially owned by the
Crown under its deemed trust to the extent of the unremitted source deductions.  [28]
The issue then is whether the Caisse and Camvrac intended the
agreements, which included the Caisse’s right to effect compensation, to create
a “security interest” within the meaning of s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  In my
view, they did.  [29]
The relevant facts are these. Camvrac made a deposit of $200,000
with the Caisse. Camvrac and the Caisse entered into a  “Term Savings
Agreement” under which Camvrac and the Caisse agreed that:  (a)   Camvrac’s deposit would be for a term of five
years;  (b)   Camvrac could not negotiate or transfer the
deposit;  (c)   the term deposit could be hypothecated or
given as security, but only in favour of the Caisse.  Camvrac and the
Caisse also agreed to enter into the “Security Given Through Savings” agreement.
Under this agreement, Camvrac and the Caisse agreed that:  (a)   “To secure repayment of any sum . . . owed or
to be owed the Caisse” by Camvrac under its line of credit that:  (i) Camvrac would maintain a deposit of $200,000;  (ii) Camvrac consented to the Caisse withholding
repayment of the sum of $200,000;  as long as the line of credit was still outstanding.  (b)   In the event of default, there would be
compensation between the line of credit and the deposit of $200,000.  These agreements
expressly conferred on the Caisse an interest in the property of Camvrac (i.e.
Camvrac’s deposit) to secure repayment of Camvrac’s indebtedness to the Caisse.  [30]
It was the five-year term and the maintenance and retention of
the $200,000 deposit, as well as Camvrac’s agreement not to transfer or
negotiate the deposit and that the deposit could only be used as security with
the Caisse, that created the Caisse’s interest in Camvrac’s property for the
purposes of s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  In the absence of these encumbrances on
Camvrac’s deposit, Camvrac could have withdrawn the deposit at any time. Should
it have done so and still been indebted to the Caisse, the Caisse’s right to
compensation would be ineffective because it would not be indebted to Camvrac
at the time the Caisse had to resort to the remedy of compensation. However, in
this case the terms of the agreements provided that Camvrac agreed to the
encumbrances on its deposit of $200,000 so that the Caisse would continuously
be indebted to Camvrac and that on default there would be effective
compensation.  It is the fact that the agreements secured the Caisse’s right to
effective compensation by conferring on the Caisse an interest in Camvrac’s
property that created a “security interest” for the purposes of s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  [31]
I note here, from the words of the agreements, that the Caisse
itself conceived of its agreements with Camvrac as creating “security” for the
line of credit. The “Term Savings Agreement” provided that the term deposit
“may be hypothecated or given as security only in favor of the issuing
Caisse” (emphasis added). In the “Security Given Through Savings” agreement, it
was Camvrac’s term deposit which was used “[t]o secure the repayment” of
the line of credit (emphasis added). The hypothecation provision contained in
the “Security Given Through Savings” agreement was “[t]o further secure
the repayment” (emphasis added). Thus, even in the absence of hypothecation,
the agreements granted the Caisse rights over Camvrac’s deposit to ensure an
effective compensation remedy. The rights and obligations ensuring an effective
compensation remedy were the Caisse’s primary security because the
hypothecation was viewed as “further” security.  [32]
 While the mechanism by which the Caisse would realize on its
security was compensation, that mechanism in no way detracts from the fact that
the deposit was encumbered by the conditions agreed to by Camvrac and imposed
by the Caisse in order to ensure that the remedy of compensation would be
effective.  Nor does the fact that the Caisse could realize on its security by
means of a book entry diminish the fact that the deposit secured Camvrac’s
obligation to the Caisse.  In the absence of the restrictions imposed by the
Caisse, Camvrac’s right to repayment of its deposit of $200,000 could have been
encumbered or transferred to a third party as security: see arts. 1637 and 2710
C.C.Q. and B. Crawford, The Law of Banking and Payment in Canada
(loose-leaf), vol. 2, at § 9:30.20.  Just because a creditor holding a security
interest (the Caisse) is also the debtor (the Caisse owes the $200,000
deposited by Camvrac to Camvrac) does not make it any less of a security
interest for the purposes of s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  [33]
The situation in this case is in contrast to one in which a bank
has what may be a standard term in a deposit agreement that any credit in the
customer’s account may be appropriated by the bank in discharge of the
customer’s potential indebtedness to the bank. In that case, there is no
obligation on the customer to maintain a specific sum or, indeed, any amount
deposited in the account at all as security for a loan that may or may not
exist.  There is no continuous right in the customer’s property to protect the
bank against default.  The customer may withdraw any or all of the amounts in
the account at any time.  No specific property secures repayment.  In these
circumstances, based on this type of deposit agreement, the customer’s property
— its right to claim a deposit — cannot be said to secure its indebtedness to
the bank. Unlike the case before this Court, this is a simple contractual right
to set-off or compensation without attendant security.  D.      Responses to Deschamps J.  [34]
In my view, the difference in the results reached by Deschamps J.
and myself in this case stems from the approaches we have taken. If I
understand my colleague’s approach correctly, she focusses on the remedy of
compensation to conclude it is not a security interest. Under my approach, it
is necessary to consider all of the relevant terms of the agreements between
Camvrac and the Caisse and not solely the provisions entitling the Caisse to
the remedy of compensation. In my view, the issue is not whether compensation alone
is viewed as a security interest. It is whether the agreements between the
parties — including the Caisse’s contractual right to effect compensation —
created a “security interest” to ensure that the remedy of compensation would
be effective.  [35]
Deschamps J. says that a creditor with a right to effect
compensation or set-off attains a goal analogous to a security interest.
However, in her view, creditors who exercise their right to compensation or
set-off are not enforcing a security by realizing on the debtor’s property, but
are instead just extinguishing mutual obligations.  [36]
 I agree with her that compensation or set-off is the
extinguishment of mutual obligations. However, mutual obligations must exist
for compensation to be an effective remedy. If a debtor can, at its own option,
eliminate the creditor’s liability to it (by withdrawing its deposit), the
creditor may have a right of compensation or set-off, but it may not be
effective. It is the encumbrances placed on the debtor’s claim against the
creditor that ensure that the creditor will remain liable to the debtor and, in
this way, ensure an effective compensation remedy.  [37]
Deschamps J. also notes that compensation is not specifically
enumerated in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  and that this is important for two
reasons.  First, she relies on academic authorities who assert that a
contractual right to set-off cannot create a security interest because the
right does not confer on the creditor an interest in the debtor’s property.
Second, she says that compensation would have to be specifically enumerated in
s. 224(1.3)  ITA  because compensation and set-off are not included in the
provincial statutes respecting personal property security. Legal compensation
is not included in the division relating to hypothecs in the Civil Code of
Québec.  She also says that set-off is excluded from the personal property
security legislation of the common law provinces which all include definitions
of security interest that are similar to that in s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  In
light of the exclusion of contractual compensation and contractual set-off from
provincial legislation dealing with security interests over property and the
fact that contractual compensation does not confer on the creditor an interest
in the debtor’s property, its absence from the list of examples of security
interests provided in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  is evidence that Parliament did
not intend to include contractual compensation or contractual set-off within
its definition of “security interest”.  [38]
With respect to my colleague’s reliance on academic authorities
who say that a contractual right to set-off does not confer on a creditor an
interest in property, I understand these authorities differently than my
colleague.  Professor Derham explains that a contract containing a right to
set-off like the one at issue in this case can also confer on a creditor an
interest in a debtor’s property: see Derham, at para. 16.82.  However, the
authors upon whom Deschamps J. relies do not address the precise issue before
this Court.  For example, R. C. C. Cuming, C. Walsh and R. J. Wood say, in Personal
Property Security Law (2005):  Set-off, whether contractual or procedural, does not involve a security
interest because neither party to the set-off acquires a property interest. [p.
87]  And Professor R.
M. Goode says, in Goode on Legal Problems of Credit and Security (4th
ed. 2008):  The party asserting it [the right of set-off] never acquires rights in
the other’s monetary claim at all; he merely asserts a countervailing claim
which operates in pro tanto extinction of his monetary liability. [para. 1-19]  However, in this
case, the Caisse has acquired rights in Camvrac’s property by the encumbrances
placed on Camvrac’s deposit.  Those rights ensured that Camvrac’s claim against
the Caisse for its deposit would continuously exist in order to ensure that the
compensation remedy would be effective. The P. Wood quote relied upon by
Deschamps J. states:  [With respect
to set-off] . . . a depositor does not grant a property right over the
depositor’s ownership of the deposit claim back to the bank to secure a loan
owed by the depositor to the bank.  (Set-Off and Netting, Derivatives, Clearing Systems (2nd ed.
2007), at para. 1-008)  Yet, in this
case, Camvrac did grant the Caisse a continuous interest in its deposit.  [39]
It appears these authors were considering a bare right to
contractual set-off such as the standard form deposit agreement I have
discussed above. I believe these authors are saying that the remedy of set-off
results in no property of the debtor coming in the hands of the creditor as the
result of a set-off. All that occurs is the extinguishment of mutual debts.
These authors are not addressing the period of time before set-off takes place
where, as in this case, the creditor has taken steps to place restrictions on
the debtor’s property to ensure that the creditor continuously remains liable
to the debtor so that the set-off remedy will be effective.   [41]
Although it is unnecessary for me to decide this point in order
to resolve the issues in this appeal, I would respectfully disagree with my
colleague that any agreement that provides for contractual set-off is
categorically excluded from the personal property security legislation of the
common law provinces. In the common law provinces, the approach to personal
property security arrangements is functional, rather than formal. For example,
s. 3(1) of Alberta’s Personal Property Security Act, R.S.A. 2000, c.
P-7, states that it applies to  (a)   every transaction that in substance creates a security
interest, without regard to its form and without regard to the person who has
title to the collateral, and  (b)   without limiting the generality of clause (a),
a chattel mortgage, conditional sale, floating charge, pledge, trust indenture,
trust receipt, assignment, consignment, lease, trust and transfer of chattel
paper where they secure payment or performance of an obligation.  See also the
personal property security acts of the other provinces and territories:  s.
3(1) in New Brunswick (S.N.B. 1993, c. P-7.1), Prince Edward Island (R.S.P.E.I.
1988, c. P-3.1), Manitoba (C.C.S.M., c. P35) and Saskatchewan (S.S. 1993, c.
P-6.2); s. 2(1) in British Columbia (R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 359), Northwest
Territories and Nunavut (both S.N.W.T. 1994, c. 8); s. 4(1) in Nova Scotia
(S.N.S. 1995-96, c. 13) and Newfoundland and Labrador (S.N.L. 1998, c. P-7.1);
s. 2(a) in Ontario (R.S.O. 1990, c. P.10); and s. 2 in Yukon (R.S.Y. 2002, c.
169).  [42]
Given the functional approach to personal property security
arrangements  in these statutes, it is difficult for me to see how any
transaction that confers an interest on a creditor in a debtor’s property to
secure an obligation could be categorically excluded unless that type of
transaction has been defined and expressly excluded by the legislation itself. 
To my knowledge, an agreement that provides for security together with a right
of set-off to realize on that security is not expressly excluded in any of the
common law provincial personal property security statutes. What is required by
the common law provincial personal property security statutes is a decision
about whether a particular contract or agreement in a given case functions as a
security interest.  [43]
Deschamps J. says the Caisse did not rely on its hypothec. She
says the mere obligation of Camvrac to maintain its deposit and the Caisse’s
right to withhold repayment of the deposit do not create the real right
necessary for a “security interest”. She distinguishes between “droit de
rétention”, which she says only applies to corporeal property and which has
some of the attributes of a real right and a “droit de retenue”, which
applies to retention of amounts of money and which has no attributes of a real
right and corresponds to compensation.  [44]
At both civil and common law, a claim, like a deposit, may be
charged with a real right or become the subject of a creditor’s interest in
property. For example, accounts receivable are often assigned to lending
institutions as security for loans. Indeed, a deposit in a bank or caisse is an
account receivable in favour of the customer. In the case of term deposits, in
the absence of restrictions imposed by the lending institution, a term deposit
may be assigned just like other receivables. An assignee has an interest in or
a real right over the account receivable, that is an encumbrance on the claim
of the creditor to the proceeds of the receivables whether from debtor
customers or from a debtor bank or caisse.  [45]
In s. 224(1.3) ITA , the word “interest” in English is
rendered as “droit” or right in French. As Marc Cuerrier notes in “The
Harmonization of Federal Tax Legislation” (section 2.3 ), booklet 7 published in
The Harmonization of Federal Legislation with the Civil Law of the Province
of Quebec and Canadian Bijuralism (2001), this terminological difference in
the English and French reflects differences in the two major legal systems of
Canada. While in the common law it is possible to speak independently of both
rights and interests in property, only rights are recognized in the civil law.
As Martin Lamoureux notes in his article “The Income Tax Act , the Excise Tax
Act  and the Term Interest: An Interesting Case for Harmonization” published in The
Harmonization of Federal Legislation with Quebec Civil Law and Canadian
Bijuralism — Collection of Studies in Tax Law 2001 (2002), 7.1, the term “droit”
in civil law corresponds most to the term “interest” in common law.      [48]
In this case, the agreements between the Caisse and Camvrac met
these criteria. First, the Caisse had effective control over Camvrac’s claim.
The five-year term and the conditions in the “Security Given Through Savings”
agreement ensured that the Caisse had effective control over Camvrac’s deposit
and that, in the event of default, the Caisse could effect compensation between
the line of credit and Camvrac’s deposit without further authorization from
Camvrac.  Second, it is not clear on the record whether a certificate of
deposit was or was not issued in this case.  Both clause 2 of the “Security
Given Through Savings” agreement and the fact that the Caisse noted on its copy
of the “Term Savings Agreement” that it had been [translation] “To be closed on 21/2/2001 to realize on
security” suggest that, if a certificate of deposit was issued, it was held by
the Caisse.  However, nothing turns on whether Camvrac’s term deposit was
evidenced by a certificate of deposit.  Gonthier J.’s second criteria for a
movable hypothec with delivery over a non-negotiable claim only applies where a
non-negotiable title exists.  Where it does not, the second criteria is not
applicable.  Third, a movable hypothec with delivery is set up against the
account debtor and all other claimants by taking the necessary steps under art.
1641 C.C.Q. Under art. 1641 C.C.Q., the assignment may be set up
against the account debtor and other claimants as soon as the account debtor
has acquiesced in it.  In this case, in respect of Camvrac’s deposit, the
Caisse is the account debtor as well as the assignee. Obviously, the Caisse as
account debtor acquiesced in the assignment of its debt to itself as assignee. 
In my view, because the agreements between the Caisse and Camvrac met the
criteria of a movable hypothec with delivery on a non-negotiable claim and
because a hypothec is defined as a real right in the Civil Code of Québec,
the Caisse must have held a real right over Camvrac’s property.  [49]
As my colleague notes at para. 129, art. 2702 C.C.Q. has
been amended and these amendments have come into force since this case was
heard.  It is not necessary to embark upon an interpretation of these
amendments.  However, what they point out is that, should provincial law form
the basis for defining a “security interest” under s. 224(1.3)  ITA , the
scope of the deemed trust created by s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA 
could change from time to time with changes to provincial property security
law.  In my view, this result is not contemplated by the words of ss. 224(1.3) 
and 227(4.1)  ITA , and s. 86(2.1)  EIA .  [50]
Deschamps J. says that Camvrac’s obligation to maintain the
deposit and the Caisse’s right to withhold repayment “were of residual
application” only (para. 120). During the term of the deposit, the Caisse was
not required to return the deposit until the term had expired.  [51]
Even if the obligation to maintain and the right to retain are
residual and apply only after the five-year term of the deposit has expired,
they are nonetheless encumbrances that could affect Camvrac’s use of its
property. Indeed, as Deschamps J. says, they are mechanisms provided “to ensure
that legal or conventional compensation could be effected” (para. 120). That is
precisely the point. The agreements entered into by Camvrac and the Caisse
created rights and obligations, including the Caisse’s right of retention and
Camvrac’s obligation to maintain the deposit, to ensure that the Caisse would
remain liable to Camvrac if the Caisse had to resort to compensation as a
remedy.  [52]
Finally, Deschamps J. says that the Caisse’s right of retention
of Camvrac’s $200,000 deposit does not confer on the Caisse a real right to
Camvrac’s term deposit. She says at para. 121:  The most important thing to bear in mind is that none
of the clauses . . . created a real right or [a] security interest . . . .  A
term is a deadline for repayment. The right to deduct is simply the right of a
creditor not to perform an obligation to pay as long as a debt is owed to him
or her. It is, in a way, an extension granted for repayment. As for the
obligation to maintain, it is clearly an undertaking by one person to another
to perform an obligation.  The limit on the right to transfer, hypothecate or
negotiate constitutes an obligation “not to do”.  [53]
She further says, at para. 124, that my approach may conflict
with how negative pledges are treated under the functional approach to personal
property security in the common law provinces. She quotes Professors Cuming,
Walsh and Wood who say, at p. 86:  A “negative
pledge” clause or negative covenant in a loan agreement under which the
borrower covenants not to encumber or dispose of some or all of her personal
property until the loan is repaid does not create a security interest since, standing
alone, the covenant does not create an interest in the property of the
borrower. A negative pledge clause in a security agreement cannot prevent the
covenantor from giving another effective security interest in the collateral. 
[Emphasis added.]  [54]
I believe her paras. 121 and 124 highlight the difference between
us. I would agree with my colleague that no security interest has been created
if a contractual right to compensation only means that, should the debtor
default, the creditor may retain amounts owed to the debtor, if any. I would
also agree that a negative pledge “standing alone” does not “prevent the
covenantor from giving another effective security interest in collateral”.  [55]
However, much more was occurring here. From the outset, the
Caisse required that Camvrac make a term deposit subject to encumbrances in
order to ensure that the Caisse would remain liable to Camvrac, in the event
that the Caisse had to resort to the remedy of compensation as a result of
default. The right of retention, the obligation to maintain and Camvrac’s
pledge not to hypothecate or use its term deposit as security in favour of
anyone besides the Caisse were three of a series of encumbrances that created
the Caisse’s interest in or right over Camvrac’s property to ensure that
compensation would be an effective remedy.  E.      To Which of the Unremitted Source
Deductions Did the Deemed Trust Apply?  [56]
Having concluded that the agreements between the Caisse and
Camvrac created a “security interest” within the meaning of s. 224(1.3)  ITA ,
it is now necessary to determine whether the deemed trust covered all
unremitted source deductions that the Crown sought from the Caisse.  [57]
On the facts of this case, some of the unremitted employment
insurance premiums and income tax deducted was owed by Camvrac to the Crown
before Camvrac entered into the “Term Savings Agreement” with the Caisse. 
There is some question, then, in this case, whether the deemed trust provisions
in s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  can confer beneficial
ownership on the Crown over Camvrac’s after-acquired property (i.e. the term
deposit).  [58]
A second issue is at what point the Caisse realized on its
security in the term deposit by effecting compensation. The Caisse says that
the relevant date was the date of default, November 25, 2000. The Crown says
that the relevant date was February 21, 2001. Under s. 227(4.1) ITA  and
s. 86(2.1)  EIA , Camvrac’s property is impressed with the Crown’s deemed
trust from the time income tax and employment insurance premiums were deducted
at source by Camvrac.  The date at which the Caisse effected compensation is
important because unremitted employment insurance premiums and income tax were
deducted by Camvrac until the end of January 2001.  If the Caisse is correct,
as of November 25, 2000 the Crown would have no entitlement to the proceeds of
the term deposit for source deductions that were deducted after November 25,
2000 since the term deposit would no longer have been the property of Camvrac
once compensation had been effected and could not be subject to the deemed
trust created by s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA . If the Crown
is correct, then the proceeds would be subject to the deemed trust for the full
amount of the unremitted source deductions to February 21, 2001 (as the date
when compensation was effected by the Caisse).  [59]
With respect to whether the deemed trust provisions apply to
after-acquired property, this Court interpreted s. 227(4.1)  ITA  broadly
in First Vancouver Finance v. M.N.R., 2002 SCC 49, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 720,
as applying to both property in the hands of the tax debtor and after-acquired
property. In First Vancouver, Iacobucci J. held for the Court, at para.
38, that  based on the plain language of ss. 227(4)  and 227(4.1)  as supported by
the purpose of the provisions and intentions of Parliament, the deemed trust
created by these sections encompasses property which comes into the hands of
the tax debtor after the trust arises.  The trust
created by s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and s. 86(2.1)  EIA  is deemed to be in
effect “at any time”. It does not matter that the term deposit became the
property of Camvrac only after some of the employment insurance premiums and
income tax deductions went unremitted since the deemed trust “encompasses
property which comes into the hands of the tax debtor after the trust arises”.
The proceeds of Camvrac’s term deposit are therefore available to the Crown to
discharge all of the outstanding employment insurance premiums and income tax
deducted at source by Camvrac, whether the unremitted deductions occurred
before or after Camvrac entered into the “Term Savings Agreement” and until the
date that the Caisse realized on its security.  [60]
As to the date on which the Caisse exercised its right to
compensation, I agree with the Crown for two reasons. First, February 21, 2001
is the date on which the Caisse itself noted on its copy of the “Term Savings
Agreement”:  [translation] “To be
closed on 21/2/2001 to realize on security.” This is evidence that the Caisse
believed that compensation was effected on that date and not earlier. Second,
the Caisse, according to its account records, continued to charge interest on
the line of credit until January 31, 2001 despite the fact that Camvrac had
defaulted on November 25, 2000 by failing to make its interest payment to the
Caisse due on that date.  The “Security Given Through Savings” agreement stated
that:  7.    DEFAULT                                                                       .
. .  The
consequences of a default are for the exclusive benefit of the Caisse and the
latter may waive them expressedly.  The Caisse may, among others, without any
prejudice to its rights, wait for the maturity date of the certificate(s) of
deposit before exercising its rights as provided for in paragraphs (b) and (c)
above.  8.    RESERVE
OF RECOURSES  . . . Furthermore, failure by the Caisse to avail itself of any
of its rights in case of default shall not be interpreted as a waiver of such
rights.  [61]
These terms acknowledged that the Caisse had a discretion as to
the timing of when compensation would be effected. The Caisse was entitled, as
it did here, not to effect compensation immediately upon default, but instead
could choose to allow the line of credit to remain open.  This is what the
Caisse did.  It did not effect compensation until February 21, 2001.  The
Caisse is liable to pay to the Crown the amounts for employment insurance
premiums and income tax deducted at source by Camvrac up to, and including, any
deductions not remitted as of February 21, 2001.  F.      Interest Calculation  [62]
This issue may be disposed of quickly.  The Caisse says that if
it is liable to the Crown, the law of Quebec with respect to pre-judgment
interest rather than ss. 36(2)  and 37(2)  of the Federal Courts Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 , applies.  I cannot agree with the Caisse.  Markevich v.
Canada, 2003 SCC 9, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 94, is dispositive of the
issue.  Indebtedness under the ITA  and EIA  gives rise to a cause
of action outside of a particular province and so the rules respecting
pre-judgment interest in ss. 36(2)  and 37(2)  of the Federal Courts Act 
apply:  see Markevich, at paras. 39-40.  The cause of action was that of
the Crown against the Caisse for unremitted source deductions pursuant to its
deemed trust which arose because the Caisse appropriated funds belonging to
Camvrac which were impressed with the Crown’s deemed trust.  IV.   Conclusion  [63]
For these reasons, I find that the terms of the “Term Savings
Agreement” and the “Security Given Through Savings” agreement between the
Caisse and Camvrac created a “security interest” within the meaning of s.
224(1.3)  ITA .  The Caisse was liable to the Crown for the unremitted
employment insurance premiums and income tax deducted at source by Camvrac up
to and including February 21, 2001.  Interest is calculated in accordance with
ss. 36(2)  and 37(2)  of the Federal Courts Act  from February 21, 2001,
when the Caisse effected compensation, to the date of payment.  [64]
The appeal should be dismissed with costs in this Court only.  English version of the reasons of LeBel and Deschamps JJ. delivered by  [65]
Deschamps J.
(dissenting) — The Court is once again being asked to consider the scope of the
rights resulting from the deemed trust created by Parliament to ensure that
employers remit income tax and employment insurance premiums deducted from
their employees’ salaries to the Receiver General for Canada.  For the reasons
that follow, I find that compensation is not a “security interest” within the
meaning of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”),
and the Employment Insurance Act, S.C. 1996, c. 23  (“EIA ”),
and that the appellant’s contractual right may be set up against the respondent
because the respondent cannot have more rights than the employer itself had.  I
would accordingly allow the appeal and remand the case to the trial judge to
establish the amount of the deductions that had not been remitted at the time
the compensation agreement was signed.  1.     Issues   2.     Facts  [67]
Between May 2000 and January 2001, Camvrac, an employer doing
business in Quebec, failed to remit $26,863.53 in income tax and employment
insurance premiums deducted from its employees’ salaries to the Receiver
General for Canada.  Nothing in the evidence specifies the amount owed by
Camvrac as of September 25, 2000, but according to the Federal Court
prothonotary who heard the matter at trial, the unremitted deductions totalled
$5,558.72 in October 2000.  [68]
On September 18, 2000, the Caisse and Camvrac signed a
variable credit contract under which the Caisse extended $277,000 in credit to
Camvrac.  A few days later, on September 25, 2000, two additional
agreements were signed:  a term savings agreement under which Camvrac deposited
$200,000 in the Caisse for a term expiring on October 16, 2005, and an
agreement to give savings as security for the repayment of any amount owed to
the Caisse, in which Camvrac granted the Caisse a “right to withholding and
compensation” and a hypothec.  Only the right to compensation is in issue in
this appeal: neither the hypothec nor the right to withhold was raised,
enforced or exercised, or set up against the respondent.  Although excerpts
from the relevant clauses are also set out in the Appendix, I will reproduce
one here that I will be discussing more specifically:  [translation]  1.    RIGHT TO WITHHOLDING AND COMPENSATION   The Caisse may withhold the sums shown above, along with the interest
from the certificates of deposit if applicable, as long as all the amounts due
under the Credit Contract(s) have not been fully repaid and, in the case of a
line of credit, as long as it has not been cancelled.  In cases of default as
provided for below, there shall be compensation between the Credit Contract(s)
and the certificate(s) of deposit or the amounts deposited defined above, as
provided for in Section 7.  [69]
I note that the parties and the courts below have sometimes
referred to the term deposit as a “certificate of deposit”.  In my opinion, as
is indicated in the term savings agreement, it is simply a term deposit.  But
what it is called is of no consequence in light of the mechanisms that are at
issue in this appeal.  [70]
On November 25, 2000, Camvrac defaulted on the interest on
the borrowed amount.  On December 1, 2000, that interest was paid by means
of a manual transfer of funds effected by the Caisse.  A statement dated
December 31, 2000, shows a debt of $277,000 owed by Camvrac to the Caisse;
it also indicates that monthly interest on the total amount of the loan was
charged to Camvrac.  A savings and investment account statement dated
January 31, 2001 shows a balance of $200,578 in respect of the deposit. 
On February 5, 2001, Camvrac made an assignment in bankruptcy.  On its
copy of the deposit agreement, the Caisse made the following note: [translation] “To be closed on 21/2/2001
to realize on security.”  [71]
On June 12, 2001, the respondent required the Caisse to pay
her $26,863.53 owed by Camvrac for payroll deductions.  She submits that this
amount was protected by the deemed trust resulting from provisions of the ITA 
and the EIA .  The Caisse counters that the note made on the deposit
agreement on February 21, 2001 was merely administrative in nature and
that its debt to Camvrac was extinguished by compensation.  3.      Judicial History  [72]
Before a prothonotary of the Federal Court, the respondent argued
that the deposited amount was property of Camvrac that was subject to the
deemed trust, and that in enforcing its security interest on
February 21, 2001, the Caisse had realized on that certificate and
should have paid her the amount of the deductions Camvrac had failed to remit. 
The Caisse submitted that under the agreement with Camvrac, the mutual debts —
its own and that of Camvrac — became exigible when Camvrac defaulted and that
those debts had been extinguished by compensation.  In the prothonotary’s
opinion, there was no doubt that the deposited amount was held as security,
that in “cashing it in”, the Caisse was enforcing a security interest, and that
the deposited amount was subject to the deemed trust.  She therefore held that
“the value of the benefit conferred on the [Caisse] through the realization on
its security interest in the certificate of deposit constitutes the proceeds
from the certificate of deposit, and must be paid to the Receiver General”
(2005 FC 731, 2006 D.T.C. 6385, at para. 22).  According to the prothonotary,
legal compensation could not be relied on, because the term of the deposit had
not expired.  She added that if the Caisse wanted to avail itself of its
contracts with Camvrac, it had to manifest its intention to enforce them, which
it did not do until February 21, 2001, by which time the respondent’s
right had priority.  The prothonotary therefore ordered the Caisse to pay the
amount claimed by the respondent.  She awarded interest at the rate provided
for in ss. 36(2)  and 37(2)  of the Federal Courts Act .  [73]
The Federal Court upheld the prothonotary’s judgment (2005 FC
1563, 2007 D.T.C. 5664).  In response to the Caisse’s argument that the
prothonotary had failed to consider the forfeiture of the term clause in the
term savings agreement, the court stated that although conventional compensation
could have been effected under the terms of the contract before the expiry of
the term of the deposit, the Caisse had not exercised its right to do so until
February 21, 2001, by which time the deposit amount was subject to the
deemed trust.  The Federal Court rejected the Caisse’s argument that
compensation is not a security interest, relying instead on the French version
of the definition of “security interest” (garantie) in s. 224(1.3)  ITA 
to conclude that even if compensation were held to constitute a payment, it
would be considered a “security interest” within the meaning of the ITA .  [74]
The Federal Court of Appeal also concluded that the ITA ’s
definition of “security interest” is sufficiently broad to include the Caisse’s
right to compensation in respect of Camvrac’s deposit, and that the provisions
concerning the deemed trust authorized the respondent to recover from the
Caisse the amounts owed by Camvrac (2006 FCA 366, 361 N.R. 77).  On the
interest issue, the Court of Appeal relied on Markevich v. Canada, 2003
SCC 9, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 94, and Canada (Attorney General) v. Caisse populaire
d’Amos, 2004 FCA 92, 324 N.R. 31, and upheld the trial judgment.  4.       Parties’ Arguments
Concerning the Deemed Trust  [75]
The Caisse advances three arguments:  (1) the courts below
erred in finding that the mechanism it relies on is a security interest within
the meaning of ss. 224(1.3)  and 227(4.1) ; (2) compensation is not a
mechanism for performing obligations; and (3) the time when the debt was
extinguished does not depend on whether the compensation is characterized as
legal or conventional, but in the alternative, if it must be characterized, it
should instead be regarded as a contractual arrangement for compensation in the
future.  This last argument does not appear to have been raised as forcefully
in the courts below, but the facts and legal concepts relied on remain the
same.  [76]
The respondent contends that the deemed trust creates an absolute
priority and that, regardless of whether the compensation is conventional or
legal or of whether compensation constitutes a security interest, the proceeds
from the “cashing in” of the term deposit must be paid to her up to the amount
of the source deductions owed by the employer.  [77]
Because the courts below held that compensation constitutes a
“security interest” as defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA , I will deal with
this issue first.  I will then consider whether the contractual right to
compensation may be set up against the respondent.  5.     “Security Interest”
as Defined in Section 224(1.3)  ITA  [78]
Over ten years ago, Gonthier J. observed in Royal Bank of
Canada v. Sparrow Electric Corp., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411, at para. 22,
that a clash between conflicting legislative objectives had given rise to a
competition of priorities between deemed trusts and consensual security
interests.  In 1998, Parliament enacted legislation to expand the scope of the
deemed trust (S.C. 1998, c. 19, s. 226(1)) and give it priority over every
“security interest” as that term is defined in s. 224(1.3) .  In this
context, it is important to clearly delineate the concept of “security
interest” as defined in that provision.  [79]
Although the provisions in issue in this appeal —
ss. 224(1.3) , 227(4)  and 227(4.1)  ITA  and the corresponding
provisions of the EIA  — are reproduced in the Appendix, I will
nevertheless reproduce the more relevant passages here for ease of reference. 
Section 224(1.3)  ITA  defines “security interest” for the purposes
of the deemed trust.  The English version of the definition reads as follows:  “security interest” means any interest in
property that secures payment or performance of an obligation and includes
an interest created by or arising out of a debenture, mortgage, hypothec, lien,
pledge, charge, deemed or actual trust, assignment or encumbrance of any kind
whatever, however or whenever arising, created, deemed to arise or otherwise
provided for;  [80]
The terminology used in the French version is different.  On the
one hand, the term “security interest” is rendered as “garantie”.  On
the other hand, whereas the word “interest” is used in the English expression
“interest in property”, the word “droit” is used instead in the
expression “droit sur un bien” in French:  « garantie » Droit sur
un bien qui garantit l’exécution d’une obligation, notamment un paiement.  Sont
en particulier des garanties les droits nés ou découlant de débentures,
hypothèques, privilèges, nantissements, sûretés, fiducies réputées ou réelles,
cessions et charges, quelle qu’en soit la nature, de quelque façon ou à quelque
date qu’elles soient créées, réputées exister ou prévues par ailleurs.   [82]
Furthermore, not only must reference be made — when necessary to
interpret federal legislation — to the law of the province in which it is to be
applied, but both the English and French versions must be taken into
consideration: M. Bastarache et al., The Law of Bilingual Interpretation
(2008), at pp. 42 et seq.  I will begin by analysing the English
and French versions to determine whether a shared meaning can be established. 
In the case at bar, this analysis leads to a notion common to the civil law and
the common law that makes it possible to harmonize the application of the
taxing provision in the two legal systems.   [84]
There are two steps to this analysis:  identifying the shared
meaning and establishing Parliament’s intent.  At the first step, there are
three possibilities (S.A.C.,  at para. 15):  First, the English and French versions may be
irreconcilable. . . .  Second, one version may be ambiguous
while the other is plain and unequivocal.  The shared meaning will then be
that of the version that is plain and unambiguous:  Daoust, at para. 28;
Côté, at p. 327.  Third, one version may have a broader meaning than the
other.  According to LeBel J. in Schreiber, at para. 56, “where one of
the two versions is broader than the other, the common meaning would favour the
more restricted or limited meaning”.    [87]
If, in the instant case, the shared meaning corresponds to the
unequivocal concept of “security interest”, it is because there is a concept
common to a “security interest” in the sense of “interest in property” and a “garantie”
in the sense of “droit sur un bien”.  It is this concept that must be
identified.  In “The Income Tax Act , the Excise Tax Act  and the Term Interest:
An Interesting Case for Harmonization”, in The Harmonization of Federal
Legislation with Quebec Civil Law and Canadian Bijuralism (2002), published
in the Collection of Studies in Tax Law 2001, Martin Lamoureux points
out that a term like “interest” may be impossible to define without considering
the context.  In his view, “depending on the context, the expression ‘interest
in property’ appears to be the converse of the notion of absolute ownership”
(p. 7:9).  According to this interpretation, therefore, the security interest —
the right in question in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  — is distinct from a right
of absolute ownership.   As we stated in part three, we propose to harmonize
the notion of “interest” (intérêt) with its Quebec equivalent which is
“real right” (droit réel). This conclusion is based on a comparative
analysis which shows a great similarity between the two concepts.  In fact, a
comparison of the two concepts shows a similarity between several of their
general attributes, for example, the right to follow, the right to assert adversus
omnes, a direct right to the thing and the dismemberment of property over
time. [p. 7:22]   [90]
At common law, the term “real right” and its close cousins “right
in rem” and “jus in re”, although less common, are nevertheless
established.  Professor Royston Miles Goode writes in Goode on Legal
Problems of Credit and Security (4th ed. 2008), at para. 1-17, that “a
security interest is a right in rem”.  Professors Ronald C. C. Cuming,
Catherine Walsh and Roderick J. Wood also refer to the concept of “real right”
or “right in rem” in Personal Property Security Law (2005):  A creditor who is given a security interest in the debtor’s property
obtains a proprietary right to the collateral. The defining characteristic of a
proprietary right (which is also referred to as a real right or a right in
rem) is that it is a right in a thing that is generally enforceable against
the world. [p. 511]  [91]
Moreover, just as an interest in property may be considered to be
similar in many respects to a civil law real right, at common law, the notion
of a “real right” is considered to be essential to a finding that a security
interest exists in the area of personal property security.  It is now well
established that a functional approach has been adopted in the common law
provinces and that form is not determinative of whether a security has been
created.  The fact remains, however, that the basis for a security interest
continues to be a real right.  Professors Cuming, Walsh and Wood explain this
clearly:   Professor Goode
makes a similar comment in this respect (at para. 1-17):  Even where the creditor is to be given rights in respect of an asset, it
is necessary to distinguish real rights from personal rights. . . .
[A] security interest is a right in rem and in principle the secured creditor
is entitled to remove the asset from the general body of creditors.  [92]
The common law concept of security interest therefore
corresponds, in civil law terms, not to a personal right, but to a real right. 
In short, although no single expression is used at common law, what can be seen
is that the right holder has a right in the property itself, as opposed to a
right to compel a person to perform an obligation, which is the essence of a
personal right.  Thus, the “real right” concept is common to the two legal
traditions.  This concept is also inherent, and literally so, in the English
expression “interest in property” and the French expression “droit sur
un bien” used in s. 224(1.3) .       [98]
In my opinion, since compensation has not been included in the
list, the Caisse’s right can constitute a security interest only if it entails
a real right.  To limit the concept of security interest in s. 224(1.3)  ITA 
to rights that are real in nature is consistent both with the shared
meaning of the terms (“security interest” and “garantie”) used in the
two versions of the provision and with Parliament’s purpose of giving the
deemed trust priority over the security interests referred to in
s. 224(1.3)  ITA :  First Vancouver Finance.  [99]
It must now be determined whether compensation is a “security
interest” as that term is defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  6.       Right to
Compensation and Security Interest   [101]     
These observations, although relevant to a description of
compensation and its effects, do not support a conclusion that compensation is
a “security interest” as that term is defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA . 
Although compensation may have the same effect as a security interest, care
must be taken not to refer to the flexible sense that can be derived only from
the French term “garantie”.  For the purposes of s. 224(1.3)  ITA ,
it is not enough that compensation offers protection similar to that of a
security interest:  it must also confer an “interest in property”, that is, a
real right.     “security interest” means an interest in personal
property that secures payment or performance of an obligation, and includes
. . . .  As can be seen,
this definition is very similar to the one in the English version of
s. 224(1.3)  ITA :  “security interest” means any interest in property
that secures payment or performance of an obligation and includes an interest
created by or arising out of . . . .   « sûreté » Intérêt sur
des biens meubles qui garantit le paiement ou l’exécution d’une obligation,
notamment les intérêts suivants . . . . Thus, the term
“security interest” is rendered as “sûreté” in the Ontario statute, as
opposed to “garantie” — a word that requires interpretation because of
its vagueness — in the federal statute.     Professor Goode
adds the following, at para. 1-19:         [110]     
Despite the arguments presented in all courts, my colleague
Rothstein J. considers that the question to be answered is not whether
compensation is a security interest.  Rather, in his view, the issue is whether
the agreement created a “security interest” as defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA . 
He concludes that such an interest did in fact result from the juxtaposition of
certain rights of the Caisse and obligations of Camvrac.   Novel
Approach to the “Security Interest” Concept  [112]     
I must say that Rothstein J.’s approach to the “security
interest” concept is a novel one.  He states that he agrees that the shared
meaning lies in the English version, which implies that the English term
corresponds to a legally recognized common concept.  As I mentioned above,
there is no federal common law.  To identify the purpose Parliament was
pursuing when it chose the “security interest” concept, it is necessary to
refer to the common law, which is provincial law.  The analysis cannot
therefore disregard provincial law.  However, the effect of my colleague’s
interpretation is to expand the “security interest” concept beyond its accepted
scope in Canadian commercial law.  Since his approach does not correspond at
all to the shared meaning, its effect is to disregard both the principles
applicable to the interpretation of bilingual legislation and those applicable
to the harmonization of federal law and provincial law.  [113]     
Rothstein J. concludes on the basis of inchoate accessory rights
that an interest in property — or, in other words, a “security interest” as
defined in s. 224(1.3)  LIR — was created (at para. 30):   What my
colleague overlooks in his analysis is the fact that under s. 224(1.3)  ITA ,
the interest in the property must make it possible to realize on the security. 
To simply find that an interest in property exists without regard for the
context is not sufficient.  [114]     
At common law, a security interest typically entails three
fundamental rights: (1) the right to realize on property given as security; (2)
a right to priority with respect to the proceeds of realization; and (3) the
right to follow the property in the hands of a third party to whom it has been
transferred (Cuming, Walsh and Wood, at p. 1).  None of the rights mentioned by
Rothstein J. enable the person concerned to appropriate the property.  Thus,
neither the term for repayment, nor the obligation to maintain, nor the right
to withhold, nor the limit on the right to transfer, hypothecate or negotiate
would enable the Caisse to realize on the deposit or appropriate the deposit
amount to ensure performance of the secured obligation.  I cannot imagine that
Parliament intended the provision to apply to any mechanism other than the one
known at common law that makes it possible to appropriate the property to which
the security interest relates.  What must be done under s. 224(1.3)  ITA 
is to identify a security interest, not a simple interest.  [115]     
Although my colleague does not include compensation in the above
list in support of his conclusion that an interest in property was created, he
does ultimately refer to it, describing it as a remedy.  What I conclude from
this is that he does not see compensation as an interest in property and that
according to his interpretation only the rights he mentions create such an
interest.  I believe that a few comments about each of these rights will be
helpful here.  [116]     
Regardless of what standpoint is taken in reviewing the Caisse’s
obligation with respect to the term, the clause establishing the term cannot be
viewed as stipulating anything other than a deadline for repayment of the
deposit.  It is well established that in the context of a banking contract, to
deposit an amount in a financial institution is to make a loan.  The financial
institution becomes the owner of the loaned amount and must return it with the
interest agreed on (art. 2330 C.C.Q.).  The transaction is, in a word, a
simple loan (art. 2329 C.C.Q.).  The clause that establishes the term
merely fixes the time when the loaned amount is to be returned.  Camvrac’s
relationship with the Caisse with respect to the deposit was merely one of
creditor and debtor that entailed only a right to be repaid upon expiry of the
term.  The establishment of a term did not alter the nature of the legal
relationship between the Caisse and Camvrac.  The right was not a real right,
but a simple personal right.  [117]     
The same analysis applies to the covenants to which Camvrac
agreed, those relating to Camvrac’s claim against the Caisse.  The undertakings
to maintain the deposit and not to transfer, negotiate or hypothecate the claim
conferred on the Caisse no right in the claim Camvrac had against it.  In the
event of default, these rights would be of no assistance unless they were
violated, in which case they might give rise to an action for failure to
perform the contract.  All these rights were personal rights, not real rights. 
The right to withhold warrants more specific comment.  [118]     
In considering the meaning to be given to the expressions “droit
de retenue” and “droit de rétention” and the nature of the right
that has been created, the context is essential.  In civil law, there is one
concept known as the “droit de rétention” (under, for example, arts.
875, 974, 1250 and 2543 C.C.Q.), which is a right to retain corporeal
property, and another known as the “droit de retenue”, or right to
deduct (see arts. 2111, para. 2 and 2123 C.C.Q.).  The right to deduct
is different from the right to retain: it applies to an amount of money, not to
corporeal property.  There is therefore no right to follow.  Also, the
creditor’s claim does not have priority.  The right to deduct has none of the
characteristics on the basis of which a right to retain can be likened to a
real right.  [119]     
In the instant case, in the agreement to give savings as
security, the following appears as the title of clause 1: “Droit de
rétention et de compensation” (“Right to withholding and compensation” in
the English version of the Caisse’s standard form contract).  Regarding
obligations, the agreement provides that the depositor “consents to the
withholding by the Caisse, in the account(s) . . . mentioned below,
of the amount of . . .”, and that “[t]he Caisse may withhold the sums
. . . in the case of a line of credit, as long as it has not been
cancelled”.  Despite the use of the expression “droit de rétention” in
the title of the clause, the purpose of the right is to deduct an amount of
money and not to retain corporeal property, which means that it is a “droit
de retenue”, not a “droit de rétention” within the meaning of the Civil
Code of Québec.   [121]     
The most important thing to bear in mind is that none of the
clauses on which Rothstein J. relies created a real right or an interest in
property (“security interest” as defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA ).  A term is
a deadline for repayment.  The right to deduct is simply the right of a
creditor not to perform an obligation to pay as long as a debt is owed to him
or her.  It is, in a way, an extension granted for repayment.  As for the
obligation to maintain, it is clearly an undertaking by one person to another
to perform an obligation.  The limit on the right to transfer, hypothecate or
negotiate constitutes an obligation “not to do”.  [122]     
Thus, I cannot see how these rights, whether considered in
isolation or as a whole, might constitute a “security interest” as that term is
defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  None of them provides a basis for using the
property to ensure performance of the obligation, and none of them constitutes
an interest in property that secures performance of an obligation.  [123]     
As Professors Cuming, Walsh and Wood point out, the elimination
of form as a determinant of the creation of a security does not mean that every
contractual undertaking can be regarded as security on personal property.  The
limits on which Rothstein J. relies can be compared with those applicable to
flawed assets.  According to the technique of flawed assets, property such as a
bank deposit is subject to limits on withdrawal until the depositor has repaid
his or her debt to the bank.  It is well established that this technique does
not create a security interest.  Professor Goode explains this as follows (at
para. 1-21):  [The technique of flawed assets] does not of itself constitute a
security, for the bank acquires no rights over the deposit, merely a right to
withhold repayment.  [124]     
Cuming, Walsh and Wood also cite examples of undertakings
pursuant to which creditors are given interests in property that cannot be
characterized as security interests.  One of them, the covenant not to dispose
of or encumber property, is of interest, as it is analogous to one of the
undertakings on which Rothstein J. relies:  A “negative pledge” clause or negative covenant in a loan agreement under
which the borrower covenants not to encumber or dispose of some or all of her
personal property until the loan is repaid does not create a security interest
since, standing alone, the covenant does not create an interest in the property
of the borrower. A negative pledge clause in a security agreement cannot
prevent the covenantor from giving another effective security interest in the
collateral. [p. 86]  Adding one or
more personal rights does not result in the creation of a real right, which, as
we saw above, Cuming, Walsh and Wood consider essential to the creation of a
security interest.  If Rothstein J.’s conclusion that a contractual
undertaking creates an interest in the property is based on the functional
approach, a further issue that will arise is how the negative pledge — whether
or not in combination with another personal right such as the right to
compensation — is now to be characterized.  [125]     
Therefore, in my view, not only is Rothstein J.’s analysis of the
expression “interest in property” or “droit sur un bien” unacceptable in
that it disregards the fact that the principal purpose of a security interest
must be to permit the property given as security to be realized, but it cannot
be reconciled with the characterization of techniques similar to those adopted in
the case at bar that do not create security interests.  Granting of a Movable Hypothec on a Claim With Delivery      [130]     
Having said this, I have difficulty understanding how the
hypothec fits into the reasoning that leads Rothstein J. to conclude that the
rights granted to the Caisse created a security interest.  Two interpretations
are possible.  Does my colleague conclude that the respondent’s right has
priority over the Caisse’s right solely because of the control exercised over
the claim by means of the term, the obligation to maintain, the right to
withhold and the limits on the rights to transfer, hypothecate and negotiate? 
Or is his conclusion based on the idea that in addition to those rights,
Camvrac had granted a right to compensation that resulted in a hypothec?  If
the first interpretation is correct, the argument based on the hypothec is
irrelevant.  If the second is correct, the right to compensation becomes
determinative even though my colleague does not include it among the sources of
an interest in property.  If Rothstein J.’s conclusion that the deemed
trust has priority is based on the hypothec, his reasoning clashes with the
clarification made by the Quebec legislature.  [131]     
Furthermore, I cannot accept the Court’s recourse to an argument
that has been raised neither by the Caisse nor by the respondent.  As I
mentioned above, the agreement to give savings as security provided for the
granting of a hypothec, a right to withhold and a right to compensation, but
only the right to compensation was raised and argued.  The Caisse was not
limited in the choice of rights it could exercise.  If, for example, in addition
to the hypothec and the right to compensation, the claim had been secured by
another personal right, such as by suretyship, the respondent could not have
claimed from the Caisse the amount received from the surety.  It would have
been clear that the Caisse was free to choose which right it would exercise. 
Thus, it could have chosen to exercise its right to compensation, or it could
also — independently of the hypothec also provided for in the contract — have
availed itself of the suretyship if such a right were provided for in the
contract.  The Civil Code of Québec provides, on the one hand, for
compensation and, on the other hand, for hypothecs on claims.  These two
mechanisms must not, in my opinion, be confused.  The reasons for the parties’
choice may be based in fact.  In my view, the question is not merely one of
law.  In all fairness to the parties, therefore, I do not consider it
appropriate at this point to intervene in the “judicial contract” to alter the
bases of the appeal before the Court.  [132]     
I therefore find, with respect, that as regards the term, the
obligation to maintain, the right to withhold and the limits on the right to
transfer, hypothecate or negotiate, all that have been created are personal
obligations.  Furthermore, since the parties did not raise the hypothec in this
Court, I do not think that we can base our conclusion on an argument in respect
of which no evidence was adduced and that does not correspond to the law.  The
appellant chose to exercise its right to compensation, and that is the right
that must be considered.  [133]     
As a result, I conclude that the appellant is correct in arguing
that compensation is not a “security interest” as that term is defined
in s. 224(1.3)  ITA .  To accept the Caisse’s first argument is
not to dispose of the appeal, however.  Despite my finding that the Federal
Court of Appeal erred in holding that the respondent had priority on the basis
that the Caisse, in effecting compensation, had created a security interest for
itself, the case is not yet closed.  It must still be determined whether the
right to compensation may be set up against the respondent, who, as a result of
the deemed trust, not only has a priority over secured creditors — as the term
“secured creditor” is defined in s. 224(1.3)  ITA  — but also has a
right in the tax debtor’s property.  To do this, it must be asked whether the
respondent may exercise its right in respect of both the amounts that had not
been remitted at the time the right to compensation was granted to the Caisse
and those that were not remitted after that time.  As I mentioned above, by
September 25, 2000, the date the compensation agreement was signed,
Camvrac had already failed to remit some amounts that had been deducted from
its employees’ salaries.  Those amounts totalled approximately $5,000.  7.       Possibility of Setting up the
Compensation Agreement Against the Respondent  [134]     
I do not think it necessary to explain at length why, prior to
the expiry of the term of the deposit, the Caisse’s right was not a right to
legal compensation.  The Caisse’s right cannot be dissociated from the contract
in which it was granted, if only because one of the conditions for legal
compensation was not met:  Camvrac’s debt was not exigible, because repayment of
the deposit amount was not due until October 2005.  It will therefore be
necessary to refer to the agreements between Camvrac and the Caisse.  [135]     
The Civil Code of Québec does not mention conventional
compensation.  However, there is nothing that prohibits it.  In fact,
conventional compensation is merely the arrangement by contract of the
mechanism provided for in the Code.  Furthermore, commentators have long
recognized the validity of compensation agreements (see: Baudouin, Jobin and
Vézina, at No. 1057; Lluelles and Moore, at No. 2701).  [136]     
The issue in the case at bar is whether the Caisse may set up its
compensation agreement against the respondent.  The respondent’s right is
provided for in s. 227(4.1)  ITA .  If I exclude the portions
relating to the priority over secured claims, which I have already discussed,
the respondent’s right in Camvrac’s property is set out as follows:  227. . . .  (4)       Every person who deducts or withholds an amount under this
Act is deemed . . . to hold the amount separate and apart from the
property of the person . . . in trust for Her Majesty and for payment
to Her Majesty in the manner and at the time provided under this Act.  (4.1)    . . . where at any time an amount deemed by
subsection (4) to be held by a person in trust for Her Majesty is not paid
to Her Majesty in the manner and at the time provided under this Act, property
of the person . . . equal in value to the amount so deemed to be held
in trust is deemed  (a)       to be held, from the time the amount was deducted or
withheld by the person, separate and apart from the property of the person, in
trust for Her Majesty . . . and  (b)       to form no part of the estate or
property of the person from the time the amount was so deducted or withheld
. . . .  [137]     
The statutory mechanism transfers the tax debtor’s property to a
trust.  In First Vancouver Finance, the Court likened this mechanism to
a floating charge over all the tax debtor’s assets up to the amount due, in
that the trust does not attach to any specific property and allows the tax
debtor’s business to be carried on as usual.   Civil Code
of Québec  1680.  A debtor who has acquiesced unconditionally in
the assignment or hypothecating of claims by his creditor to a third person may
not afterwards set up against the third person any compensation that he could
have set up against the original creditor before he acquiesced.  An assignment or hypothec in which a debtor has not acquiesced, but
which from a certain time may be set up against him, prevents compensation only
for debts of the original creditor which come after that time.  Code of
Civil Procedure  637.  If the affirmative declaration of the garnishee is
not contested and does not show the existence of another seizure by garnishment
in his hands, the clerk, upon an inscription by either party, orders the
garnishee to pay to the seizing creditor the amounts which he owes to the
judgment debtor to the extent of the amount of the judgment in capital,
interest and costs.  To that extent the order of the clerk effects an
assignment, in favour of the seizing creditor, of the judgment debtor’s claim,
from the date of the seizure.  Such order must be served on the garnishee and
becomes executory 10 days later.  [139]     
The ability of the debtor of the assigned claim to set up against
the assignee any recourse that the debtor may have against the assignor is
based on the general rule that the assignee may not have more rights in the
assigned claim than the assignor had.  This rule is set down in art. 1637 C.C.Q.:  1637.  A creditor may assign to a third person all or
part of a claim or a right of action which he has against his debtor.  He may not, however, make an assignment that is
injurious to the rights of the debtor or that renders his obligation more
onerous.  [140]     
This provision is complemented by art. 1643 C.C.Q.,
which provides that a debtor may rely on a cause of extinction that occurred
before an assignment could be set up against him or her.  The first paragraph
of that article reads as follows:  1643.  A debtor may set up against
the assignee any payment made to the assignor before the assignment could be
set up against him, as well as any other cause of extinction of the obligation
that occurred before that time.  [141]     
The commentators and the courts have accordingly recognized that
any defences and any right to refuse to perform (exception for nonperformance)
that arose prior to an assignment may be set up against the assignee by a
debtor who has not acquiesced in the assignment.  The same is true of the extinction
of obligations by compensation:  Karim, at p. 773; Baudouin, Jobin and
Vézina, at No. 962; Lluelles and Moore, at No. 3176; Bélanger, at
p. 189.   [translation]  However,
it will be hard for the creditors of an insolvent party to challenge a
compensation agreement entered into at the same time as the contract giving
rise to that party’s claim, as the creditors will have difficulty proving that
the agreement has caused them any prejudice. [p. 750]       [translation]  A claim
is not only a patrimonial asset, but also a legal relationship.  When a
claim is alienated, therefore, what is transferred is not just an asset, but
also an active contractual situation.  The possibility of setting up a contract whose object
is the transfer of a claim thus necessarily has some particularities that are
accounted for in positive law on the basis that the contract produces effects
in respect of certain third parties.  [148]     
Thus, where the deemed trust applies to a claim, it attaches to a
legal relationship that corresponds to an active contractual situation, which
explains why the beneficiary of the trust may assert only those rights held by
the tax debtor at the time the trust became effective.  [149]     
It will also be helpful to refer back to s. 227(4.1)  ITA  and
to review the cases in which the scope of the deemed trust has been
considered.  Before Parliament clarified the respondent’s priority over secured
creditors, the courts had held that prior rights could be disregarded only to
the extent expressly provided for in the relevant provision.  For example, in Board
of Industrial Relations v. Avco Financial Services Realty Ltd., [1979] 2
S.C.R. 699, Martland J. wrote:   (See also Dauphin
Plains Credit Union Ltd. v. Xyloid Industries Ltd., [1980] 1 S.C.R. 1182,
at p. 1199.)  [150]     
This suggests that it is necessary to be cautious in assessing
the scope of the deemed trust on the tax debtor’s property.  When Parliament
wished to give the deemed trust more teeth, it took care to give the respondent
priority over secured creditors.  It did not alter the general rules governing
the rights a debtor can assert against its original creditor.  In assessing the
consequences of that decision, particularly with regard to compensation, one
can but find support in an interpretation based on the normally applicable
legal rules.     [152]     
This is just one example of the use of compensation in a context
that does not involve the “security interest” concept and of the great
importance of this mechanism both in Canadian law and in international economic
relations.  Parliament thus seems to have had reasons for acting as it did in
modifying the deemed trust only to give the respondent priority over creditors
with security interests.  I have concluded that the deemed trust does not give
the respondent more rights than the tax debtor had and that, insofar as the
amounts had not been deducted at the time the agreement was entered into, the
Caisse’s right may be set up against the respondent.  What this finding means
in practice must now be determined.  [153]     
In the case at bar, Camvrac’s right to recover its claim was
subject to the right to compensation that had been granted to the Caisse in the
agreement to give savings as security.  In the context of that agreement,
the right to compensation was a right held by the Caisse that could not be
negated solely by the fact of the deemed trust becoming effective.  The
respondent, as a third party, could not demand that the Caisse discharge its
debt to Camvrac if the conditions for repayment had not been met.  The Caisse’s
right had to be respected by third parties who acquired rights after the
agreement was signed.  Consequently, the respondent must abide by the compensation
agreement, given that her right is subsequent to it.  [154]     
As I mentioned above, Camvrac had remitted nothing to the
respondent since May 2000.  Because the compensation agreement was entered
into in September 2000, a question that arises is whether the respondent
may claim from the Caisse amounts owed prior to that date.  This is the issue
that remains to be addressed.    8.      Interest Issue  [157]     
Regarding interest, the Court of Appeal correctly endorsed the
application of Markevich, and there is no need to intervene.  9.        Conclusion  [158]     
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the
judgment of the Court of Appeal, authorize compensation for the balance of the
amounts deducted as of September 25, 2000 and, failing an agreement
between the parties, remand the case to the court of original jurisdiction to
establish the amount to be paid by the Caisse to the respondent, with costs
throughout.                                                                APPENDIX  A.      Contractual Provisions  (a)      Variable Credit Contract  [translation]  1.    LINE
OF CREDIT  The Caisse
agrees to extend to the Borrower, who accepts, a line of credit in the amount
of $277,000.00. . . .  . . .  At any point
in time, the Caisse may notify the Borrower that no advance shall be granted to
it thenceforth under this contract.  . . .  3.    INTEREST  . . .   The Borrower
further undertakes to pay, on any payment due not made, additional interest
. . . , any arrears of interest being then considered as principal.  . . .  5.    REQUEST FOR REPAYMENT  The Caisse
reserves the right to demand at any time the immediate repayment of any balance
owed in principal, interest, costs and accessories.  The  Caisse shall then be
entitled to no longer carry out this agreement, subject to all its other rights
and recourses.  . . .   7.    DEFAULT  If the Borrower draws a cheque that brings the line of credit balance to
an amount higher than the amount authorized hereunder, if it goes bankrupt, if
it transfers its property or becomes insolvent or fails to meet any of the
conditions and obligations stipulated herein, any balance then owing in
principal, interest, costs and accessories shall become immediately payable.  (b)    Term Savings
Agreement  [translation]  Date of
maturity:  October 16, 2005  . . .  PROVISIONS
GOVERNING THE PRINCIPAL  2.    The member agrees to make, on the date of acquisition, a
deposit in the amount of $200,000 (hereinafter referred to as the “initial
amount of deposit”).  3.    On the date of issue associated with the applicable term (“date
of issue”), the initial amount of deposit and the interest then accrued on that
amount shall be reinvested in the form of a deposit maturing on the maturity
date associated with the applicable term (“date of maturity”).  4.    This deposit may neither be negotiated nor transferred.  No
amount in principal or interest shall be redeemable or payable before the date
of maturity.  5.    This deposit may be hypothecated or given as security only in
favor of the issuing Caisse.  . . .  PROVISIONS GOVERNING
DISPOSAL AT MATURITY  11.  At maturity date, unless the Caisse is notified to the contrary
not later than the seventh day following such date, the principal and interest
shall be deposited (to a term savings account) for a term equal to the term of
this deposit.  The interest rate shall be the rate then in force at the Caisse
for such deposit, depending on the applicable term.  The interest shall be
reckoned daily and capitalized annually.  . . .  THIS IS A DEPOSIT WITHIN THE MEANING OF THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE ACT.  (c)   Agreement to Give Savings as Security  [translation]  1.    RIGHT
TO WITHHOLDING AND COMPENSATION  To secure the
repayment of any sum in principal, interest, costs and accessories owed or to
be owed the Caisse by:  :    the
Depositor  9    Name of Borrower (if other
than Depositor) under:   9      (b)     a 
(Loan, line of credit, etc.)                                   agreement
in the amount of $             granted to him (her) on              ;  9      (c)     the
following agreements:        :    and under
any debts or obligations, present or future, direct or indirect held by:  :      the
Depositor  9      Name of
Borrower (if other than Depositor)                       towards the
Caisse,  (hereinafter
referred to as “the Credit Contract[s]”)  the Depositor
undertakes to maintain and consents to the withholding by the Caisse, in the
account(s) or on the certificate(s) of deposit mentioned below, of the amount
of $200,000.00 distributed as follows:  Account or certificate of deposit            Sum withheld by the
Caisse identification (for deposit
certificates, state date issued amount and certificate number)  ALTERNATIVE TERM SAVINGS 5 YEARS IN
THE AMOUNT OF $200,000.00                                             $200,000.00                                                                   $  The Caisse
may withhold the sums shown above, 9
along with the interest from the certificates of deposit if applicable, as long
as all the amounts due under the Credit Contract(s) have not been fully repaid
and, in the case of a line of credit, as long as it has not been cancelled.  In
cases of default as provided for below, there shall be compensation between the
Credit Contract(s) and the certificate(s) of deposit or the amounts deposited
defined above, as provided for in Section 7.  2.    SAFEKEEPING OF CERTIFICATES                                                                        .
. .  3.    HYPOTHEC   4.    WITHDRAWALS AND CHEQUES  . . .  5.    REDEMPTION BEFORE MATURITY OF A CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT  . . .  6.    MATURITY AND RENEWAL OF A CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT  . . .  7.    DEFAULT  The Depositor
shall be in default in any of the following cases:  (a)    if any of the commitments under the Credit Contract(s) or these
presents is not fulfilled;  (b)    if the Depositor or the Borrower becomes insolvent or goes
bankrupt, or if he (she) makes a proposal and it is rejected or annulled;  . . .  In the event
of any default:  (a)    any sums owing under the Credit Contracts shall immediately
become payable;  (b)    the Caisse may use the sums deposited or the certificate(s) of
deposit contemplated herein, regardless of its (their) having matured or not,
to compensate its claim under the Credit Contract(s);  . . .  The
consequences of a default are for the exclusive benefit of the Caisse and the
latter may waive them expressedly.  The Caisse may, among others, without any
prejudice to its rights, wait for the maturity date of the certificate(s) of
deposit before exercising its rights as provided for in paragraphs (b) and (c)
above.  8.    RESERVE
OF RECOURSES  . . . Furthermore, failure by the Caisse to avail itself of any
of its rights in case of default shall not be interpreted as a waiver of such
rights.  B.       Statutory
Provisions  (a)      Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .)  224. .
. .  (1.3) In
subsection (1.2),  . . .  “security interest” means any interest in property that secures
payment or performance of an obligation and includes an interest created by or
arising out of a debenture, mortgage, hypothec, lien, pledge, charge, deemed or
actual trust, assignment or encumbrance of any kind whatever, however or
whenever arising, created, deemed to arise or otherwise provided for;  227. . . .  (4)  Every person who deducts or withholds an amount under
this Act is deemed, notwithstanding any security interest (as defined in
subsection 224(1.3) ) in the amount so deducted or withheld, to hold the amount
separate and apart from the property of the person and from property held by
any secured creditor (as defined in subsection 224(1.3) ) of that person that
but for the security interest would be property of the person, in trust for Her
Majesty and for payment to Her Majesty in the manner and at the time provided
under this Act. (4.1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Act  (except sections 81.1 and 81.2 of that Act), any other
enactment of Canada, any enactment of a province or any other law, where at any
time an amount deemed by subsection (4) to be held by a person in trust for Her
Majesty is not paid to Her Majesty in the manner and at the time provided under
this Act, property of the person and property held by any secured creditor (as
defined in subsection 224(1.3) ) of that person that but for a security interest
(as defined in subsection 224(1.3) ) would be property of the person, equal in
value to the amount so deemed to be held in trust is deemed  (a)   to be held, from the time the amount was deducted or
withheld by the person, separate and apart from the property of the person, in
trust for Her Majesty whether or not the property is subject to such a security
interest, and  (b)   to form no part of the estate or
property of the person from the time the amount was so deducted or withheld,
whether or not the property has in fact been kept separate and apart from the
estate or property of the person and whether or not the property is subject to
such a security interest . . . .  (b)     Employment Insurance Act, S.C. 1996,
c. 23  86. (1)  All premiums, interest, penalties and
other amounts payable by an employer under this Act are debts due to Her
Majesty and are recoverable in the Federal Court or any other court of
competent jurisdiction or in any other manner provided for by this Act.  (2)    Where an employer has deducted an amount from the remuneration
of an insured person as or on account of any employee’s premium required to be
paid by the insured person but has not remitted the amount to the Receiver
General, the employer is deemed, notwithstanding any security interest (as
defined in subsection 224(1.3)  of the Income Tax Act ) in the amount so
deducted, to hold the amount separate and apart from the property of the
employer and from property held by any secured creditor (as defined in
subsection 224(1.3)  of the Income Tax Act ) of that employer that but for
the security interest would be property of the employer, in trust for Her
Majesty and for payment to Her Majesty in the manner and at the time provided
under this Act.  (2.1)  Notwithstanding the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act 
(except sections 81.1 and 81.2 of that Act), any other enactment of Canada, any
enactment of a province or any other law, where at any time an amount deemed by
subsection (2) to be held by an employer in trust for Her Majesty in the manner
and at the time provided under this Act, property of the employer and property
held by any secured creditor (as defined in subsection 224(1.3)  of the Income
Tax Act ) of that employer that but for a security interest (as defined in
subsection 224(1.3)  of the Income Tax Act ) would be property of the
employer, equal in value to the amount so deemed to be held in trust is deemed  (a)    to
be held, from the time the amount was deducted by the employer, separate and
apart from the property of the employer, in trust for Her Majesty whether or
not the property is subject to such a security interest, and  (b)    to
form no part of the estate or property of the employer from the time the amount
was so deducted, whether or not the property has in fact been kept separate and
apart from the estate or property of the employer and whether or not the
property is subject to such a security interest  and is
property beneficially owned by Her Majesty notwithstanding any security
interest in such property or in the proceeds thereof, and the proceeds of such
property shall be paid to the Receiver General in priority to all such security
interests.  (2.2) For the purposes of subsections (2) and (2.1),
a security interest does not include a prescribed security interest.  (c)     Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64  1637.  A creditor may assign to a third person all or part of a
claim or a right of action which he has against his debtor.  He may not, however, make an assignment that is injurious to the
rights of the debtor or that renders his obligation more onerous.  . . .  1643.  A debtor may set up against the assignee any payment
made to the assignor before the assignment could be set up against him, as well
as any other cause of extinction of the obligation that occurred before that
time.  . . .  1671.  Obligations are extinguished not only by the causes of
extinction contemplated in other provisions of this Code, such as payment, the
expiry of an extinctive term, novation or prescription, but also by
compensation, confusion, release, impossibility of performance or discharge of
the debtor.  1672.  Where two persons are reciprocally debtor and creditor
of each other, the debts for which they are liable are extinguished by
compensation, up to the amount of the lesser debt.  Compensation may not be claimed from the State, but the State may
claim it.  1673.  Compensation is effected by operation of law upon the
coexistence of debts that are certain, liquid and exigible and the object of
both of which is a sum of money or a certain quantity of fungible property
identical in kind.  A person may apply for judicial liquidation of a debt in order to set
it up for compensation.  . . .  1680.  A debtor who has acquiesced unconditionally in the
assignment or hypothecating of claims by his creditor to a third person may not
afterwards set up against the third person any compensation that he could have
set up against the original creditor before he acquiesced.  An assignment or hypothec in which a debtor has not acquiesced, but
which from a certain time may be set up against him, prevents compensation only
for debts of the original creditor which come after that time.  1681.  Compensation may neither be effected
nor be renounced to the prejudice of the acquired rights of a third person.   637.   If the affirmative declaration of the garnishee is not
contested and does not show the existence of another seizure by garnishment in
his hands, the clerk, upon an inscription by either party, orders the garnishee
to pay to the seizing creditor the amounts which he owes to the judgment debtor
to the extent of the amount of the judgment in capital, interest and costs.  To
that extent the order of the clerk effects an assignment, in favour of the
seizing creditor, of the judgment debtor’s claim, from the date of the
seizure.  Such order must be served on the garnishee and becomes executory
10 days later.  Appeal dismissed with costs, LeBel
and Deschamps JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Langlois Kronström
Desjardins, Lévis.  Solicitor for the respondent:  Canada Department of Justice,
Montréal.    