Ikea Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R.
196  Ikea Limited                                                                                       Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Ikea Ltd. v. Canada  File No.:  25674.  1997:  December 2; 1998:  February 12.  Present:  Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci, Major and
Bastarache JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal   In an agreement dated six days after the original
lease, Ikea became entitled to receive a tenant inducement payment (“TIP”) from
its landlord. The agreement clearly and unequivocally stipulated that this
payment was to induce Ikea to lease the premises and that no obligation was
placed upon Ikea to use the money for any particular purpose.  The payment was
to be made to Ikea within seven days of its taking possession of and commencing
business operations in the premises.  Ikea did not include the entire TIP in its income
for the 1986 year for the purposes of its financial statements and instead
amortized it over the period of the lease.  It also offset a portion of the
TIP against the cost of fixtures for the leased premises which were
reflected as capital assets and which would have been depreciated over
approximately the same time period used to amortize the balance of the
TIP.  In filing its tax return for 1986, however, Ikea neither reduced the
cost of fixtures by the offset portion of the TIP nor included any portion
of the TIP in its income, owing to its belief that, for tax purposes, the
payment constituted a capital receipt rather than taxable revenue.  In
reassessing Ikea, the Minister required that the TIP be included in income
entirely in the 1986 taxation year.  On appeal by Ikea, the Tax Court of Canada
agreed with the Minister that the TIP represented income and not a capital
receipt, and also that the amount was required to be included in income wholly
in the year of receipt.  This decision was affirmed by a unanimous judgment of
the Federal Court of Appeal.  Two issues arose on this appeal:  whether
the TIP was to be treated for tax purposes as revenue or as a capital
receipt, and if revenue, whether it should have been included in income entirely
in the year received or amortized over the period of the lease of which it was
the catalyst.  Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.  A payment made as a reimbursement for the cost of
capital property is to be treated as a capital receipt for tax purposes and one
made as a reimbursement for an expense or reimbursement of a loss on revenue
account is to be treated as income.  Thus, had the payment been made by Ikea
for the purpose of acquiring the lease, a capital asset, it would have been a capital
payment.  However, two simultaneous acquisitions by the same party (the lease
and the cash payment) need not be characterized in the same way for tax
purposes simply because they are related to the same transaction.  Indeed, the
desirability of an accurate picture of income inherently outweighs the possible
inconvenience of an asymmetrical result in the occasional case.   The TIP was taxable in the year received.  The
“realization principle”, which holds that an amount may have the quality of
income even though it is not actually received by the taxpayer but only
“realized” in accordance with the accrual method of accounting, is well
established in the jurisprudence.  Amounts received or realized free of
conditions or restrictions upon their use are therefore taxable in the year
realized, subject to any contrary provision of the Act or other rule of law. 
Here, the taxpayer’s right to the TIP accrued immediately upon the assumption
of its contractual obligations, and thus could not properly be said to relate
to future expenditures.  In such a case, unless otherwise specified by the
inducement agreement and in the absence of statutory or case law authority to
the contrary, the realization approach gives a more accurate picture of the
taxpayer’s income.  Cases Cited  Considered:  The
Queen v. Foothills Pipe Lines (Yukon) Ltd., 90 D.T.C. 6607; St.
John Dry Dock & Shipbuilding Co. v. M.N.R., [1944] Ex. C.R. 186;
IBM Canada Ltd. v. M.N.R., 93 D.T.C. 1266; French Shoes Ltd.
v. The Queen, 86 D.T.C. 6359;  referred to:  Canderel Ltd.
v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 147; Toronto College Park Ltd. v. Canada,
[1998] 1 S.C.R. 183; Neonex International Ltd. v. The Queen, 78
D.T.C. 6339; Oxford Shopping Centres Ltd. v. The Queen, 79 D.T.C.
5458; Associated Investors of Canada Ltd. v. M.N.R., 67 D.T.C. 5096; Symes
v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695; Corporation of Birmingham v.
Barnes, [1935] A.C. 292; The Queen v. Canadian Pacific Ltd., 77
D.T.C. 5383; Consumers’ Gas Co. v. The Queen, 82 D.T.C. 6300; London
and Thames Haven Oil Wharves, Ltd. v. Attwooll, [1967] 2 All
E.R. 124; Woodward Stores Ltd. v. The Queen, 91 D.T.C. 5090; Suzy
Creamcheese (Canada) Ltd. v. The Queen, 92 D.T.C. 6291; Kenneth
B. S. Robertson Ltd. v. M.N.R. (1944), 2 D.T.C. 655; Westfair
Foods Ltd. v. Canada, [1991] 1 C.T.C. 146; Charles Brown &
Co. v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue (1930), 12 T.C. 1256; Lincolnshire
Sugar Co. v. Smart, [1937] A.C. 697; Schwartz v. Canada,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 254; Nesbitt Thomson Inc. v. M.N.R., 91 D.T.C.
1113; M.N.R. v. Benaby Realties Ltd., [1968] S.C.R. 12.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income Tax Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), s. 12(1) (x).  Income Tax Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63,
s. 9(1).  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal,
96 D.T.C. 6526, [1996] 3 C.T.C. 307, [1996] F.C.J. No. 1243 (QL), dismissing an
appeal from a judgment of Bowman J.T.C.C., 94 D.T.C. 1112, [1994] 1 C.T.C.
2140, [1993] T.C.J. No. 874 (QL).  Appeal dismissed.  Warren J. A. Mitchell, Q.C.,
and Karen Sharlow, for the appellant.  Roger Taylor and Sandra
Phillips, for the respondent.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Iacobucci J. -- This
appeal was heard along with Canderel Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R.
147, and Toronto College Park Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 183,
reasons for which are being released simultaneously herewith, but raises in
essence the opposite question of that raised in those cases.  Whereas in Canderel
and Toronto College Park this Court was called upon to determine the
appropriate manner in which a taxpayer may deduct a tenant inducement payment
(“TIP”) from business income, the instant case requires a determination of how
(prior to the enactment of s. 12(1) (x) of the Income Tax Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)) the same type of payment was to be treated
in the hands of the recipient.  Was the TIP to be dealt with as revenue or as a
capital receipt, and if revenue, was it to be included in income entirely in
the year received or could it properly be amortized over the period of the
lease to which it related?  I.  Facts  2                                  
The appellant, Ikea Limited (“Ikea”), is a furniture retailer which
carries on its business through retail outlets which it owns or leases
throughout Canada.  In 1985, Ikea entered into a 10-year lease of premises at
the West Edmonton Mall (the “Mall”), with an option to extend the lease for a
further 10 years.  The lease provided for a base rent, payable in monthly
instalments, plus a percentage rent based on sales.  In an agreement dated six
days after the original lease, Ikea became entitled to receive a TIP of
$2,650,000 from the Mall.  The agreement was clear and unequivocal in
stipulating that the purpose of this payment was to induce Ikea to lease the
premises, and no obligation was placed upon Ikea to use the money for any
particular purpose, such as, for example, applying it against the cost of
inventory or fixtures.  The payment was to be made to Ikea within seven days of
its taking possession of and commencing business operations in the premises.  3                                  
Ikea tendered expert accounting evidence stating that it was proper
treatment, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
(“GAAP”), not to include the entire TIP in its income for the 1986 year and
instead to amortize it over the period of the lease.  Further, this evidence
indicated that it was also in accordance with GAAP for Ikea to offset a portion
of the TIP, an amount totalling $825,189, against the cost of fixtures for the
leased premises, provided only that, had the cost of the fixtures been
reflected as capital assets, they would have been depreciated over approximately
the same time period used to amortize the balance of the TIP.  In fact, this
was precisely the accounting treatment accorded to the payment by Ikea for the
purposes of its financial statements.  This evidence was uncontradicted by the
Minister of National Revenue (the “Minister”), who simply took the position
that the appropriate accounting treatment was irrelevant to the issue of the
computation of income for tax purposes.  4                                  
Philip Boname, an expert called on behalf of the Minister, expressed the
opinion, based on his general knowledge of the commercial real estate market in
Edmonton at the time of the lease, that the TIP received by Ikea resulted in an
increase in the amount of rent that it agreed to pay to the Mall.  His
experience suggested to him that there was a direct correlation between the use
of TIPs and the ability of a landlord to realize higher rents.  5                                  
In contrast to the treatment accorded the TIPs in its financial
statements, in filing its tax return for 1986, Ikea did not reduce the cost of
fixtures by the $825,189 portion of the TIP, nor did it include any portion of
the TIP in its income.  This treatment reflected its opinion that, for tax
purposes, the payment constituted a capital receipt rather than taxable
revenue.  In reassessing Ikea, the Minister required that the TIP be included
in income entirely in the 1986 taxation year.  On appeal by Ikea, the Tax Court
of Canada agreed with the Minister that the TIP represented income and not a
capital receipt, and also that the amount was required to be included in income
wholly in the year of receipt.  This decision was affirmed by a unanimous
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal.  II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  6                                  
Income Tax Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (now R.S.C., 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .))  9. (1)   Subject to this Part, a taxpayer's
income for a taxation year from a business or property is his profit therefrom
for the year.  III.  Judicial History  1.                 Tax Court of Canada (Bowman J.), 94 D.T.C.
1112  7                                  
Bowman J. began by stating at p. 1115 that the “accounting treatment
does not affect the determination whether the receipt was on revenue or capital
account.  That determination is one of law based upon a consideration of all of
the facts”.  After commenting briefly on the differences between income tax and
financial accounting, he observed that the rationale for the accounting
treatment of the $825,189 might have been that since it represented the cost of
fixtures, it was not inappropriate to offset it against that cost, “thereby
achieving an effective amortization over the term of the lease by reducing the
basis against which annual depreciation would be deducted”.  However, he found
no legal or factual basis for such treatment for income tax purposes.  8                                  
Moreover, Bowman J. could find no basis whatsoever for the amortization
of the balance of the TIP over the term of the lease.  Beginning with the
proposition that, even for accounting purposes, expenditures are to be
attributed to the period that they benefit and revenues are either to be
allocated to the period in which they are earned or applied as a reduction of
expenses for the period to which they relate, he observed that the tenant
inducement agreement specified that the purpose of the TIP was strictly to
induce Ikea to enter into the lease and carry on business in the premises.  The
question, then, was when the payment was actually earned.  One possibility was
that it was earned when the consideration flowed from Ikea to the Mall, that
is, when Ikea commenced business at the Mall.  In fact, the agreement
stipulated that the right to the TIP became absolute seven days after this
event.  If it was completely earned in this way, however, then in the view of
Bowman J., this analysis did not support the amortization of the payment over
the term of the lease.  Such treatment could only be rationalized either by
deeming the consideration flowing from Ikea to consist not only of the signing
of the lease and the fulfilment thereof, but also of its continuing obligation
to carry on its business in the premises during the term of the lease, or by
regarding the TIP as a reduction of the rent payable over the term of the
lease.  However, neither of these hypotheses supported Ikea’s treatment of the
TIP as capital.  Both supported its treatment as revenue.  9                                  
Bowman J. considered in some detail the role of accountants and GAAP in
the court’s determination of income tax matters.  He viewed such evidence as
potentially useful in indicating the underlying commercial and economic reality
that the transaction represents, free of tax considerations, but viewed
accounting evidence as only of “marginal assistance” in tax cases.  He relied
on several cases, including Neonex International Ltd. v. The Queen, 78
D.T.C. 6339 (F.C.A.), Oxford Shopping Centres Ltd. v. The Queen, 79
D.T.C. 5458 (F.C.T.D.), and Associated Investors of Canada Ltd. v. M.N.R.,
67 D.T.C. 5096 (Ex. Ct.), in support of the proposition that the accounting
treatment of revenues and expenses is not determinative and that the true
question is one of law, having regard to “ordinary commercial principles”. 
Relying on the decision of this Court in Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4
S.C.R. 695, he found at p. 1117 that “GAAP is not relevant in determining
whether a receipt or expense is on revenue or capital account . . .
[or] whether an item of revenue is to be recognized in the year of receipt or
in a later year”, and concluded at p. 1118 that while GAAP may have “an
extremely circumscribed subordinate function” within ordinary commercial
principles, “[i]t cannot supersede those principles”.  10                              
Turning to the first substantive question, whether the TIP was on
revenue account or on capital account, Bowman J. first noted a number of
relevant facts.  Ikea was not in the business of entering leases, and although
the leasing of property was obviously an essential part of its business, the leases
were nonetheless capital assets in its hands.  The leasing of premises by Ikea
was not of such frequency that lease negotiations could be regarded as a
“recurrent or ordinary phenomenon” in its business.  Ikea had requested the TIP
as part of the overall economic package surrounding the lease, and had
acknowledged at trial that the terms and conditions of its leases affected its
profits on an ongoing basis.  However, the base rent agreed to was suggested
early in the lease negotiations and never changed.  On this basis, Bowman J.
concluded that the TIP resulted in an increase in the aggregate value of the
rent which Ikea agreed to pay, based on the direct correlation between the use
of such payments and the ability of a landlord to realize higher rents.  In his
view, this conformed to “obvious commercial common sense”.  Bowman J. was also
of the opinion that the other evidence, including that given by an officer of
Ikea, confirmed that the TIP was “inextricably bound up with the rent that was
to be paid and the economic return that the parties expected from the
commercial relationship between them”.   12                              
In the view of Bowman J., relying on London and Thames Haven Oil
Wharves, Ltd. v. Attwooll, [1967] 2 All E.R. 124 (C.A.), the crucial matter
to be determined, as a general rule and irrespective of whether the receipt
reimbursed a “loss” or an “expenditure”, is the nature of the expense that the
payment is designed to reimburse.  If the reimbursement is of a capital loss or
a capital expenditure, then the receipt will be on capital account: Woodward
Stores Ltd. v. The Queen, 91 D.T.C. 5090 (F.C.T.D.), and Suzy
Creamcheese (Canada) Ltd. v. The Queen, 92 D.T.C. 6291  (F.C.T.D.). 
From the cited case law, he concluded that while in the absence of a statutory
provision to the contrary, a payment made to a taxpayer to reimburse the taxpayer
for the cost of capital property does not reduce the capital cost of the
property for tax purposes, such a payment is nonetheless a capital receipt and
is not to be included in income under the Act.  On the other hand, a payment
made as a reimbursement to  the taxpayer for an expense that is on revenue
account, or as a reduction of such an expense, is an income receipt and must
therefore be included in income.  13                              
In applying the law to the facts of this case, Bowman J. observed that
under the tenant inducement agreement, Ikea was not obliged to apply the TIP to
any expense in particular.  Aside from the accounting treatment of the expense,
which was seen as irrelevant, nothing in the evidence could support the
conclusion that the payment was made to reimburse a capital expenditure or
capital loss.  Indeed, there was no other linkage whatsoever between the
payment and any capital outlay.  Bowman J. held that there was no reason to
extend the principle in Birmingham v. Barnes, supra, to allow the
accounting treatment of a receipt to affect its characterization as revenue or
capital.  He concluded that it would have been arbitrary to treat the payment
as capital for tax purposes merely because it may not have been inappropriate
for accounting purposes to attribute a portion of it to the cost of fixed
assets.  This, he found at p. 1124, would have constituted “an abdication to
the professional judgment of accountants of the court’s obligation to determine
what is essentially a question of law”.   15                              
Turning to the second question, the timing of recognition of the
receipt, Bowman J. again found that the accounting treatment of the TIP was not
determinative.  He could find no basis in the Act for a reserve in respect of
this type of income, and observed at p. 1125 that, as a rule, “amounts become
taxable as income in the year of receipt provided the amounts received exhibit
the nature and quality of income at that time”: The Queen v. Foothills Pipe
Lines (Yukon) Ltd., 90 D.T.C. 6607 (F.C.A.), at p. 6612.  Put another way,
the question was whether Ikea’s right to the receipt became absolute, with no
restriction as to its disposition, use or enjoyment, in the year in question: Kenneth
B. S. Robertson Ltd. v. M.N.R. (1944), 2 D.T.C. 655 (Ex. Ct.).  In the view
of Bowman J., this condition was clearly satisfied, and thus, the income was
taxable in 1986.  Accordingly, he dismissed Ikea’s appeal of the reassessment
on both counts.  2.  Federal Court of Appeal (Reasons of Robertson J.A., for
the court), 96 D.T.C. 6526   IV.  Issues  17                              
Two issues are raised on this appeal.  The first is whether the TIP
received by Ikea was to be treated for tax purposes as revenue or as a capital
receipt.  If it was properly to be considered revenue, the next task is to
determine when it was to be included in income: entirely in the year received
or amortized over the period of the lease of which it was the catalyst.  V.  Analysis  18                              
By way of preliminary comment, I should like to acknowledge the great
assistance provided by the lucid and comprehensive reasons of Bowman J.  As
shall become clear, I agree substantially with his reasons on both of the
issues raised in this appeal.  However, because this appeal was heard together
with those in Canderel and Toronto College Park, and particularly
because of the importance of the issue of timing to the outcome of those appeals,
I feel obliged to make some brief observations of my own.  1.  Legislative change since 1986  19                              
At the outset, I would note that since the dispute which precipitated
this case arose, the Income Tax Act  has been amended to include a
specific provision dealing with the issues raised on this appeal.  The relevant
portions of R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .),  s. 12(1) (x) read:  12. (1)  There shall be included
in computing the income of a taxpayer for a taxation year as income from a
business or property such of the following amounts as are applicable:                                                                     . . .  (x)  any amount (other than a prescribed amount) received
by the taxpayer in the year, in the course of earning income from a business or
property, from  (i)    a person who pays the amount (in this paragraph referred to as
“the payer”) in the course of earning income from a business or property or in
order to achieve a benefit or advantage for the payer. . . .                                                                     . . .  where the amount can reasonably be considered to have been received  (iii)  as an inducement, whether as a grant, subsidy, forgivable loan,
deduction from tax, allowance or any other form of inducement, or  (iv)  as a reimbursement, contribution or allowance or as assistance
. . . in respect of the cost of property or in respect of an outlay
or expense  to the extent that the amount  (v)  was not otherwise included in computing the taxpayer’s
income, or deducted in computing, for the purposes of this Act, any balance of
undeducted outlays, expenses or other amounts, for the year or a preceding
taxation year. . . .  20                              
It is evident that the TIP paid to Ikea in the instant case would fall
squarely within this section, which would render the payment income to Ikea and
taxable entirely in the year received.  However, because the section was not in
force in 1986, when the payment in question was received, the matter remains to
be determined for the purposes of this appeal in accordance with the law as it
existed then.  The new provision, obviously, has no effect on the outcome of
the instant case.  2.  Capital or income?  21                              
Ikea argued that the TIP was a capital receipt and not income, and
therefore should not have been included in income at all.  This argument was
premised primarily on an attempted analogy between this receipt and an amount
received upon the acquisition or disposition of a capital asset, which is
clearly a capital receipt:  Woodward Stores, supra; Westfair
Foods Ltd. v. Canada, [1991] 1 C.T.C. 146 (F.C.T.D.).  As the argument
goes, the character of the receipt is properly to be determined by the
character of the asset to which it relates, and because the lease that gave
rise to the TIP in this case was characterized by the trial judge as a capital
asset in Ikea’s hands, the TIP itself must therefore be considered a capital
receipt.  However, no specific authority was advanced in support of this
interpretation, and for my part, I am unable to see any legal basis for the
analogy.   [income] subsidies come into the hands of the recipient in the
course of trade or business operations or because of them and, being
operational revenues, may properly be described as income subsidies subject to
tax.  The situation in the present case is quite different.  The appellant
was not entitled to receive nor did it receive the subsidy in the course of its
trade or business operations or because of them.  The subsidy was not a trade
or business receipt or revenue or an item of trade or business profit or gain. 
There was no guarantee of trade or business profits or earnings nor was the
subsidy given to supplement or increase the operational revenues of the
appellant.  Indeed, the subsidy payments had nothing to do with the trade or
business operations of the appellant at all.  [Emphasis added.]  In my view,
this passage is most instructive in setting out useful criteria for the
classification of “unusual” receipts as income or capital.  23                              
The case law cited by Bowman J., beginning with Birmingham v. Barnes,
supra, and continuing through IBM Canada Ltd. v. M.N.R., 93
D.T.C. 1266 (T.C.C.), reaffirms this proposition.  Where a payment is made to a
taxpayer as a reimbursement for the cost of capital property, it is to be
treated as a capital receipt for tax purposes.  On the other hand, a payment
that is made as a reimbursement for an expense on revenue account is to be
treated as income.  In fact, even the case law cited by Ikea in support of its
contention that the TIP was a capital receipt in the end commends the opposite
conclusion, given the above analysis.  In Woodward Stores, supra,
at p. 5091, the payment in question, while clearly a TIP, was earmarked
specifically as a “fixturing allowance”.  It was advanced for the express
purpose of reimbursing a capital expense, and therefore constituted a capital
receipt.  Similarly, in Westfair Foods, supra, the payments made
to the taxpayer were characterized by the court as capital receipts only
because they were compensation for the premature termination of leases and
therefore related to the disposition of a capital asset.  These cases are both
entirely consistent with the law as stated by Bowman J. and provide no specific
assistance to Ikea’s argument.  24                              
That the lease of the premises here in question was to Ikea a capital
asset was not disputed, and I believe this proposition is correct in law.  It
follows that if the payment in question had been made by Ikea for the purpose
of acquiring the lease, it would have been a capital payment, and this too is
undisputed.  To my mind, however, there is a significant difference between a
payment made by the lessee for the purpose of acquiring a lease and one
received by the lessee as an inducement to lease.  Whereas a capital asset is
surely paid for by a capital expenditure, and disposed of in consideration of a
capital receipt, I see no reason why two simultaneous acquisitions by the same
party, that is, the lease and the cash payment, must be characterized in the same
way for tax purposes simply because they are related to the same transaction. 
Obviously, the TIP was not paid as consideration for the disposition of a
capital asset; quite the opposite, in fact.  The symmetry contended for by
Ikea, though perhaps convenient, is not necessarily the rule in tax law.  25                              
The question which must be asked in this case is whether, on the facts,
the TIP was received by Ikea as reimbursement of an expenditure, or replacement
of a loss, which was on capital or on income account.  Bowman J. found that the
payment could not be linked to any capital expenditure or purpose.  Instead, in
his words at p. 1125:  The negotiation of the lease and the payment of rent are, however,
necessary incidents of the conduct of the appellant’s business, and in
determining the cost to the appellant of carrying on its business in the West
Edmonton Mall it is impossible to imagine how such a payment could be ignored. 
. . . It is true, as Reed, J. observed in Westfair Foods Limited,
that not every receipt that is related to a business is necessarily
income from that business.  She was, however, dealing with a receipt
that, albeit related to the business, was nonetheless one that arose from a
disposition of a capital asset of that business. Here we are concerned with
a receipt that, although it does not arise from the sale of the goods or
services in which the company deals, is directly and inextricably bound up with
the economics of the operation.  It impinges immediately upon the costs that
must be satisfied out of the appellant’s trading operations. [Italics in
original; underlining added.]    27                              
Ikea submitted that Bowman J. premised his conclusion on the improper
assumption that simply because the receipt was not capital, it was therefore
income.  Certainly, it is possible that a given receipt might constitute
neither capital nor income for the purposes of the Act; if it is not received
from a “source” of income, as that term has been judicially defined, an amount
may not be taxable at all: see, for example, Schwartz v. Canada, [1996]
1 S.C.R. 254.  Each receipt must be considered individually in order to
ascertain its true character, and it would certainly be improper to classify a
receipt as income automatically upon the determination that it is not capital.     31                              
In IBM Canada, supra, Mogan J. discussed  the purpose of
TIPs in the following terms (at p. 1274):  Taken at face value, the underlying purpose for the
payments was to induce the Appellant to sign the seven leases.  But that face
value purpose is too simplistic because each lease brings into existence both
rights and obligations.  In the circumstances of this case, I find that the
primary consideration granted by the Appellant for the lease inducement
payments was the Appellant’s acceptance of its obligations under the various
leases to pay rent during the terms of those leases.  Those obligations were on
revenue account. . . . I find that the inducement payments flowing from
the various landlords to the Appellant are just as much revenue payments as the
periodic rental payments flowing from the Appellant to its landlords. 
[Emphasis added.]  See also French
Shoes, supra, as a further example of the characterization of this
type of expense as being on revenue account.  32                              
I can see no basis at all on which to distinguish IBM Canada from
the present case.  Therefore, I am of the opinion that this argument must also
fail.  33                              
In my view, Bowman J. was entirely correct in finding that the TIP
received by Ikea was on revenue account and should have been included in income
for tax purposes.  The payment was clearly received as part of ordinary
business operations and was, in fact, inextricably linked to such operations. 
On the evidence, no question of linkage to a capital purpose can seriously be
entertained.  Had Ikea wished, it could have requested that the TIP be advanced
expressly for the specific purpose of fixturing, or to defray some other
capital cost.  It did not do so, however, and the payment was in fact made free
of any conditions for or stipulations as to its use.  Therefore, whether the
TIP represented a reduction in rent or a payment in consideration of Ikea’s
assumption of its various obligations under the lease, it clearly cannot be
treated as a capital receipt and should have been included in Ikea’s income. 
The question that remains, however, is in which taxation year should this
inclusion have taken place.  3.  Timing
of recognition  34                              
To my mind, the timing analysis in the present case is considerably less
complicated than in either Canderel or Toronto College Park,
which involved the deduction of  TIPs from the income of the payer, not their
inclusion in the income of the recipient.  In the present case, the
jurisprudence clearly points to the conclusion that the TIP was taxable in the
hands of Ikea in the year in which it was received.  In M.N.R. v. Benaby
Realties Ltd., [1968] S.C.R. 12, Judson J. considered the timing of
recognition of certain proceeds of expropriation.  He concluded, at p. 16,
that the Act “requires that profits be taken into account or assessed in the
year in which the amount is ascertained”.  35                              
Similarly, in Foothills Pipe Lines, supra, at
p. 6612, Urie J.A. provided the following concise summary of the law:  A considerable body of jurisprudence has developed
certain principles applicable in determining whether or not sums of money
received by a taxpayer are to be considered as income in the tax period when
received or are to be recorded as a liability or in some other way.
. . .  It is useful then to recall that, as a matter of
law, amounts become taxable as income in the year of receipt provided the
amounts received exhibit the nature and quality of income at that time. 
[Emphasis added.]  36                              
In using the term “quality of income”, Urie J.A. referred at p. 6612 to Kenneth
B. S. Robertson Ltd., supra, at pp. 661, where Thorson
J. enunciated the following test as to whether an amount received by a
taxpayer has this quality:  Is his right to it absolute and under no restriction, contractual or
otherwise, as to its disposition, use or enjoyment?  37                              
The combined effect of these passages is to confirm what in the law of
income tax has become known as the “realization principle”, given that an
amount may have the quality of income even though it is not actually received
by the taxpayer, but only “realized” in accordance with the accrual method of
accounting.  The ultimate effect of this principle is clear: amounts received
or realized by a taxpayer, free of conditions or restrictions upon their use,
are taxable in the year realized, subject to any contrary provision of the Act
or other rule of law.  The TIP received by Ikea in the present case fits this
description perfectly.  The tenant inducement agreement made it clear that the
sole condition precedent to receipt of the payment was the assumption of Ikea’s
obligations under the lease agreement, and further stipulated that the payment
was to be made within seven days of Ikea’s commencing business in the premises,
pursuant to the lease.  Thus, Ikea’s right to the payment became absolute at
that time.  There were no further strings attached such as to postpone actual
realization or receipt into a subsequent taxation year, and the payment was
received in full by Ikea in 1986.  Therefore, I conclude that the entire amount
was taxable in that year.  38                              
I cannot accept Ikea’s argument that the case law relied upon by the
courts below is not relevant to this case.  Ikea notes that Robertson
was decided not under the present Income Tax Act  but under its
predecessor, the Income War Tax Act, R.S.C. 1927, c. 97.  That
statute made taxable all income received in a year and did not permit
computation of profit on the accrual basis, which is now the only acceptable
method in most cases.  Therefore, it is argued, the “matching principle” of
accounting, the application of which was held to be mandatory by the Federal
Court of Appeal in both Canderel and Toronto College Park, was
not then relevant and the computation of profit was a completely different
matter.   40                              
This situation is quite different from that canvassed in Canderel,
where the issue was when a TIP is to be deducted from the income of the payer,
rather than included in the income of the payee.  There, in a proper fact
situation (though not in Canderel or Toronto College Park), it
could well be argued that the payment relates directly to specific items of
revenue to be realized in subsequent taxation years, and that a more accurate
picture of income is thus to be obtained via matching.  But I fail to see how a
TIP to which the payee’s right accrues immediately upon the assumption of its
obligations under a contract can properly be said to relate to future
expenditures.  The consideration for the TIP is not the future payment of rent,
but rather, the immediate assumption of the contractual obligations.  In such a
case, unless otherwise specified by the inducement agreement, then, and in the
absence of statutory or case law authority to the contrary, the realization
approach commends itself as that which will give a more accurate picture of the
taxpayer’s income.  41                              
Before concluding, one final matter bears mentioning.  Even if this
approach is prone to lead to asymmetry in some future case, where a TIP might
be amortizable by the payer over the term of the lease but should properly be
included in income immediately by the payee, such is perhaps an inevitable
consequence of the attempt to obtain an accurate picture of each taxpayer’s
income.  It should be of no real concern to the law, however.  Each case must
necessarily turn on its individual facts, and on the particular situation of
each individual taxpayer.  The desirability of an accurate picture of income,
in my view, inherently outweighs the possible inconvenience of an asymmetrical
result in the occasional case.  In this regard, I am in agreement with
Robertson J.A. in the court below.  VI.  Disposition  42                              
For the foregoing reasons, I would dismiss the appeal with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs. Solicitors for the appellant:  Thorsteinssons, Vancouver.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.    