Ludco Enterprises Ltd. v. Canada,
[2001] 2 S.C.R. 1082, 2001 SCC 62  Ludco Enterprises Ltd., Brian Ludmer, David Ludmer, and Cindy Ludmer                                                                                          Appellants  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                               Respondent  Indexed as:  Ludco Enterprises Ltd. v. Canada  Neutral citation:  2001 SCC
62.  File No.:  27320.  2001:  March 19; 2001:  September 28.  Present:  Gonthier, Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache, Binnie,
Arbour and LeBel JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Income tax – Deductions – Interest – Legal test for
interest deductibility  – Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .),
s. 20(1) (c)(i).  Income tax – Deductions – Interest – Taxpayers
seeking deduction of interest paid on borrowed money used to purchase shares in
foreign companies – Taxpayers receiving $600,000 in dividends and incurring $6
million in interest costs during period shares held in foreign companies –
Whether interest costs deductible – Whether money borrowed “used for the
purpose of earning income” – Concepts of “purpose” and “income” – Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), s. 20(1) (c)(i).  Income tax – Deductions – Interest – Corporate
taxpayer seeking deduction of interest paid on borrowed money used to purchase
shares in foreign companies – Shares disposed of in rollover transaction –
Whether taxpayer entitled to deduct interest costs incurred after rollover
transaction – Whether taxpayer established link between original eligible use
property and current eligible use property – Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985,
c. 1 (5th Supp .), s. 20(1) (c)(i).  Costs – Special costs – Revenue Canada denying
taxpayers’ interest deductions and aggressively pressing its case against
taxpayers – Revenue Canada’s reassessment set aside –  Whether special costs
should be awarded – Supreme Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-26, s. 47 .  Two foreign companies operated investment funds
carefully structured to avoid the application of the Foreign Accrual Property
Income (“FAPI”) rules and to provide other tax advantages to investors. Between
September 1977 and June 1979,  L, the President and sole shareholder of the
corporate appellant (“Ludco”), purchased shares in the foreign companies on
behalf of Ludco and the individual appellants, investing approximately $7.5
million using $6.5 million in borrowed funds.  In 1983, Ludco disposed of the
shares in the foreign companies along with other assets to a wholly owned
subsidiary of Ludco for their fair market value and in accordance with the
rollover provisions in s. 85  of the Income Tax Act . It received
both interest-earning and non-interest-earning assets as consideration.  In
1985, when the FAPI rules eliminated the tax benefits of the type of off-shore
investment in issue, the appellants disposed of their shares and earned capital
gains of approximately $9.2 million. In the eight years the appellants held
shares in the foreign companies, they received approximately $600,000 in dividends
and incurred approximately $6 million in interest charges.  For the taxation
years 1981 to 1985, the appellants deducted their interest costs against other
reported income pursuant to s. 20(1) (c)(i) of the Income Tax Act . 
They were reassessed and the deductions were disallowed.  The Minister of
National Revenue took the position that the amount borrowed had not been “used
for the purpose of earning income from a business or property” as stipulated in
s. 20(1) (c)(i), but to defer taxes and convert income into capital
gains.  The Tax Court of Canada, the Federal Court, Trial Division, and the
majority of the Federal Court of Appeal all upheld the Minister’s
reassessments.  Held:  The appeal
should be allowed.  The interest costs were deductible under s. 20(1) (c)(i)
of the Income Tax Act .  Per Gonthier,
Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache, Binnie and Arbour JJ.:  Whether a taxpayer’s
purpose in making an investment falls within the ambit of s. 20(1) (c)(i)
of the Income Tax Act  is a question of mixed fact and law.  Determining
and applying the proper test under s. 20  is a question of law.  In this
case, since the trial judge did not apply the correct legal test to determine
the appellants’ purpose, this Court may interfere with his finding in this
regard.  The use of the borrowed money in this case complies
with the  requirements expressed  in s. 20(1) (c)(i), including the
requirement that the borrowed money be “used for the purpose of earning
income”.  A determination of whether borrowed money has been put to an eligible
use requires a characterization of the use of the borrowed funds and of the
taxpayer’s purpose in using the funds.  Here, the borrowed funds were directly
used to purchase shares in the foreign companies, so the focus of the inquiry
is whether the taxpayers’ purpose in so using the funds was to earn income
within the meaning of s. 20(1) (c)(i).  The requisite test to determine the purpose for
interest deductibility under s. 20(1) (c)(i) is whether, considering
all the circumstances, the taxpayer had a reasonable expectation of income at
the time the investment was made.  When the modern rule of statutory
interpretation is applied, only the reasonable expectation of income test is
consistent with the wording of s. 20(1) (c)(i).  Although many
courts have simply adopted the bona fide purpose test, it is not
supported by the principles of statutory interpretation, especially as applied
in our recent tax law jurisprudence.  Nor does the text of s. 20(1) (c)(i)
indicate that the requisite purpose must be the exclusive, primary or dominant
purpose, or that multiple purposes are to be somehow ranked in importance in
order to determine the taxpayer’s “real” purpose.  Absent a sham, window
dressing or other vitiating circumstances, a taxpayer’s ancillary purpose may
be nonetheless a bona fide objective of his or her investment, equally
capable of providing the requisite purpose for interest deductibility.  For the purposes of s. 20(1) (c)(i),
“income”  refers to income subject to tax, not net income.  This definition of
income is more consistent with the objective of the interest deductibility
provision, which is to create an incentive to accumulate capital with the
potential to produce income by allowing taxpayers to deduct interest costs
associated with its acquisition.  Absent  vitiating circumstances, courts
should not be concerned with the sufficiency of the income expected or
received.  Although the income earned in this case was relatively nominal
compared to the capital gains realized and interest deductions sought, an
“economic realities” view of the investments is not appropriate as it would
stray from the express terms of s. 20(1) (c)(i) and supplement the
provision with extraneous policy concerns.  Here,  the requisite purpose was
present.  Although earning income was not the principal factor that motivated 
L to invest in the foreign companies, he anticipated the receipt of dividend
income and the objective documentary evidence indicates that the appellants had
a reasonable expectation of earning income.  Furthermore, dividend income was
actually received.  The purchases of the shares were genuine investments and
the amount of dividends actually paid cannot be characterized as window
dressing or sham.  The disposition by Ludco of its shares in the foreign
companies to its subsidiary in 1983 did not affect its ability to deduct the
interest costs.  Ludco met the burden of establishing the necessary linkage
between the original eligible use property and the current eligible use property. 
Although Ludco initially received a mix of income-earning and
non-income-earning assets as consideration for the shares in the foreign
companies, the value of the income-earning assets exceeded the amount of the
borrowed money. In these circumstances, the income-producing replacement
property can be linked to the entire amount of the loan and it can be said that
the interest charges were “wholly applicable” to the source of the income. 
Consequently, the entire amount of the interest payment continued to be
deductible after the rollover occurred.  This is not an appropriate case for an order for
special costs pursuant to s. 47  of the Supreme Court Act .  Although
the Crown aggressively pressed its case against the appellants, there is no
substance to the appellants’ claims of abuse and misconduct.  Per LeBel
J.:  Subject to comments made on the interpretation of tax statutes
in the companion case of Singleton v. Canada, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 1046, 2001
SCC 61, there is agreement with the disposition of this appeal. Cases Cited  By Iacobucci J.  Referred to:  Singleton
v. Canada, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 1046, 2001 SCC 61; Bronfman
Trust v. The Queen, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32; Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd.
(Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27; Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen,
[1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695; Canada v.
Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312; Québec (Communauté urbaine) v. Corp.
Notre-Dame de Bon-Secours, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 3; Friesen v. Canada,
[1995] 3 S.C.R. 103; Schwartz v. Canada, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 254; Alberta
(Treasury Branches) v. M.N.R., [1996] 1 S.C.R. 963; 65302 British
Columbia Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 804; Will-Kare Paving &
Contracting Ltd. v. Canada, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 915, 2000 SCC 36; Royal Bank
of Canada v. Sparrow Electric Corp., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411; Canderel Ltd.
v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 147; Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999]
3 S.C.R. 622; Neuman v. M.N.R., [1998] 1 S.C.R. 770; Hickman Motors
Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336;  Duha Printers (Western) Ltd. v.
Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 795; Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada,
[1998] 2 S.C.R. 298; Spire Freezers Ltd. v. Canada, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 391,
2001 SCC 11; Backman v. Canada, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 367, 2001 SCC 10; Moldowan
v. The Queen, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 480; Mark Resources Inc. v. The Queen,
93 D.T.C. 1004; Tennant v. M.N.R., [1996] 1 S.C.R. 305.  By LeBel J.  Referred to:  Singleton v. Canada, [2001] 2 S.C.R.
1046, 2001 SCC 61.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income
Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 9 ,
18(1) (b), 20(1) (c)(i), 85 , 96 .  Supreme Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-26, s. 47 .   Authors Cited  Driedger, Elmer A. Construction
of Statutes, 2nd ed. Toronto: Butterworths, 1983.  Krishna, Vern. The Fundamentals
of Canadian Income Tax, 6th ed. Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 2000.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal
(1999), 240 N.R. 70, 99 D.T.C. 5153, [1999] 3 C.T.C. 601, [1999] F.C.J. No. 402
(QL), affirming a decision of the Federal Court, Trial Division (1997), 139
F.T.R. 241, 98 D.T.C. 6045, [1997] F.C.J. No. 1707 (QL), affirming a decision
of the Tax Court of Canada, 93 D.T.C. 1351, [1993] 2 C.T.C. 2494, [1993] T.C.J.
No. 1 (QL), dismissing the plaintiffs’ appeal from the reassessment made under
the Income Tax Act  for the 1981-1985 taxation years.  Appeal allowed.  Guy Du Pont,
François Barette and Robert Raizenne, for the appellants.  Pierre Cossette and
Sophie-Lyne Lefebvre, for the respondent.  The judgment of Gonthier, Iacobucci, Major,
Bastarache, Binnie and Arbour JJ. was delivered by  Iacobucci J. –  I.  Introduction  1                                  
In this appeal, we are asked to decide whether interest charges incurred
with respect to money the appellants borrowed to purchase shares in two foreign
companies are deductible from their income from other sources pursuant to s.
20(1) (c)(i) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .).  2                                  
The appeal was heard at the same time as Singleton v. Canada,
[2001] 2 S.C.R. 1046, 2001 SCC 61, reasons in which are being released
concurrently herewith.  The main issue in both cases is the same:  whether the
money borrowed by the taxpayers was “used for the purpose of earning income
from a business or property” within the meaning of s. 20(1) (c)(i) of the
Income Tax Act .  However, the resolution of this issue requires a
characterization of both the “use” of borrowed funds and the “purpose” of the
use (see Bronfman Trust v. The Queen, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32, at p. 46), and
it is at this point that the inquiry in the two appeals diverges.  In Singleton,
the Court is asked to characterize the “use” of the borrowed funds, whereas in
the present appeal we are primarily concerned with the proper characterization
of the taxpayer’s “purpose” in using the borrowed money.  3                                  
In my view, the requisite use and purpose were present in the
circumstances of this case, and the requirements for interest deductibility
under s. 20(1) (c)(i) were met.  Consequently, I would allow the appeal
for substantially the same reasons given by Létourneau J.A. in dissent at the
Federal Court of Appeal.  II.  Facts  A.  The
Companies 4                                  
The two companies at issue in this case, Justinian Corporation S.A.
(“Justinian”) and Augustus Corporation S.A. (“Augustus”), operated investment
funds that were carefully structured to avoid the application of the Foreign
Accrual Property Income rules (the “FAPI” rules) and to provide other tax
advantages to investors such as deferral of taxes and the conversion of income
into capital gains.  It was the policy of Justinian and Augustus (together the
“Companies”) to invest in debt-securities and reinvest almost all profits, 
retaining only a relatively small portion for the purpose of dividend
distribution.  In the eight years the appellants held shares in the Companies,
they received approximately $600,000 in dividends, but incurred approximately
$6  million in interest charges.  After the FAPI rules were amended to
eliminate the tax advantages of these investment funds, the appellants disposed
of their shares and earned capital gains of approximately $9.2 million.  5                                  
By way of background, it is useful to outline the taxation
environment within which the Companies were set up.  A document prepared in
September 1976 by the Montreal law firm, Verchère & Gauthier, entitled
“Memorandum Respecting the Establishment of a Non-Resident Investment
Organisation for Canadian Investors”, explained that in 1976 the FAPI rules
were implemented to eliminate some foreign vehicles for tax deferral and
savings, such as foreign-based family investment corporations or trusts.  Under
the new rules, passive income of closely held foreign holding companies and
trusts was attributed to Canadian shareholders or beneficiaries in the year it
was earned, even if not distributed.  However, it remained open to Canadians to
invest in widely held foreign investment vehicles without incurring current
taxation on reinvested income provided that the interest of the Canadian
investor was less than 10 percent.  The Companies were conceived, and their
operations planned, in light of these Canadian income tax laws and the proposal
for a new investment vehicle contained in the aforementioned memorandum.  6                                  
For our purposes, the Companies can be treated as essentially the same
entity.  Both were incorporated in Panama in 1977, and operated from
headquarters in the Bahamas.  Therefore, as non-residents of Canada, during the
material times, the income of the Companies was not taxable under the Income
Tax Act .  The business activities of the Companies consisted of investing
in Canadian and US withholding tax-exempt debt securities or fixed income
securities.  In order to circumvent the FAPI rules, the Companies’ constituting
documents restricted the acquisition and redemption of shares so that no one
investor could hold more than a  9.9 percent share interest in the Companies.  7                                  
A 1977 document prepared by Verchère & Gauthier, entitled
“Memorandum Respecting the Formation and Operation of the Altanational Bond
Fund” summarized the tax features of an investment in what became the Companies
in this way:  a)    the Fund would not be subject to any
Canadian income tax either with respect to interest income or gains on its
sales of Fund assets;  b)    the Canadian shareholders would not be
subject to any income tax with respect to their investment in the Fund except
to the extent of dividends received or proceeds of disposition of their shares;  c)    proceeds of dispositions of the shares by
the Canadian shareholders, whether by way of sale or redemption, would give
rise to taxation as capital gains.  8                                  
The Companies’ Explanatory Memoranda set out their investment strategy
and dividend policy.  Initially, in 1977, the Companies’ strategy was to invest
in debt securities and “accumulate earnings for reinvestment”.  The dividend
policy granted the Boards of Directors a broad discretion to declare and pay a
dividend at any time if that was in the best interests of the Companies and
their shareholders.  In 1978, the Companies’ strategy was modified slightly to
“accumulate the major portion of its earnings for reinvestment”.  Furthermore,
the dividend policy was changed to indicate that “in each year that the Fund
has earnings it is anticipated that the Board of Directors of the Fund will
declare and pay a dividend to shareholders of some portion of the Fund’s
earnings”.  By 1981, the dividend policy reflected the practice of the
Companies since 1977.  It provided that, “in the past, it has been the policy
of the Board of Directors of the Fund to declare and pay a dividend to
shareholders for years in which the Fund has earnings, and it is anticipated
that the Board of Directors will continue to follow this policy”.  9                                  
In fact, beginning in December 1978, the Companies did declare an annual
dividend of US$1 per share for each year of their existence.  B.  The
Investments  10                              
In addition to the tax advantages presented, an investment in the
Companies was made attractive by the fact that the funds were managed by a Mr.
Ronald Meade, whose expertise and success in this area was renowned.  One of
the investors who became interested in the Companies was a businessman and real
estate developer named Irving Ludmer.  Mr. Ludmer was the President and sole
shareholder of the corporate appellant, Ludco Enterprises Ltd. (“Ludco”).  He
is also the father of the individual appellants in this case (the “Ludmer
children”).  Mr. Ludmer was introduced to the opportunity to invest in the
Companies by a former business colleague named Arnold Steinberg.  Mr. Steinberg
had been a client of Mr. Meade and communicated to Mr. Ludmer his confidence
that an investment in the Companies would be worthwhile.  11                              
Between September 1977 and June 1979, Mr. Ludmer entered into five
separate transactions whereby he purchased shares in the Companies on behalf of
Ludco and the Ludmer children.  In October 1977, the Ludmer children acquired a
total of 10,000 shares of Justinian at US$100 per share.  In July 1978, they
doubled their holdings.  The total acquisition cost of their investment was
$2.2 million.  In July and December 1978, Ludco invested a total of $2.3
million in Augustus.  Approximately eighty percent of these four investments
were financed with funds borrowed from Canadian chartered banks in different
loans at floating rates of prime plus 1 percent or 3/4 percent.  The carrying
cost of the appellants’ loans increased from about 10 percent in late 1977,
through 14 percent in 1979 to a peak of 20 percent in early 1981 before
stabilizing at approximately 12 percent in 1983 until the disposition of their
shares in 1985.  In the fifth of the appellants’ transactions, in June 1979
Ludco invested $3 million in Justinian.  All the funds for this acquisition
were borrowed through a long-term mortgage on a Ludco-owned shopping centre
property with a fixed interest rate of 11.5 percent.  In the result, the appellants
invested approximately $7.5 million to acquire shares in the Companies, having
borrowed a total of $6.5 million to finance their acquisitions.  12                              
Mr. Ludmer testified at trial and explained the appellants’ reasons for
and expectations in investing in the Companies.  He sought no professional
advice before deciding to invest.  His decision was driven principally by Mr.
Meade’s previous performance, but other factors included the tax advantages and
rumours concerning foreign exchange controls.  Mr. Ludmer also read the
dividend policy section of the Explanatory Memorandum and anticipated the
receipt of dividend income.  Mr. Ludmer stated clearly that the appellants
would not have invested in the Companies with borrowed funds if he had known
that interest costs were not deductible from income.   C.  The
Rollover  13                              
On May 12, 1983, the appellant Ludco disposed of a group of  investment
assets, including the shares in the Companies, to 2154-7203 Québec Inc., a
wholly owned subsidiary of Ludco.  This disposition was done in accordance with
the rollover provisions in s. 85 of the Act.  The assets were disposed of for
their fair market value of $12,685,000.  Ludco received as consideration for
the disposition both interest earning and non-interest earning assets. 
Specifically, Ludco received  two non-interest bearing notes (one for
$1,780,000 and the other for $5,600,000) totalling $7,380,000, a promissory
note in the principal amount of $605,000 and bearing interest at the prime rate
of the Mercantile Bank of Canada plus 1 percent, and 94 Class B preferred
shares of 2154-7203 Québec Inc. providing an annual fixed dividend of 9 percent
and a redemption value of $4,700,000.  14                              
At the time of the disposition, the market value of the shares in the
Companies totalled $8,645,715,  Ludco’s outstanding debt attributable to the
shares in the Companies totalled $4,800,000, and the new income-producing
assets received as consideration in the rollover totalled $5,305,000.  15                              
On the day the rollover occurred, Ludco pledged the 94 Class B preferred
shares to Ludco’s parent company, 109395 Canada Inc., to guarantee all
indebtedness owing by Ludco to its parent company.  At the same time, Ludco
pledged the non-interest bearing promissory note of $1,780,000 to the
Mercantile Bank of Canada as security for the loan used to purchase the shares
of the Companies.  16                              
On September 6, 1985, the non-interest bearing notes were exchanged for
Class D preferred shares of 2154-7203 Québec Inc. providing annual dividends of
8 percent.  D.  The
Share Redemption and the Tax Consequences  17                              
In 1984, the FAPI rules were amended to discourage the type of off-shore
investment at issue in this case by eliminating the tax benefits and advantages
it generated.  These amendments, known as the “FAPI  amendments”, led to the
winding up of the Companies’ businesses.  18                              
In 1985, upon the coming into force of the FAPI amendments, the
taxpayers disposed of their shares and realized a capital gain of $9.24
million.  Over the eight years during which the shares had been held by the
appellants, they received some $600,000 in dividends.  Over the same period
they incurred interest costs of $6 million.  19                              
For the taxation years 1981-1985, the appellants deducted their interest
costs against other reported income pursuant to s. 20(1) (c)(i) of the Income
Tax Act .  In 1986 and 1987, the Minister of National Revenue reassessed the
appellants and disallowed those deductions.  The Minister took the position that
the amount borrowed had not been used “for the purpose of earning income from a
business or property” as stipulated in s. 20(1) (c)(i); rather the real
purpose of the investment was to defer taxes and convert income into capital
gains.  20                              
Both the documentary evidence and the testimony of Revenue Canada
personnel indicated that Revenue Canada’s policy was to allow the deduction of
interest on money borrowed to purchase shares even if no dividend was paid to
the investor.  In particular, written statements of Revenue Canada policy
indicated that taxpayers could deduct interest paid in respect of funds used to
purchase shares that were precluded from paying taxable dividends, just as they
could shares in speculative stock that did not actually realize income.  21                              
The Tax Court of Canada confirmed the Minister’s reassessments and
disallowed the deduction.  The Federal Court, Trial Division, and a majority of
the Federal Court of Appeal also disallowed the deduction.  Létourneau J.A., in
dissent, would have allowed the deduction.  III.  Relevant
Statutory Provisions  22                              
Section 20(1) (c)(i) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.
1 (5th Supp .), provides:  20. (1) Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a),
(b) and (h), in computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year
from a business or property, there may be deducted such of the following
amounts as are wholly applicable to that source or such part of the following
amounts as may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto:                                                                     . . .  (c) an amount paid in the year or payable in respect of the year
(depending on the method regularly followed by the taxpayer in computing the
taxpayer’s income), pursuant to a legal obligation to pay interest on  (i) borrowed money used for the purpose of earning income from a
business or property (other than borrowed money used to acquire property the
income from which would be exempt or to acquire a life insurance policy),                                                                     . . .  or a reasonable amount in respect thereof, whichever is the lesser; IV.  Judgments
Below  A.  Tax
Court of Canada, 93 D.T.C. 1351  23                              
In determining whether the interest charges were deductible in this
case, Tremblay J.T.C.C. interpreted the term “income” in s. 20(1) (c)(i)
to mean profit or net income.  He reviewed the evidence in detail and found
that the appellants’ interest expenses far exceeded their dividend earnings,
both actual and anticipated.  Accordingly, he held that the appellants did not
have a reasonable expectation of earning net dividend income from their investment,
and hence the interest charges in question were not deductible.  B.  Federal
Court, Trial Division, 98 D.T.C. 6045  24                              
An appeal from the decision of the Tax Court of Canada was heard by way
of trial de novo.  Lutfy J. interpreted s. 20(1) (c)(i) as
requiring a reasonable expectation of net income before interest deductibility
could be triggered under that provision.  After a comprehensive review of the
evidence, Lutfy J. accepted that, at the time of their initial investments in
the Companies, the appellants did have a reasonable expectation of receiving
dividends.  However, they never expected their dividend income to exceed their
interest expenses.  Moreover, after reviewing the case law, Lutfy J. concluded
that in order to meet this requirement the appellants must satisfy the court
that their bona fide or true purpose in making the investments at issue
was to earn net income.  Instead, Lutfy J. concluded that the appellants’ true
purpose was to defer taxes and convert income into capital gains.  Therefore,
Lutfy J. dismissed the appeal and confirmed the Minister’s reassessment.  C.  Federal
Court of Appeal (1999), 240 N.R. 70  25                              
I prefer to deal with the dissenting reasons of Létourneau J.A. prior to
those of Marceau J.A. and Desjardins J.A. since the latter two often refer to
the position advanced by Létourneau J.A. in their reasons.  1.  Létourneau J.A. (Dissenting)  26                              
Létourneau J.A., in dissent, analysed the arguments respecting s. 20(1) (c)(i)
in two parts: first, the requisite intention to earn income, and second, the
assertion that the term “income” refers to net income or profit.  In regard to
the requisite intention to earn income, Létourneau J.A. reviewed the case law
and acknowledged that courts have adopted a bona fide or true purpose
test to determine whether interest charges are deductible under s. 20(1) (c)(i). 
He noted, however, that a difficulty arises in the case of an investment in the
form of shares or debt securities because of the fact that such an investor is
always pursuing a dual purpose.  In resolving this difficulty, Létourneau J.A.
rejected the introduction of a dominant purpose test into s. 20(1) (c)(i)
as being unsupported by the text of the Act, contrary to the objective of the
provision and the evidence of Parliamentary intention and likely to create
uncertainty and adversely affect the business community.  Instead, he concluded
that it is sufficient for the investor to have a reasonable expectation of
income when investing borrowed money. 27                              
Létourneau J.A. also rejected the proposition that “income” in s. 20(1) (c)(i)
refers to net income or profit.  In his view, to the extent that the purpose of
the use of the borrowed amount was to acquire or increase capital for the
purpose of gross income, the essential condition of s. 20(1) (c)(i) is
met.  28                              
In respect of the s. 85  rollover of Ludco’s shares in the Companies,
Létourneau J.A. held that the acquisition of the taxable income-producing
replacement property can be traced to the entire amount of the balance of the
loan at the time of the transfer.  Therefore, the appellant Ludco did not lose
the benefit of the interest deduction when it replaced its original source of
income with another source that also generated taxable income.  Accordingly,
Létourneau J.A. would have allowed the appeal and permitted the deduction of
interest charges in this case.  2.  Desjardins J.A.  29                              
After noting that the case law refers to the taxpayer’s real or true
purpose in matters of interest deductibility under s. 20(1) (c)(i),
Desjardins J.A. agreed with Létourneau J.A.’s rejection of a dominant purpose
test.  Furthermore, she stated that she shared Létourneau J.A.’s views that a
taxpayer need only have had a reasonable expectation of income at the moment
the investment was made, and that the borrowed money must have been used to
acquire property for the purpose of deriving gross, not net, income.  However,
Desjardins J.A. went on to find that the evidence in this case clearly
established that the appellants’ real purpose when they borrowed the money was
to make capital gains.  She held that because receiving dividends was not the
real objective of the appellants’ investments in the Companies, the interest
paid is not deductible under s. 20(1) (c)(i).  3.  Marceau J.A.  30                              
Marceau J.A. admitted to having some difficulty with the introduction of
a dominant purpose test into s. 20(1) (c)(i).  However, in his view
Parliament clearly intended for interest deductibility to be triggered only
where the taxpayer’s actual or true intention was to earn income.  In addition,
it was Marceau J.A.’s view that the trial judge made a finding of fact that the
appellants’ true purpose in investing in the Companies as structured was to
defer tax and transform the income into capital gains.  In his view, this
finding of fact is not contradicted by the evidence and therefore is not
subject to appellate interference.  Accordingly, Marceau J.A. concluded that
the statutory requirements for the deduction of interest were not met in this
case and that the Minister’s reassessment should be upheld.  V.  Issues
and Submissions of the Parties  31                              
1.    What is the legal test for interest deductibility under s. 20(1) (c)(i)?  2.    Are the interest costs incurred by the
appellants deductible in this case?   3.    Should special costs be awarded in this
case?  32                              
The appellants submit that the lower courts erred in two ways: first, by
introducing a dominant or true purpose test into s. 20(1) (c)(i) and,
second, by interpreting the term “income” in that provision to mean net income
or profit.  The appellants state that these errors lead to an interpretation of
s. 20(1) (c)(i) that is impractical and contrary to the plain meaning and
objective of the provision.  The appellants argue that the use of the borrowed
money in this case complies with all of the requirements expressed in s. 20(1) (c)(i)
and, in particular, with the requirement that the borrowed money was used for
the purpose of earning income.  They also seek special costs for what they
characterize as an abuse of Revenue Canada’s assessment power in this case.  33                              
The respondent submits that in order for interest charges to be
deductible it must be the taxpayer’s actual, true or bona fide purpose
to use the funds to earn income and the taxpayer must have a reasonable
expectation that the borrowing transaction would yield net income.  The
respondent argues that, in the present context, the trial judge’s
identification of the appellants’ true purpose was a finding of fact supported
by the evidence and therefore not subject to appellate interference.  In the
result, she submits that the interest deductions at issue in this case do not
meet the statutory requirements of s. 20(1) (c)(i).  The respondent also
argues that, even if this Court concludes that the interest charges associated
with the initial investments are deductible, Ludco lost the ability to deduct
interests charges when it rolled over its shares in the Companies.  The
respondent submits that during the rollover transaction there was a commingling
of funds and that Ludco failed to meet its onus to trace the borrowed funds to
a current eligible use.  Finally, the respondent argues that there should be no
award of special costs in this case as there is no evidence of misconduct by
the respondent in connection with the litigation.  VI.  Analysis  A.  The
Preliminary Issue: Fact or Law?  34                              
As a preliminary matter, it was argued that the trial judge made a
finding of fact when he determined that the appellants’ true purpose in making
the investments at issue was not to earn income but to defer taxes and acquire
capital gains.  It was further argued that this Court is prevented from
revisiting the trial judge’s finding in this regard by the principle that,
absent a palpable and overriding error, findings of fact made at trial are not
subject to appellate court interference.  However, whether or not a taxpayer’s
purpose in making an investment falls within the ambit of s. 20(1)(c)(i)
of the Act is properly viewed as a question of mixed fact and law.  For the
reasons set out below, the main issue in this appeal is to determine and apply
the proper test under s. 20.  That is a question of law.  Moreover, in my view,
with respect, the trial judge did not apply the correct legal test to determine
the appellants’ purpose in this case.  Therefore, it is open to this Court to
interfere with the finding of the trial judge in this regard.  35                              
The identification of the correct legal test in this case centres on a
question of statutory interpretation.  As a result, before discussing the legal
test for interest deductibility under s. 20(1) (c)(i), and whether
interest costs are deductible in this case, it may be helpful to review briefly
the principles of statutory interpretation that apply in this case.  B.  Principles
of Statutory Interpretation  36                              
The modern rule of statutory interpretation was put succinctly by E. A.
Driedger in Construction of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983), at p. 87:  Today there is only one principle or approach,
namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their
grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the
object of the Act, and the intention of  Parliament. . . .  37                              
This passage from Driedger “best encapsulates” the preferred
approach to statutory interpretation: Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at paras. 21 and 23.  This
is the case for the interpretation of any statute, and it is noteworthy that
Driedger’s famous passage has been cited with approval by our Court on numerous
occasions both in the non-tax and in the tax context: for the
latter, see Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at p. 578, per Estey J.;  Symes v.
Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at p. 744, per Iacobucci J., and at p.
806, per L’Heureux-Dubé J.; Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R.
312, at p. 326; Québec (Communauté urbaine) v. Corp. Notre-Dame de
Bon-Secours, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 3, at p. 17; Friesen v. Canada, [1995]
3 S.C.R. 103, at para. 10, per Major J.; Schwartz v. Canada,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 254, at para. 56, per La Forest J.; Alberta (Treasury
Branches) v. M.N.R., [1996] 1 S.C.R. 963, at para. 14, per Cory J.; 65302
British Columbia Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 804, at para. 5, per
Bastarache J., and at para. 50, per Iacobucci J.; and Will-Kare
Paving & Contracting Ltd. v. Canada, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 915, 2000 SCC 36,
at para. 32, per Major J., and at para. 50, per Binnie J.  38                              
Furthermore, when interpreting the Income Tax Act  courts
must be mindful of their role as distinct from that of Parliament.  In the
absence of clear statutory language, judicial innovation is undesirable: Royal
Bank of Canada v. Sparrow Electric Corp., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411, at para.
112.  Rather, the promulgation of new rules of tax law must be left to
Parliament: Canderel Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 147, at para. 41.  As McLachlin J. (as she then was) recently explained in Shell
Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 622, at para. 43:  The Act is a complex statute through which Parliament
seeks to balance a myriad of principles.  This Court has consistently held that
courts must therefore be cautious before finding within the clear provisions of
the Act an unexpressed legislative intention. . . .  Finding
unexpressed legislative intentions under the guise of purposive interpretation
runs the risk of upsetting the balance Parliament has attempted to strike in
the Act. [Citations omitted.]  See also Antosko, supra, at p. 328.  Having said this,
it is within the jurisdiction of courts to interpret the rules enacted by
Parliament, including the elucidation of otherwise undefined concepts such as
“income” or “profit”: see Canderel, supra, at para. 42. 39                              
In addition, given that the Income Tax Act  has many specific
anti-avoidance provisions and rules, it follows that courts should not be quick
to embellish the provisions of the Act in response to concerns about tax
avoidance when it is open to Parliament to be precise and specific with respect
to any mischief to be prevented: Neuman v. M.N.R., [1998] 1 S.C.R. 770,
at para. 63, per Iacobucci J.  To do otherwise would be to fail to give
appropriate weight to the well-established principle that, absent a provision
to the contrary, taxpayers are entitled to arrange their affairs for the sole
purpose of achieving a favourable position regarding taxation: see Stubart,
supra, at p. 540, per Wilson J., and at p. 557, per Estey
J.; Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336, at para. 8, per
McLachlin J.; Duha Printers (Western) Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R.
795, at para. 88, per Iacobucci J.;  Neuman, supra, at
para. 63, per Iacobucci J.; Shell Canada, supra, at para.
46, per McLachlin J.  40                              
With these principles in mind, I turn to consider the legal test for
interest deductibility under s. 20(1) (c)(i).  C.  The
Legal Test for Interest Deductibility Under Section 20(1)(c)(i)  (1)   Introduction  41                              
The deductibility of interest under s. 20(1) (c)(i) of the Income
Tax Act  has given rise to considerable litigation and has been the topic of
much legal commentary, as pointed out by the parties.  Many of the features of
the interest deductibility provision are matters of settled law.  However, as
explained below, the appeal at bar raises two novel issues related to the
concepts of “purpose” and “income” contained within s. 20(1) (c)(i).  42                              
Recently, in Shell Canada, supra, at para. 28, McLachlin
J., writing for the Court, described the four elements of s. 20(1) (c)(i)
that must be present before interest can be deducted:   43                              
The first two elements are not in dispute here.  As noted above, the
focus of the inquiry in this case is clearly on the third element, namely,
whether the borrowed money was used for the purpose of earning non-exempt
income from business or property.  44                              
In this connection, Dickson C.J., writing for the Court in Bronfman
Trust, supra, closely analysed the third element of the interest
deductibility provision and classified the various possible uses of borrowed
money as: eligible and ineligible, original and current, and direct and
indirect.  Dickson C.J. outlined the inquiry into the third element at pp.
45-46:    45                              
In short, a determination of whether borrowed money has been put to an
eligible use requires a characterization of the use of the borrowed funds and a
characterization of the taxpayer’s purpose in using the funds in a particular
manner.  Dickson C.J. went on to deny the interest deduction in that case on the
ground that, properly characterized, the taxpayer’s “use” of borrowed funds was
a directly ineligible one.  Thus, the law relating to the matter of the
taxpayer’s “purpose” was not fully elaborated on in that case.  46                              
In the case at bar, and in contrast to Singleton, supra,
there is no dispute as to the particular use that the borrowed funds were put
to:  they were directly used to purchase shares in the Companies.  Rather, the
focus of the inquiry is on whether the taxpayers’ purpose in so using
the funds was to earn income within the meaning of s. 20(1) (c)(i). 
Consequently, in the present appeal, the Court is asked for the first time to
explicate the law on two of the central concepts in s. 20(1) (c)(i):
“purpose” and “income”.  (2)   When is Borrowed Money “Used for the
Purpose of Earning Income” Within the Meaning of Section 20(1) (c)(i)?  47                              
In this case, three different tests have been advanced for determining
whether the requisite income earning purpose is present; they are:  the bona
fide purpose test, the dominant purpose test, and the reasonable
expectation of income  test.  In several decisions, including those of the
lower courts in the case at bar,  courts have simply adopted the bona fide
purpose test on the strength of some obiter dicta by Dickson C.J. in Bronfman
Trust, supra.  48                              
It is worth repeating what Dickson C.J. in Bronfman Trust, supra,
stated on this point.  At p. 54, the former Chief Justice explained:   49                              
It appears to me that Dickson C.J.’s suggestion that a bona fide
purpose test should apply was made as a passing comment and did not result from
an analysis of the text of the provision.  In my opinion, Dickson C.J.’s
comments fall short of elevating the bona fide purpose test to a rule of
law.  Indeed, as discussed below, the importation of the bona fide
purpose test into s. 20(1) (c)(i) is not supported by the principles of
statutory interpretation outlined above, especially as applied in our recent
tax law jurisprudence.  50                              
With respect to the plain meaning of s. 20(1) (c)(i), the
only express requirement related to “purpose” is that borrowed money must have
been “used for the purpose of earning income”.  Apart from the use of the
definite article “the”, which on closer analysis is hardly conclusive of the
issue before us, nothing in the text of the provision indicates that the
requisite purpose must be the exclusive, primary or dominant purpose, or that
multiple purposes are to be somehow ranked in importance in order to determine
the taxpayer’s “real” purpose.  Therefore, it is perfectly consistent with the
language of s. 20(1) (c)(i) that a taxpayer who uses borrowed money to
make an investment for more than one purpose may be entitled to deduct interest
charges provided that one of those purposes is to earn income.  51                              
In this connection, the adjectives that have been heretofore used by
courts to characterize the requisite purpose in s. 20(1) (c)(i), such as
“bona fide”, “actual”, “real” or “true”, are to my mind ultimately
useful only when describing whether the transaction at issue
was a mere sham or window dressing designed to obtain the benefit of interest
deductibility.  Absent a sham or window dressing or other vitiating
circumstances, a taxpayer’s ancillary purpose may be nonetheless a bona fide,
actual, real and true objective of his or her investment, equally capable of
providing the requisite purpose for interest deductibility in comparison with
any more important or significant primary purpose.  52                              
This approach is consistent with that taken by this Court in the context of s. 96 of the Act, the partnership losses
deductibility provision.  In order to deduct  partnership losses, a taxpayer
must establish the existence of a valid partnership by showing an intention to
carry on business in common with a view to profit.  In Continental Bank Leasing
Corp. v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 298, and Spire Freezers Ltd. v. Canada,
[2001] 1 S.C.R. 391, 2001 SCC 11, the taxpayers’ primary intention in joining a
partnership was to acquire losses deductible against income from other
sources.  However, this Court held that a taxpayer’s overriding
intention is not determinative of whether the requisite intention to form a
partnership is present.  Rather, it will be sufficient for a taxpayer to show
that there was an ancillary intention that meets the requirements of a valid
partnership: see also Backman v. Canada, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 367, 2001 SCC 10.  53                              
There are other compelling reasons to reject both the bona fide
and dominant purpose tests proposed in this case.  I note that, in this
respect, Major J. has reached a similar conclusion in Singleton, supra,
and I agree with him.  Reading such tests into s. 20(1) (c)(i)
would require a rewriting of the provision to introduce a concept of degree,
exclusivity, or primacy in the taxpayer’s purposes.  Presumably, a court would
take such an approach in response to concerns over tax avoidance.  However,
this Court has repeatedly stated that in matters of tax law, a court should
always be reluctant to engage in judicial innovation and rule making: see Sparrow
Electric, supra; Canderel, supra; and Shell Canada,
supra.  Furthermore, the application of any such test is impractical in
the context of investments in securities.  It would open the door to many
reassessments and in each case impose on taxpayers a tremendous burden to justify
that their real or dominant purpose was to earn income. 54                              
Having determined that an ancillary purpose to earn income can provide
the requisite purpose for interest deductibility, the question still remains as
to how courts should go about identifying whether the requisite purpose of
earning income is present.  What standard should be applied?  In the
interpretation of the Act, as in other areas of law, where purpose or intention
behind actions is to be ascertained, courts should objectively determine the
nature of the purpose, guided by both subjective and objective manifestations
of purpose: see Symes, supra, at p. 736; Continental Bank,
supra, at para. 45; Backman, supra, at para. 25; Spire
Freezers, supra, at para. 27.  In the result, the requisite test to
determine the purpose for interest deductibility under s. 20(1) (c)(i) is
whether, considering all the circumstances, the taxpayer had a reasonable
expectation of income at the time the investment was made.  55                              
Reasonable expectation accords with the language of purpose in the
section and provides an objective standard, apart from the taxpayer’s
subjective intention, which by itself is relevant but not conclusive.  It also
avoids many of the pitfalls of the other tests advanced and furthers the policy
objective of the interest deductibility provision aimed at capital accumulation
and investment, as discussed in the next section of these reasons.  56                              
In conclusion, of the three tests proposed in this case, in my view only
the reasonable expectation of income test is consistent with the wording of the
section in light of all of the applicable principles of statutory
interpretation.  In this respect, I agree with both Létourneau and Desjardins
JJ.A., who formed the majority at the Federal Court of Appeal on this point.  (3)   What is Income for the Purposes of
Section 20(1) (c)(i)?  57                              
The Income Tax Act  does not define the term “income”.  The Act
speaks of “net income”, “taxable income”, and income from different sources,
but it neither identifies nor describes the legal characteristics of “income”;
it only speaks of what is to be included or excluded from income.  Similarly,
tax theorists have proposed many different definitions of “income”
distinguishable by their varying degrees of inclusiveness.  The common feature
of all the definitions of income, whether derived from tax law, economic theory
or the dictionary, is that “income” is a measure of gain: see V. Krishna, The
Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax (6th ed. 2000), at pp. 97-100.  58                              
In the case at bar, both the Tax Court of Canada and the Federal Court,
Trial Division, ostensibly applied this Court’s decision in Moldowan v. The
Queen, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 480, in equating “income” with “profit”.  However,
that case was concerned not with the meaning of the term “income” as such, but
with identifying the source of income in play and, more specifically, with
differentiating between business activities as distinct from personal or hobby
activities.  It is clear that Moldowan, supra, does not stand for
the absolute proposition that “income” necessarily means “profit”.  59                              
Because it is left undefined in the Act, this Court must apply the
principles of statutory interpretation to discern what is meant by “income” in
the context of s. 20(1) (c)(i).  The plain meaning of s. 20(1) (c)(i)
does not support an interpretation of “income” as the equivalent of “profit” or
“net income”.  Nowhere in the language of the provision is a quantitative test
suggested.  Nor is there any  support in the text of the Act for an
interpretation of “income” that involves a judicial assessment of sufficiency
of income.  Such an approach would be too subjective and certainty is to be
preferred in the area of tax law.  Therefore, absent a sham or window dressing
or similar vitiating circumstances, courts should not be concerned with the
sufficiency of the income expected or received.  60                              
As noted by Létourneau J.A., Bowman J.T.C.C. (as he then was) lucidly
dealt with the argument that the word “income” in s. 20(1) (c)(i)
necessarily means “profit” in Mark Resources Inc. v. The Queen, 93
D.T.C. 1004, at p. 1015.  Most importantly, Bowman J.T.C.C. dismissed that
argument at p. 1015 in these terms:  Interest on money that is borrowed to invest in common shares, or
property, or a business or corporation is deductible because it is laid out to
earn amounts that must be included in the computation of
income.  Amounts of income such as dividends which must be included
in income under paragraphs 12(1)(j) and (k) do not cease to be
income merely because they are exceeded by the cost of their production.  61                              
I agree.  Indeed, when one looks at the immediate context in which the
term “income” appears in s. 20(1) (c)(i), it is significant that within
the provision itself the concept of “income” is used in contradistinction from
the concept of tax-exempt income.  Viewed in this context, the term “income” in
s. 20(1) (c)(i) does not refer to net income, but to income subject to
tax.  In this light, it is clear that “income” in s. 20(1) (c)(i) refers
to income generally, that is, an amount that would come into income for
taxation purposes, not just net income.  62                              
I am bolstered in this conclusion by the other evidence of
Parliamentary intention.  If Parliament had intended interest to be deductible
only in circumstances where borrowed money was used for the purpose of earning
“net income”, it could have expressly said so.  Indeed, as noted by Létourneau
J.A., in both 1981 and 1991,  amendments to the Act that would have restricted
interest deductibility to circumstances where borrowed money is used for the
purpose of making a profit were proposed but never enacted.  63                              
Furthermore, reading “income” in s. 20(1) (c)(i) to mean income
generally, as described above, is more consistent with the objective of the
interest deductibility provision.  In most circumstances, ss. 9 and 18(1)(b)
of the Act prohibit the deduction of amounts expended on account of capital. 
Section 20(1) (c)(i) is an exception to this prohibition, designed to
encourage the accumulation of capital which would produce income:  see Shell
Canada, supra, at para. 28, per McLachlin J.; Tennant v.
M.N.R., [1996] 1 S.C.R. 305, at para. 16, per Iacobucci J.;
Bronfman Trust, supra, at p. 45, per Dickson C.J.  Thus, the
object of s. 20(1) (c)(i) is to create an incentive to accumulate capital
with the potential to produce income by allowing taxpayers to deduct interest
costs associated with its acquisition.  The accumulation of income-producing
capital is seen as desirable because it creates wealth and increases the income
tax base.  It is clearly sufficient for the purpose of the provision that an
investor have a reasonable expectation of gross income as described above when
investing borrowed money.  In contrast, the incentive would be much less
effective if the investor bore the additional burden of  establishing a
reasonable expectation of net income or profit.  64                              
Finally, in defining the taxpayer’s real or true purpose by emphasizing
the relatively nominal amount of income earned in this case compared to the
capital gains realized and interest deductions sought, the respondent
effectively asks the Court to take an “economic realities” view of the
investments at issue.  However, there are limits to the economic realities
approach to the assessment of a particular transaction: see Shell Canada,
supra, at para. 39.  In particular, a court should not place so much
reliance on “economic realities” so as to cause it to stray from the express
terms of s. 20(1) (c)(i) and supplement the provision with extraneous
policy concerns that are said to form part of its purpose.  Rather, where the
provision at issue is clear and unambiguous, the court’s duty is to simply
apply its terms to the transaction at issue: see Shell Canada, supra,
at para. 43, per McLachlin J.; Continental Bank, supra, at
para. 51, per Bastarache J.; Tennant, supra, at para. 16, per
Iacobucci J.;  Antosko, supra, at pp. 326-27 and 330, per
Iacobucci J.; Friesen, supra, at para. 11, per Major J.; Alberta
(Treasury Branches), supra, at para. 15, per Cory J.  65                              
In conclusion, where a taxpayer uses borrowed money for a purpose
yielding a reasonable expectation of income from business or property as I have
described above, the interest charges incurred will fall within the ambit of s.
20(1) (c)(i) and are deductible.  D.  Application
of the Foregoing Principles: Are the Interest Charges Incurred by the       Appellants
Deductible in this Case?  (1)  Interest Charges for Initial Investments in Shares of the
Companies  66                              
The question now to be determined is whether,  in using borrowed money
to purchase shares of the Companies, the appellants had a reasonable
expectation of income?  If the answer is affirmative, and the amount of interest
paid was reasonable within the meaning of the provision, the interest charges
are deductible.  67                              
Here, the objective documentary evidence indicates that the appellants
did have a reasonable expectation of income.  Owing to the nature of the
investments and the Companies’ investment strategy, it was reasonable to expect
income would be available for distribution.  In addition, given the terms of
the dividend policy, it is clear that the appellants had a reasonable
expectation of receiving dividends.  68                              
Although earning income was not the principal factor that motivated  Mr.
Ludmer to invest in the Companies, upon reading the relevant documents he did
anticipate the receipt of dividend income.  In my view, Mr. Ludmer’s
expectation of dividend income was reasonable.  Indeed, the judge at the
Federal Court, Trial Division, came to the same conclusion at p. 6056.  69                              
Furthermore, it is notable that income was actually received in the
amount of $600,000 of dividends.  Although this amount may be small in
comparison to the capital gains realized and the interest charges incurred,
absent a sham or window dressing or similar vitiating circumstances (none of
which was argued before this Court), we are not concerned with the sufficiency
of the income expected or received.  There is no sham in this case: the
purchase of the shares was a genuine investment.  Neither can the amount of
dividends actually paid be properly characterized as window dressing.  Six
hundred thousand dollars is a significant sum and there was some expert
evidence indicating that the actual rate of return on the shares of Justinian
was within the norm of most of the companies publicly traded on the Toronto and
Montréal Stock Exchanges.  70                              
I conclude that the appellants did have a reasonable expectation of
income when they used the borrowed money to purchase shares in the Companies. 
Therefore, the requisite purpose is present in the circumstances of this case. 
Given that there is no dispute as to the first two elements of the interest deductibility
provision, it only remains to show that the fourth element has been met in this
case.  In Shell Canada, supra, at para. 34, McLachlin J.
explained that:  The fourth element – that the amount sought to be
deducted must be the actual amount paid or “a reasonable amount in respect
thereof” – has not previously been the subject of comment by this Court. It is
clear, however, from the structure of s. 20(1) (c), that the phrase
refers to the entirety of s. 20(1) (c)(i). Therefore, the taxpayer is
entitled to deduct the lesser of, (1) the actual amount paid or, (2) a
reasonable amount in respect of “an amount paid . . . pursuant to a
legal obligation to pay interest on . . . borrowed money used for the
purpose of earning income from a business or property”. . . . Where
an interest rate is established in a market of lenders and borrowers acting at
arm’s length from each other, it is generally a reasonable rate:  Mohammad
v. The Queen, 97 D.T.C. 5503 (F.C.A.), at p. 5509, per Robertson
J.A.; Canada v. Irving Oil Ltd., [1991] 1 C.T.C. 350 (F.C.A.), at p.
359, per Mahoney J.A.  71                              
In this case, the appellants borrowed the money at issue from Canadian
chartered banks at rates of between 1 percent and 3/4 percent above prime. 
There can be no argument that such rates are reasonable within the meaning
ascribed to that word by McLachlin J. in Shell Canada, supra. 
Accordingly the fourth element is met in this case.  72                              
Therefore, I conclude that the interest charges incurred in respect of
the initial purchase of the shares are deductible under s. 20(1) (c)(i).  (2)  Interest Charges and the Rollover Investments  73                              
It remains to be determined whether the appellant Ludco is entitled to
deduct the interest charges incurred following the May 1983 disposition of its
shares in the Companies to 2154-7203 Québec Inc.  74                              
This issue is resolved primarily by the application of the principles
set out in Tennant, supra.  In that case, the issue was under
what conditions a taxpayer could deduct interest charges pursuant to s. 20(1) (c)(i)
after a s. 85  rollover transaction.  The Court concluded that “it is implicit
in the principles outlined in Bronfman Trust that the ability to deduct
interest is not lost simply because the taxpayer sells the income- producing
property, as long as the taxpayer reinvests in an eligible use property” (para.
20).  The Court held at para. 25 that:  As long as the taxpayer establishes a link between the current shares,
the proceeds of disposition of the original shares, and the money that was
borrowed to acquire the original eligible use property, it is in keeping with
the interest deduction provision to permit the taxpayer to continue to deduct
the interest payments for the full amount of the original loan, regardless of
the value or cost of the newly acquired shares.  Of course, where the taxpayer
reinvests only a portion of the proceeds of disposition of the original
eligible use property, then interest can only be deducted for the relevant
portion of the loan.  Therefore, on
the facts of this case, the appellant Ludco must establish a link between the
Class B preferred shares and the interest-bearing note (the “current eligible
use property”), the proceeds of disposition of the shares in the Companies (the
“original eligible use property”) and the money that was borrowed to acquire
the shares in the Companies.  75                              
In this regard, Ludco’s burden of establishing the necessary linkage
between the original eligible use and the current eligible use is apparently
complicated by the fact that the shares in the Companies were disposed of as
part of a group of assets and, as consideration for this group of assets, Ludco
received some income-producing and some non-income-producing assets.  This
Court in Bronfman Trust, supra, at pp. 45-46, indicated that as a
general principle “[t]he onus is on the taxpayer to trace the borrowed funds to
an identifiable use which triggers the deduction.  Therefore, if the taxpayer
commingles funds used for a variety of purposes only some of which are eligible
he or she may be unable to claim the deduction.”  This general principle was
echoed in Tennant, supra, at para. 23, in the context of a s. 85 
rollover transaction.  In that case, the Court held that “[a]s long as the
replacement property can be traced to the entire amount of the loan, then the
entire amount of the interest payment may be deducted.  If the replacement
property can be traced to only a portion of the loan, then only a proportionate
amount of the interest may be deducted.”  76                              
However, nowhere in Tennant, supra, did the Court require
a strict interpretation of tracing for the continuing entitlement to deduct
interest after a rollover transaction.  Instead, as noted above, the Court
spoke in broader terms, referring to the need to “establish a link” between the
original and current eligible use property (para. 18).  Based upon this more
flexible approach, I conclude that, although the shares in the Companies were
commingled with other assets and disposed of as part of a group of assets, for
the purposes of the interest deductibility provision, the shares in the
Companies can be traced to any of the specific assets received by Ludco as a
result of the rollover.  In this case, the taxpayer can trace the shares in the
Companies to the income-producing assets.  Therefore, the appellant Ludco has
established the required link.  77                              
That the Class B shares were pledged by Ludco for an unrelated debt 
does not affect the fact that these shares were received as part of the
consideration for the s. 85  rollover.  In my view, the subsequent pledging of
the Class B shares could only affect Ludco’s continued ability to deduct the
interest if the effect of the pledge was to give ownership of the shares to the
parent company.  However, the documentary evidence confirms that Ludco
continued to be the beneficial owner of the Class B shares.  78                              
In summary, although the appellant Ludco initially received a mix of
income-earning and non-income-earning assets as consideration for the shares in
the Companies, the value of the income-earning assets (or current eligible use
property) exceeded the amount of the borrowed money.  In these circumstances,
the income-producing replacement property can be linked to the entire amount of
the loan and it can be said that the interest charges were “wholly applicable”
to the source of the income.  Consequently the entire amount of the interest
payment continued to be deductible after the rollover occurred.  E.  Should
Special Costs Be Awarded in This Case?  79                              
Pursuant to s. 47  of the Supreme Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-26 ,
an order for costs is a discretionary matter for the Court.  However, I agree
with the respondent that this is not an appropriate case for an order for
special costs.  In general, special costs ought to be awarded only on the
grounds of misconduct connected with the litigation or other exceptional
circumstances.  Here, although the Crown aggressively pressed its case against
the appellants, there is no substance to the appellants’ claims of abuse and
misconduct and that the Crown otherwise acted improperly.  I also do not find
any other reasons why special costs should be awarded.  VII.  Conclusion  80                              
Accordingly, I would allow the appeal with costs throughout, set aside
the judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal and the reassessments for the
appellants’ 1981 to 1985 taxation years, and remit the matter back to Revenue
Canada for reassessment in conformity with these reasons.  The following are the reasons delivered by  81                              
LeBel J. – Subject
to my comments on the interpretation of tax statutes in the companion case of Singleton
v. Canada, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 1046, 2001 SCC
61, I agree with the disposition of the
appeal proposed by Justice Iacobucci.  The taxpayers’ appeal is well founded.  82                              
As Iacobucci J. points out, there was undoubtedly a loophole in
the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .).  A well-crafted piece
of tax planning took advantage of it, but remained clearly within the four
walls of the statute.  From the evidence, although the taxpayers intended to
emphasize capital accumulation, they had also a purpose of gaining income. 
Hence, they could deduct the interest paid on loans obtained to acquire
securities.  The rollover that took place several years later did not change
the situation.  For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, quash the judgment
of the Federal Court of Appeal ((1999), 240 N.R. 70), set aside the assessments
and send the matter back to Revenue Canada for reassessment in accordance with
the judgment of our Court.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Goodman Phillips
& Vineberg, Montréal.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The Deputy
Attorney General of Canada, Montréal.    