Kourtessis v. M.N.R., [1993] 2
S.C.R. 53  Constantine Kourtessis and Hellenic  v.  Minister of National Revenue                                                          Respondent  and  The Attorney General for Ontario and the Attorney General of Quebec                                                Interveners  Indexed as:  Kourtessis v.
M.N.R.  File No.:  21645.  1992:  February 6;
1993:  April 22.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                        Officers of Revenue
Canada believed that appellants were evading or attempting to evade tax by
making false and deceptive statements in income tax returns contrary to s. 239
of the Income Tax Act (ITA). The British Columbia Supreme Court
issued warrants to search for and seize documents which could afford evidence
of the alleged violations.  These warrants were subsequently quashed by another
judge of that court.  The items that had been seized, however, were not
returned and McEachern C.J.S.C. issued a search warrant for the seizure of
relevant documents located at the Department's premises, provided that
everything seized be sealed and that appellants have thirty days to challenge
the warrant.                     Appellants
instituted proceedings in the B.C. Supreme Court by way of originating petition
challenging the warrant under s. 231.3(7) of the ITA, s. 24(1)  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms , and the inherent jurisdiction of the
court.  The relief sought was an order quashing the warrant and the search and
seizure executed under it, ordering the return of the material seized,
prohibiting its use and ordering its destruction and declaring s. 231.3 of
the ITA to be contrary to ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Charter .                      The preliminary
issue to be decided here was whether the British Columbia Court of Appeal had
jurisdiction to entertain the appellants' appeal.  The constitutional question
before the Court queried whether s. 231.3 of the ITA infringed
ss. 7  and 8  of the Charter .                     Held:  The appeal should be
allowed.  Section 231.3 of the Income Tax Act infringes s. 8  of the
Charter .                     Per La Forest, L'Heureux-Dubé and Cory
JJ.:  Section 231.3 was held to violate s. 8  of the Charter  in Baron
v. Canada, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 416.  The procedural issues, nevertheless, have
very important implications for the working of the enforcement provisions of
the ITA and other federal statutes to which federal criminal procedures
apply.                     An appeal is not
available because no appeal has been provided by the relevant legislative body
and courts of appeal have no inherent rights to create appeals.  Only superior
court judges appointed under s. 96  of the Constitution Act, 1867  have
inherent jurisdiction.  The appellants, however, may pursue an action for a
declaration, to which the ordinary rules of procedure in civil actions apply,
including provisions for appeal.                     Various policy
reasons underlie enacting a procedure that limits rights of appeal.  Sometimes
the opportunity for more opinions does not serve the ends of justice.  There
should not be unnecessary delay in the final disposition of proceedings,
particularly proceedings of a criminal character.  This is especially
applicable to interlocutory matters which can ultimately be decided at trial. 
As well, there is the simple value of a final decision to resolve a dispute
without the costs, in time, effort and money, of further hearings.                     The offence created
by s. 239 of the ITA is constitutionally supportable under both Parliament's
criminal law power and its taxing power.  The procedure to secure its
enforcement is that set forth in the Criminal Code  which notably
provides only limited rights of appeal.  Section 34(2)  of the Interpretation
Act  provides that the provisions of the Criminal Code  are to apply
to offences created by Parliament unless the statute creating the offence
provides otherwise.  No right of appeal from an order issuing a search warrant
is provided in the Criminal Code .  Section 231.3 of the ITA was
enacted for search warrants as contemplated by s. 34(2)  of the Interpretation
Act .  It also makes no provision for appeal other than the review process
set forth in s. 231.3(7).                     Parliament, in the
exercise of a federal head of power, may provide procedures for the enforcement
of the measures it has enacted.  That is a matter within its exclusive
competence.  Parliament can adopt provincial procedures for that purpose, and
such an adoption will be assumed where it is necessary to give effect to a
right.  When Parliament selects a specific and integrated procedure, however,
there is no room for the operation of provincial law.  The enforcement
provisions of the ITA form part of the uniform and integrated procedure
for the investigation and prosecution of offences under the Act.  No federal
adoption was made or can be assumed here.  Barring such adoption it is
constitutionally unacceptable to read in appeals for other interlocutory
proceedings or to adopt other provincial rules of procedure.                     The admixture of provincial
civil procedure with criminal procedure could result in an unpredictable
mish-mash.  In dealing with procedure, and particularly criminal procedure, it
is important to know the precise steps to be pursued.  Parliament accordingly
adopted a comprehensive procedure under the Criminal Code  and adopted
that procedure for the enforcement of penal provisions in other statutes,
including the ITA.                     A number of
pre-trial remedies are available to a person who has been the subject of a
search.  Section 231.3(7) provides for review and the Criminal Code 
makes provision for a speedy application for the return of seized goods.   If
the matter should proceed to trial, the accused may attack the search warrant
in any way he considers appropriate, including the allegation that it infringes
the provisions of s. 8  of the Charter .  If the matter should not go to
trial, a party may still seek civil damages for compensation.                     The general right
of appeal set forth in the Federal Court Act  should not be assumed to
apply to a proceeding provided in a separate statute that is a mere adjunct to
a general system of criminal procedure where appeals of this nature are not
provided.  Parliament arguably did not intend by this minor grant of
jurisdiction to the Federal Court (in what is for it an untypical jurisdiction)
to have had in contemplation the general right of appeal devised for quite
different types of proceedings.  There may, in other words, be no anomaly at
all.                     The declaration
does not constitute a review of a decision taken in a criminal proceeding
because it merely states the law without changing anything.  It should not be
widely used as a separate collateral procedure to, in effect, create an
automatic right of appeal where Parliament has, for sound policy reasons,
refused to do so.  Another procedure need not be provided as long as a
reasonably effective procedure exists.  A reasonably effective procedure has
not been provided here, however.  Section 231.3(7) and other procedures afford
a measure of protection to the appellants but do not provide an adequate
statutory provision for constitutional review of a search warrant.                     Where a search is
being conducted at the pre-trial stage, there is no trial judge and unlike the
situation after the charge, no express Charter  guarantee that
proceedings must take place within a reasonable time.  An investigation can go
on indefinitely in continuing breach (if the search provisions are
unconstitutional) of the appellants' Charter  rights for an extensive
period. The property of the individual subject to the search may remain in the
custody of the state for a protracted period in violation of Charter 
norms.                     The power to issue
a search warrant under the ITA is vested in a superior court judge and
at common law a decision of a superior court judge cannot be the subject of
collateral attack.  The judge issuing the warrant is not in a position to
review for constitutionality at an ex parte hearing, and may not have
the jurisdiction to do so on a later review of the ex parte order.  An
action for a declaration would not be barred, even if on later review the judge
is competent to review the warrant and the empowering legislation on the basis
of constitutionality, because that remedy would not provide sufficient
constitutional protection.                     The appellants
should be permitted to pursue an action for a declaration.  Since the action
for a declaration is a discretionary remedy, however, the judge, in the
exercise of his or her discretion, should consider the specific circumstances
presented and refuse to entertain the action if satisfied that criminal
proceedings against the accused would be initiated within a reasonable time. 
This would avoid the overlap and delay that have been among the major informing
considerations in devising the rules for the governance of the discretion to
allow or not to allow an action for a declaration to proceed.                     A declaration
should issue declaring s. 231.3 of the ITA and the search warrant issued
thereunder to be of no force or effect.  The appellants, in light of that
declaration, are also entitled to the return of their documents and other
property and all copies and notes thereof.                     While an action for
a declaration is an appropriate remedy at this stage of the proceedings, certiorari
generally appears to be a more suitable instrument for reviewing the
constitutionality of the action, and the possibility that it might have issued
in this case should be left open.  At common law certiorari does not lie
against a decision of a superior court judge, but what is alleged here is a
breach of a constitutional right which may call for an adaptation of the
inherent powers of a superior court to make the procedure conform to
constitutional norms.  If certiorari might have issued, there would appear
to be little use for the declaratory action in this context.                     Per L'Heureux-Dubé J.:  The reasons of La
Forest J. were joined given that the majority decision in Knox Contracting
Ltd. v. Canada, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 338, applied.                     Per Sopinka, McLachlin and Iacobucci
JJ.:  Section 231.3 of the ITA violates the reasonable search
guarantee found in s. 8  of the Charter  for the reasons given in Baron
v. Canada, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 416.                     The offence and
search warrant provisions of the ITA are referrable to both the federal
criminal law and taxation power, and jurisdiction to legislate procedure in
matters relating to these provisions is shared between the provinces and the
federal government, subject to federal paramountcy in the event of conflict
between federal and provincial legislation.  Parliament is free to assign
jurisdiction to any tribunal it chooses, whatever the source of its legislative
power.  If federal legislation is silent, the ordinary rule is that a litigant
suing on a federal matter in a provincial court takes the procedure of that
court as he or she finds it.  This does not mean that provincial legislation
does not apply unless "adopted" by federal legislation.  The
authorities make it clear that a province has legislative authority to
adjudicate federal matters and that such legislation is only ousted if it
conflicts with federal legislation.  The fact that there is alleged to be a
comprehensive procedure contained in federal legislation is only relevant to
determine whether provincial legislation is ousted because it conflicts with
federal legislation.  It is not ousted in relation to declaratory relief, which
includes the right of appeal conferred by provincial legislation, and should
also extend to ancillary relief which enables the Court to give effect to the
declaration.                     Knox Contracting
Ltd. v. Canada,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 338, should be distinguished so as not to foreclose an appeal
in proceedings relating to a declaration that the statute authorizing a search
warrant violates the Constitution, coupled with an application to set aside the
search warrant.  These two remedies can be exercised, in combination, prior to
the laying of charges, and the result of such exercise may be appealed.                     An application
under s. 231.3(7) would be a wholly inappropriate proceeding to test the
constitutional validity of the provision under which the seizure is made.  It
applies only if the judge is satisfied that the documents seized are not needed
for an investigation or prosecution or were not seized in accordance with the
warrant.  Section 231.3(7) can only be resorted to if both the warrant and the
statutory provision under which the warrant was issued are valid.  Not only is
subs. (7) not an appropriate forum with respect to a constitutional
challenge of the search and seizure provision, but a judge would also not have
jurisdiction to deal with such a challenge upon a plain reading of the words of
the subsection.                     In the alternative,
Knox Contracting can be distinguished on the basis that the procedure
relating to proceedings for declaratory relief on constitutional grounds cannot
be characterized as criminal law so as to exclude a right of appeal.  In Knox
Contracting the proceeding taken was a motion to quash.  There was no
constitutional challenge to legislation in that case.  Here, the proceeding
taken was not simply to quash the warrant but an action for a declaration that
s. 231.3 was invalid on constitutional grounds.  A motion to quash, when
not combined with an action for declaratory relief, may take its character for
the purpose of division of powers from the underlying proceeding which it
attacked.  On the other hand, an action for a declaration as to the
constitutional validity of a statute does not necessarily partake of the
character of the statute which is attacked.  It has a life of its own.                     An action to
declare a statutory provision unconstitutional is not transformed from a civil
remedy to a criminal remedy merely because the declaration relates to a
criminal statutory provision.  It cannot be used as a substitute for an
application to the trial judge in a criminal case in order to acquire a right
of appeal.  By virtue of s. 24(1)  of the Charter , there are some
proceedings available to an accused in the context of a criminal case in
respect to issues that could be the subject of an action for a declaration. 
The superior courts have jurisdiction to entertain such applications even if
the superior court to which the application is made is not the trial court. 
However, a superior court has a discretion to refuse to do so unless, in the
opinion of the superior court, given the nature of the violation and the need
for a timely review, it is better suited than the trial court to deal with the
matter.  The superior court would therefore have jurisdiction to entertain an
action for a declaration seeking this kind of relief but subject to the same
discretion to refuse to exercise it.  The court is justified in refusing to
entertain the action if there is another procedure available in which more
effective relief can be obtained or the court decides that the legislature
intended that the other procedure should be followed.                     As a general rule,
the court should exercise its discretion to refuse to entertain declaratory
relief when such relief is sought as a substitute for obtaining a ruling in a
criminal case.  This will be the apt characterization of any declaration which
is sought with respect to relief that could be obtained from a trial court
which has been ascertained.  The same considerations apply before a trial court
has been ascertained if the relief sought will determine some issue in pending
criminal proceedings and does not have as a substantial purpose vindication of
an independent civil right.  In such circumstances, the mere fact that relief
was sought in the guise of an action for a declaration would not confer a right
of appeal from the refusal to entertain the action.                     No issue was raised
here in respect of the British Columbia Supreme Court's jurisdiction or in
respect of the exercise of its discretion to entertain the appellants'
application by way of originating petition.  There was no trial court because
no charge was laid.  The attack on the validity of the statutory provision
authorizing the search, while it would affect the admissibility at trial of the
things seized, was also vital to the taxpayers' civil interests.  The search
warrant would not only authorize a trespass but also seizure of personal
property.  The petition for a declaration was therefore properly entertained
under the British Columbia rules of procedure.  Those rules which clearly
applied at first instance should also apply to permit an appeal here.  If
Parliament did not intend to exclude a petition for a declaration under
provincial rules, it cannot have intended to exclude an appeal pursuant to the
same rules.  Cases Cited  By La Forest J.                     Applied:  Baron v. Canada, [1993] 1
S.C.R. 416;  followed:  Knox Contracting Ltd. v. Canada, [1990] 2
S.C.R. 338;  referred to:  R. v. Meltzer, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1764; Mills
v. The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 863; R. v. Seaboyer, [1991] 2 S.C.R.
577; R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627; Attorney
General of Canada v. Canadian National Transportation, Ltd., [1983] 2
S.C.R. 206; In re Storgoff, [1945] S.C.R. 526;  Attorney-General for
Alberta v. Atlas Lumber Co., [1941] S.C.R. 87;  Attorney General of
Quebec v. Attorney General of Canada, [1945] S.C.R. 600; Ministre du
Revenu National v. Lafleur, [1964] S.C.R. 412, 46 D.L.R. (2d) 439;  R.
v. Wetmore, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 284;  Goldman v. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.
(1987), 35 C.C.C. (3d) 488;  Adler v. Adler, [1966] 1 O.R. 732; Ontario
(Attorney General) v. Pembina Exploration Canada Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 206;
Welch v. The King, [1950] S.C.R. 412; Taylor v. Attorney-General
(1837), 8 Sim. 413, 59 E.R. 164; Guaranty Trust Co. of New York v. Hannay
& Co., [1915] 2 K.B. 536; Dyson v. Attorney-General, [1911] 1
K.B. 410; Attorney General of Canada v. Law Society of British Columbia,
[1982] 2 S.C.R. 307; Terrasses Zarolega Inc. v. Régie des installations
olympiques, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 94; Canadian Council of Churches v. Canada
(Minister of Employment and Immigration), [1992] 1 S.C.R. 236; Re
Southam Inc. and The Queen (No. 1) (1983), 41 O.R. (2d) 11; Canadian
Newspapers Co. v. Attorney-General for Canada (1985), 49 O.R. (2d) 557;  Wilson
v. The Queen, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 594; Argentina v. Mellino, [1987] 1
S.C.R. 536;  Crevier v. Attorney General of Quebec, [1981] 2 S.C.R.
220;  Canada Labour Relations Board v. Paul L'Anglais Inc., [1983] 1
S.C.R. 147.  By L'Heureux-Dubé J.                     Followed: Knox Contracting Ltd. v. Canada,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 338.  By Sopinka J.   Statutes and Regulations Cited  British
Columbia Rules of Court, Rule 5(22).  Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 7 , 8 , 15 , 24(1) .  Constitution
Act, 1867,
ss. 91(3) , (27) , 96 .  Constitution
Act, 1982,
s. 52 .  Court
of Appeal Act, S.B.C.
1982, c. 7, ss. 6(1)(a), 6.1(2) [ad. 1985, c. 51, s. 12].   Federal
Court Act, R.S.C.,
1985, c. F-7, s. 28  [am. c. 30 (2nd Supp.), s. 61 ; rep. & sub. 1990, c. 8,
s. 8; am. 1992, c. 26, s. 17, c. 49, s. 128].    Supreme Court Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. S-26, s. 40  [am. c.
34 (3rd Supp.), s. 3 ;            1990, c. 8, s. 37].  Authors Cited   Hogg,
Peter W.  Constitutional Law of Canada, 3rd ed. (Supplemented),
vol. 1.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1992 (loose-leaf).  Laskin,
Bora.  Laskin's Canadian Constitutional Law, 5th ed.  By Neil
Finkelstein.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1986.  Strayer,
Barry L. The Canadian Constitution and the Courts, 3rd ed. Toronto:          Butterworths,
1988.  Wade,
Sir William.  Administrative Law, 6th ed.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press,
1988.  Zamir,
Itzhak.  The Declaratory Judgment.  London:  Stevens & Sons Ltd.,
1962.                      Guy Du Pont, Basile Angelopoulos and Ariane
Bourque, for the appellants.                     John R. Power, Q.C., Pierre Loiselle,
Q.C., and Robert Frater, for the respondent.                     Janet E. Minor and Tanya Lee, for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario.                     Yves Ouellette, Judith Kucharsky and Diane
Bouchard, for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.  //La Forest J.//                     The judgment of La
Forest, L'Heureux-Dubé and Cory JJ. was delivered by                     La
Forest J. -- The
substantive question to be resolved in this appeal, i.e., whether s. 231.3 of
the Income Tax Act, as amended by S.C. 1986, c. 6, violates s. 8  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms , has already been determined in favour of
the appellants.  In Baron v. Canada, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 416, it was held
that the section does violate the Charter  and so was of no force or
effect.  It is to be expected that the law enforcement and judicial authorities
in the present case will act accordingly, whatever the result of this appeal
may be. But, two broad procedural issues have very important implications for
the workings of the enforcement provisions of the Income Tax Act and
other federal statutes to which federal criminal procedures apply.                     The first of these
procedural issues concerns the extent to which procedures enacted by a province
to govern civil procedure in the province can be engrafted on procedures of a
criminal nature enacted by Parliament.  Specifically, may provincial procedures
be used to review the issuance of a search warrant under s. 231.3 of the Income
Tax Act?  Ultimately, the issue involves the constitutional power of the
province to legislate respecting the matter.                     The second of these
issues is whether the inherent powers of a superior court can be used, by way
of a declaratory judgment, to grant the appellants an appropriate remedy.                     With respect to the
first of the procedural issues just described, I do not think an appeal can be
mounted against an order made in the course of proceedings under the Income
Tax Act by resort to provincial procedures for appeals.  Simply put, I do
not believe that such an appeal is available because no appeal has been
provided by the relevant legislative body, the federal Parliament, as was recently
decided by this Court in Knox Contracting Ltd. v. Canada, [1990] 2
S.C.R. 338.  And courts of appeal have no inherent rights to create appeals. 
Only superior court judges appointed under s. 96  of the Constitution Act,
1867  have inherent jurisdiction.                     Turning to the
second procedural issue, however, I am of the view that the appellants may
pursue an action for a declaration in the provincial court.  That being so, the
ordinary rules of procedure in civil actions apply, including provisions for
appeal.                     Finally, I shall
add some comments about the possibility of a better remedy in this type of
case.  Facts                     The facts and lower
court judgments are summarized in the judgment of McKenzie J. in the
non-constitutional review hearing (reported at (1987), 15 B.C.L.R. (2d) 200, 36
C.C.C. (3d) 304), and in the judgment of Justice Sopinka.  For clarity,
however, I shall repeat the facts most directly in issue.                     Following an
investigation, officers of Revenue Canada formed the belief that the appellants
were evading or attempting to evade the payment of taxes by making false and
deceptive statements in income tax returns for the years 1979 to 1984 contrary
to s. 239 of the Income Tax Act.  They, therefore, sought to obtain
search warrants pursuant to s. 231.3 of the Act and such warrants were issued
by Callaghan J. on October 22, 1986.  These warrants were, however,
subsequently quashed by Proudfoot J. of the same court.  The items seized under
these warrants had not been returned to the appellants, however, when McEachern
C.J.S.C. (now C.J.B.C.) issued the search warrant challenged in this appeal for
the seizure of the documents located in the Department's premises, subject to
the conditions that every item seized would be sealed and the appellants would
have thirty days to challenge the warrant.                     Within that period,
the appellants instituted proceedings by way of originating petition seeking an
order quashing the warrant and the search and seizure, declaring s. 231.3 of no
force or effect as violating ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Charter , the return
of the items seized along with the summaries, notes and outlines of these
items, and prohibiting the Department from using any of this information and
the destruction of any copies not returned.  In seeking these remedies, the
appellants resorted to a variegated mélange of procedures.  They first
invoked s. 231.3(7) of the Income Tax Act, which provides its own review
of search warrants under which a judge may order the return of any item seized
if the judge is satisfied that they are not needed for a criminal investigation
or were not seized in accordance with the warrant or the section.  They then
invoked the provincial Rules of Court, s. 24 of the Charter  as
well as the inherent jurisdiction of the court.  The constitutional and
non-constitutional attacks were heard separately by Lysyk J. (reported at
(1988), 30 B.C.L.R. (2d) 342, [1989] 1 W.W.R. 508, 44 C.C.C. (3d) 79, [1989] 1
C.T.C. 56, 89 D.T.C. 5214) and McKenzie J., respectively.  Both failed.                     I note in passing
that both in the procedures they invoked and the remedies they sought, the
appellants make no distinction between those that may broadly be described as
criminal, and those that may be described as civil in character.  This
admixture of federal and provincial procedure would seem to be at best
irregular, and has been a source of considerable confusion.  However, in their
factum, the appellants advised us that no objection to the manner in which
declaratory relief was sought was raised by the respondent or in the courts
below.  Under these circumstances, I think it best at this stage of the
proceedings to deal with the whole matter without regard to these procedural
irregularities.                     The appeal to the
British Columbia Court of Appeal was dismissed, the court holding that it had
no jurisdiction to hear the appeal:  (1989), 39 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, [1990] 1
W.W.R. 97, 50 C.C.C. (3d) 201, 72 C.R. (3d) 196, [1990] 1 C.T.C. 241, 89 D.T.C.
5464.    In doing so, the court categorized the whole of the proceedings as
criminal in nature.  It only briefly mentioned the request for a declaration,
and appeared to treat it as an interlocutory matter in a criminal proceeding. 
I must say that, given the manner in which the procedures were engaged, that
approach seems quite understandable.  However, as mentioned earlier, it seems
best at this stage of the proceedings to overlook the procedural irregularities
and deal with the substantive issue of whether an action for a declaration may
be pursued.                     On the appeal to
this Court, the issue was limited to the constitutional validity of the
legislation.  At this stage, there was again a generous intermixture of federal
and provincial procedures.  The appellants submitted that the Court of Appeal
erred in holding that it had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal for the
following reasons:  (a) 
the judgment of the Supreme Court of British Columbia was one made in the
course of civil proceedings seeking a declaration and consequently was
appealable as of right under s. 6 of the Court of Appeal Act, S.B.C.
1982, c. 7, as amended;  (b) 
the order was made in a taxation matter under s. 91(3)  of the Constitution
Act, 1867  and not in a criminal matter (s. 91(27) ), and in the absence of
specific legislation, was appealable under s. 6 of the Court of Appeal Act;
and  (c) 
the judgment appealed from denied the appellants a remedy under s. 24(1)  of the
Charter  and was also appealable under s. 6 of the Court of Appeal Act.                     I should first note
that if the appellants are successful in their claim that an action for a
declaration can properly be entertained, then it becomes unnecessary to pursue
their other arguments, for the action for a declaration was begun in the
British Columbia Supreme Court and was thus subject to its ordinary rules of
procedure, including any right to appeal from that action.  The second issue,
however, has serious implications for criminal procedure in provincial courts
and involves a serious misunderstanding of this Court's recent decision in Knox
Contracting, which it is important to correct.  It also serves as a useful
backdrop for a discussion of whether an action for a declaration properly lies,
so I shall discuss it first.  The third issue, regarding s. 24(1)  of the Charter ,
seems to me to be covered by the considerations discussed under the second
issue and has already been adequately dealt with by this Court.  I shall,
therefore, only refer to it tangentially.  Rights of Appeal Generally                     Since the appellants'
efforts were largely directed to finding a right of appeal in this case, I will
first make some comments about the nature of rights of appeal generally.                     Appeals are solely
creatures of statute;  see R. v. Meltzer, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1764, at p. 1773. 
There is no inherent jurisdiction in any appeal court.  Nowadays, however, this
basic proposition tends at times to be forgotten.  Appeals to appellate courts
and to the Supreme Court of Canada have become so established and routine that
there is a widespread expectation that there must be some way to appeal the
decision of a court of first instance.  But it remains true that there is no
right of appeal on any matter unless provided for by the relevant legislature.                     There are various
policy reasons for enacting a procedure that limits rights of appeal. 
Sometimes the opportunity for more opinions does not serve the ends of
justice.  A trial court, for example, is in a better position to assess the
factual record.  Thus most criminal appeals are restricted to questions of law
or mixed questions of law and fact.  A further policy rationale, and one that
is important to the case before this Court, is that there should not be
unnecessary delay in the final disposition of proceedings, particularly
proceedings of a criminal character.  This is especially applicable to
interlocutory matters which can ultimately be decided at trial; see Mills v.
The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 863.  On this point, McLachlin J., speaking for
the majority in R. v. Seaboyer, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 577, noted that there
was a valid policy concern to control the "plethora of interlocutory
appeals and the delays which inevitably flow from them" (at p. 641).  Such
review should, in the Court's view, normally take place at trial.  This McLachlin
J. added, "will also permit a fuller view of the issue by the reviewing
courts, which will have the benefit of a more complete picture of the evidence
and the case" (at p. 641).  Especially in the context of criminal
procedure, there is value in not constantly interrupting the process, if the
issues are all going to be heard eventually at trial in any event.  As well,
there is the simple value of a final decision to resolve a dispute without the
costs, in time, effort and money, of further hearings.                     For most civil
matters, the provincial legislatures have created a right of appeal.  In
British Columbia, that right is found in the Court of Appeal Act. 
Section 6 sets forth the circumstances where appeals are available.  The first
issue in this case is whether that procedure applies to a penal proceeding
falling within the exclusive jurisdiction of the federal Parliament,
specifically a proceeding taken in respect of an alleged offence under the Income
Tax Act.  The Procedure Under s. 231.3 of the Income
Tax Act                     The availability of
appeal is one of the questions determined by the choice of procedure created in
the particular statute involved.  To understand the nature of the procedure
with which we are here concerned, it is important, then, to look closely at the
workings of the Income Tax Act.  By and large as Wilson J. noted in R.
v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627, at p. 636, "the
system is a self-reporting and self-assessing one which depends upon the
honesty and integrity of the taxpayers for its success".  But Wilson J.
(at p. 637) was quick to add that it would be naive to suppose that this system
could work fairly without the assistance of an effective enforcement
mechanism.  To that end, the Act creates a number of offences, some very serious,
to ensure compliance with the Act.  Among these is that set forth in s. 239(1)
of the Act, in relation to which the search warrant was issued in this case. 
It reads:  239. (1) Every person who has  (a)
made, or participated in, assented to or acquiesced in the making of, false or
deceptive statements in a return, certificate, statement or answer filed or
made as required by or under this Act or a regulation,  (b)
to evade payment of a tax imposed by this Act, destroyed, altered, mutilated,
secreted or otherwise disposed of the records or books of account of a
taxpayer,  (c)
made, or assented to or acquiesced in the making of, false or deceptive
entries, or omitted, or assented to or acquiesced in the omission, to enter a
material particular, in records or books of account of a taxpayer,  (d)
wilfully, in any manner, evaded or attempted to evade, compliance with this Act
or payment of taxes imposed by this Act, or  (e)
conspired with any person to commit an offence described by paragraphs (a)
to (d),  is guilty
of an offence and, in addition to any penalty otherwise provided, is liable on
summary conviction to  (f)
a fine of not less than 25% and not more than double the amount of the tax that
was sought to be evaded, or  (g)
both the fine described in paragraph (f) and imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 2 years.   This offence, I say in passing, seems
to me to be constitutionally supportable both under Parliament's criminal law
power and its taxing power; see Constitution Act, 1867, s. 91(27) 
and s. 91(3) , respectively.                     Such offences, of
course, require a procedural scheme for their enforcement.  As in the case of
other federal statutes containing penal provisions, the procedure selected by
Parliament is that set forth in the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c.
C-46 .  Section 34(2)  of the Interpretation Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-21 ,
provides that the provisions of the Criminal Code  are to apply to
indictable and summary conviction offences created by  Parliament unless the
statute creating the offence provides otherwise.  The Criminal Code , of
course, provides a comprehensive scheme of criminal procedure.  Notably,
though, it provides only limited rights of appeal.  Section 674  stipulates that
for indictable offences, the right of appeal is limited to those authorized
under Parts XXI and XXVI of the Code.  For summary conviction offences,
the appeals are those provided under Part XXVII, s. 813.  No right of appeal
from an order issuing a search warrant is provided in the Criminal Code . 
So far as search warrants under the Income Tax Act are concerned,
however, Parliament has, as s. 34(2)  of the Interpretation Act 
contemplates, enacted a special provision to meet the specific requirements of
that Act.  That provision, s. 231.3, is central to this case.  Of special
relevance are ss. 231.3(1)  and (7) which read as follows:                     231.3 (1)  A judge may, on ex parte
application by the Minister, issue a warrant in writing authorizing any person
named therein to enter and search any building, receptacle or place for any
document or thing that may afford evidence as to the commission of an offence
under this Act and to seize and, as soon as practicable, bring the document or
thing before, or make a report in respect thereof to, the judge or, where the
judge is unable to act, another judge of the same court to be dealt with by the
judge in accordance with this section.  . . .                     (7) 
Where any document or thing seized under subsection (1) or (5) is brought
before a judge or a report in respect thereof is made to a judge, the judge
may, of his own motion or on summary application by a person with an interest
in the document or thing on three clear days notice of application to the
Deputy Attorney General of Canada, order that the document or thing be returned
to the person from whom it was seized or the person who is otherwise legally
entitled thereto if the judge is satisfied that the document or thing  (a) 
will not be required for an investigation or a criminal proceeding; or  (b) 
was not seized in accordance with the warrant or this section.  Section 231.3, not unnaturally, bears
a considerable resemblance to its counterpart in the Criminal Code . 
Noteworthy is that, like it, it provides no appeal other than the review
process set forth in s. 231.3(7).  I note, however, that s. 231  defines
"judge" to mean "a judge of a superior court having jurisdiction
in the province where the matter arises or a judge of the Federal Court",
a fact upon which considerable reliance was placed in seeking to find a right
of appeal, an issue I shall discuss later.                     As I see it, the
characterization of the foregoing procedure has already been settled by this
Court in Knox Contracting, supra.  In that case, this Court
examined and characterized the search provisions of the Income Tax Act
for the purposes of determining whether the court of appeal there had
jurisdiction to hear an appeal on a search warrant. Cory J., Wilson and
Gonthier JJ. concurring, ruled that the s. 231.3 search procedures under the Income
Tax Act were enacted pursuant to federal jurisdiction over criminal law and
procedure under s. 91(27)  of the Constitution Act, 1867 .  He considered
the search provisions to be the investigative arm of s. 239 which, in his view,
were clearly criminal law because they punished deliberate acts, protected the
public interest, and contained severe penalties.  Section 231.3 was held to be
the investigative arm of the criminal law because it was unrealistic "to
divorce s. 231.3 from the offences sought to be uncovered by the search"
(p. 356).  He concluded that the power of the provincial legislatures under s.
92(14)  of the Constitution Act, 1867  does not extend to jurisdiction
over the conduct of criminal prosecutions, citing Attorney General of Canada
v. Canadian National Transportation, Ltd., [1983] 2 S.C.R. 206.  Clearly on
this view, the procedure for this case must be the procedure created by the
federal Parliament.                     Sopinka J.,
L'Heureux-Dubé and McLachlin JJ. concurring, disagreed with Cory J.'s
position.  He found that the search provisions could be justified under both
the federal criminal law power (s. 91(27)  of the Constitution Act, 1867 )
and the federal taxing power (s. 91(3)  of the Constitution Act, 1867 ). 
He then held that the normal provincial procedure continues to operate,
including a right of appeal, unless a contrary intention is evidenced.                     It was left to me
to break the deadlock in Knox Contracting.  I agreed with the conclusion
reached by Cory J., but gave separate reasons, though these do not take issue
with what he had to say.  In the result, then, a majority of this Court held
that there was no appeal from a search warrant issued under the Income Tax
Act, and that a right of appeal provided by provincial procedure has no
application.  These, of course, are the very questions now placed before this
Court.                     In my brief
reasons, I first observed that I agreed with Sopinka J.'s approach to the
juristic character of the relevant provisions.  In other words, I agreed with
him that the relevant provisions were justifiable under both the criminal law
power and the taxing power.  If, as the appellants suggest, there is any
significance to the fact that a provision is criminal law, I fail to understand
why it should make a difference for present purposes that it is also
justifiable under the taxing power.                     I did not really
find it necessary to get into this in Knox Contracting, for, in my view,
Parliament had in the exercise of its exclusive powers provided a comprehensive
procedure for the enforcement of Income Tax offences.  I thus put it at
pp. 356-57:  In
choosing a criminal sanction and applying all the provisions of the Criminal
Code  "except to the extent that the enactment otherwise provides"
(see Interpretation Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-21, s. 34(2) ), Parliament,
it seems to me, has shown a disposition to adopt the ordinary procedures of the
criminal law for their enforcement, subject to any variations spelled out in
the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63.  [Emphasis in original.]  I then concluded by saying that I
found it unnecessary to consider whether a province could in other circumstances
deal with procedure respecting a penal provision.  What I had in mind, and all
I had in mind, was the (I think unlikely) situation that could arise if
Parliament provided an incomplete scheme in some statute, as sometimes happens
in the civil field.                     In Knox
Contracting, then, I came to the same conclusion as Cory J., that there was
no appeal.  While I believed that the provisions could be justified under both
s. 91(27)  and s. 91(3) , I concluded, at pp. 356-57, that Parliament by
enacting s. 34(2)  of the Interpretation Act  has shown a disposition to
adopt the ordinary procedures of the criminal law for their enforcement subject
to any variations spelled out in the Income Tax Act.  In the result,
then, a majority of this Court held that there was no appeal from a search
warrant under the Income Tax Act, and that the general right of appeal
provided for under provincial law had no application.                     In Knox
Contracting, I did not elaborate further on the reasons for my conclusion. 
I simply found it self-evident that Parliament, in the exercise of a power, be
it criminal or taxation or any other head of power, may if it wishes provide
procedures for the enforcement of the measures it has enacted.  That is a
matter within its exclusive competence.  This proposition is supported by
long-standing authority in this Court.  One need go no further than the
well-known case of In re Storgoff, [1945] S.C.R. 526, at pp. 563 (Hudson
J.), 579 and 583 (Rand J.), 588 (Kellock J.), 591 and 594 (Estey J.).  Cory J.
said the same thing in Knox Contracting, supra, at pp. 351-52. 
This approach is not limited to criminal law.  It is a general principle
applying to all areas of federal jurisdiction as can be seen from the following
remarks of Rinfret J. in Attorney-General for Alberta v. Atlas Lumber Co.,
[1941] S.C.R. 87, at p. 100:  . .
. it has long since been decided that, with respect to matters coming within
the enumerated heads of sec. 91, the Parliament of Canada may give jurisdiction
to provincial courts and regulate proceedings in such courts to the fullest
extent. [Emphasis added.]  Similarly, Taschereau J. in Attorney
General of Quebec v. Attorney General of Canada, [1945] S.C.R. 600, had
this to say, at p. 602:                     It
is also well established that, although a court may be provincially organized
and maintained, its jurisdiction and the procedure to be followed for the
application of laws enacted by the Parliament of Canada, in relation to matters
confided to that Parliament, are within its exclusive jurisdiction.  That applies
to criminal law and procedure in criminal matters which by subsection 27 of
section 91 of the B.N.A. Act are subject to the legislative powers of the
Dominion.                     The same approach
was later followed in the unanimous decision of this Court in respect of an
offence, significantly for our purposes, under the Income Tax Act in Ministre
du Revenu National v. Lafleur, [1964] S.C.R. 412, 46 D.L.R. (2d) 439.  And
in Attorney General of Canada v. Canadian National Transportation, Ltd.,
supra, and R. v. Wetmore, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 284, this Court held
that Parliament is competent to legislate respecting the enforcement of all
federal offences, regardless of the federal head of power under which the
substantive offences were enacted.                     I do not doubt that
Parliament can, if it wishes, adopt provincial procedures for that purpose,
and, such an adoption will be assumed, where it is necessary to give effect to
a right, for example, when it confers a civil right without providing a forum
or procedure for its enforcement.  But when it selects a specific and
integrated procedure, as it has done here, then there is no room for the
operation of provincial law in relation to that procedure.  That again is
demonstrated by Storgoff, where the Court refused to countenance the use
of the writ of habeas corpus in the manner provided by provincial law,
even though the right to habeas corpus may be looked upon as a civil
right (see, for example, p. 571).  This reasoning applies a fortiori to
appeals.  This appears perhaps most clearly in the reasons of Hudson J., at p.
563:                     It
would seem to be logical that the legislature which has exclusive power to
enact criminal law and prescribe procedure in criminal matters should also have
the sole right to prescribe the means and methods by which the validity of such
procedure should be tested.                     Parliament
has accepted this view and ever since Confederation exercised the right to make
provision for appeals in criminal matters and prescribed the conditions under
which such appeals were permitted and the courts to which they might be taken.  . . .                     A
writ of habeas corpus differs in many respects from an appeal but, in
cases like the present, it is just another means of bringing in question the
validity of proceedings in criminal matters.  It would appear strange indeed if
Parliament could provide for and control appeals but not interference with
criminal administration by way of habeas corpus.  See also at pp. 575 (Taschereau J.),
579 and 582 (Rand J.).                     What, of course,
motivated the judges in that case was the need for a uniform and integrated
procedure; see pp. 566 (Hudson J.) and 584 (Rand J.).  It was this uniform and
integrated procedure that was selected by Parliament for the enforcement of the
Income Tax Act.  Indeed the need to look at the entire procedure as an
integrated whole is most strongly stated in Lafleur, supra, which
as I noted was a case involving the Income Tax Act.  See esp. pp. 443,
444 and 446 D.L.R., where Fauteux J. (speaking for the Court) refers to these
provisions, respectively, as [translation] "uniform",
"systematically welded into a single body" and "an integrated
whole".                     The integrated
procedure I have described is not confined to the period following the charge. 
Thus, Meltzer, supra, involved an authorization to intercept
private communications--an electronic search--and it was held that no right of
appeal existed because none had been provided as part of the procedure provided
by the federal Parliament.  The power to issue an authorization appears in the Criminal
Code , but there is no magic in this.  In Goldman v. Hoffmann-La Roche
Ltd. (1987), 35 C.C.C. (3d) 488 (Ont. C.A.), it was held that there was no
appeal in the parallel situation of a search warrant issued under the Competition
Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-23, which is sustainable under both the trade and
commerce power and the criminal law power.                     I fail to see how
it detracts from this integrated scheme that it is the Income Tax Act
itself which provides a provision respecting searches that may afford evidence
of an offence.  That provision is rather similar to its counterpart in the Criminal
Code  (s. 487 ) and was obviously intended to meet the particular exigencies
relating to income tax offences.  It forms part of the uniform and integrated
procedure for the investigation and prosecution of offences under the Act.  I
am quite unable to accept the appellants' thesis that the provinces share
jurisdiction with the federal Parliament to regulate procedure over matters
exclusively vested in Parliament by the Constitution.  This is a far cry from
the principle they cite that "where no other procedure is prescribed,
a litigant suing on a federal matter in a provincial court takes the procedure
of that court as he finds it" (emphasis added); see Laskin's Canadian
Constitutional Law (5th ed. 1986), vol. 1, at p. 185.  There may be other
cases where Parliament, because it has created a substantive right that is
clearly dependent for its functioning on the rules governing general civil
procedure in the province, may be assumed to have adopted necessary parts of
such procedure, or to adapt the words of Laskin J.A. in Adler v. Adler,
[1966] 1 O.R. 732 (C.A.), at p. 735, where substantive law within federal
jurisdiction feeds the jurisdiction of the provincial court by giving it
material upon which to operate.  Ontario (Attorney General) v. Pembina
Exploration Canada Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 206, is another recent example;
there s. 22 of the  Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10,
expressly provided for concurrent jurisdiction.  But no such assumption can be
made in the present case.  Here a comprehensive procedure is prescribed by the
legislative body having power over the matter.                     The admixture of
provincial civil procedure with criminal procedure could, I fear, result in an
unpredictable mish-mash where, in applying federal procedural law, one would
forever be looking over one's shoulder to see what procedure the provinces have
adopted (and this may differ from province to province) to see if there was
something there that one judge or another would like to add if he or she found
the federal law inadequate.  And I see no reason in principle why appeals could
not be read in for other interlocutory proceedings, or indeed why other provincial
rules of procedure might not be adopted, as was attempted in Lafleur. 
That, barring federal adoption, is in my view  constitutionally unacceptable. 
It is certainly impractical.  In dealing with procedure, and particularly
criminal procedure, it is important to know what one should do next.  That is
why, no doubt, Parliament adopted a comprehensive procedure under the Criminal
Code , and that is why it adopted that procedure for the enforcement of
penal provisions in other statutes, including the Income Tax Act.  The
nature of this procedure is well stated by Fauteux J. in Lafleur, supra,
at pp. 443-44 D.L.R.:                     [translation]
It is obvious, however, that, particularly in the area of procedure, the
criminal law existing in 1867 in the various territorial jurisdictions later
united into what is now the one Canadian territorial jurisdiction of
Confederation has evolved considerably during this lengthy period of history. 
This evolution, moving towards the formation of a uniform criminal law for
Canada, has been accomplished through changes resulting expressly or by
implication from the various legislative enactments effected by Parliament over
the years.  This uniform criminal law, achieved not by mere consolidations, but
by two codifications, appears today in that grouping of legislative provisions
which Parliament has systematically welded into a single body -- the Criminal
Code  of 1953-54 -- which is the product of additions, deletions and
amendments as well as changes in structure.  The relative interdependence of
the provisions in diversified parts of the Criminal Code  has already
been noted in Welch v. The King . . . [1950] S.C.R. 412 at p. 427,
where, referring to the powers conferred by s. 873  on the Attorney-General,
this Court said:  Like
many others in the Code, they remain subject to qualifications and restrictions
implicitly and necessarily flowing from other provisions in the same Act.  The same considerations, in my view,
apply to qualifications and restrictions made, as contemplated in s. 34(2)  of
the Interpretation Act ,  by other Acts for which the procedure has been
adopted.  One would in any event be led to this conclusion by the inherent
nature of appeals.  In Welch v. The King, [1950] S.C.R. 412, Fauteux J.,
speaking for the majority, thus described the nature of appeals, at p. 428:                     The
right of appeal is an exceptional right.  That all the substantive and
procedural provisions relating to it must be regarded as exhaustive and
exclusive, need not be expressly stated in the statute.  That necessarily flows
from the exceptional nature of the right.  More recently, McIntyre J. in Meltzer,
supra, at pp. 1769-70, made it clear (citing with approval a passage
from Laycraft C.J.A. in R. v. Cass (1985), 71 A.R. 248) that a
provincial statute or rule of court relating to civil matters that purported to
govern an appeal from a criminal law matter would be ultra vires.                     Nor are Canadian
courts alone in resisting an admixture of civil and criminal procedure.  The
British courts have done the same, a fact that is all the more significant
because Great Britain is a unitary state and because criminal procedure in that
country is in no way limited to situations that would in Canada be considered
criminal for constitutional purposes (the British approach is amply discussed
in Storgoff).  The practical considerations to which I have referred
earlier underlie this approach.                     It is certainly a
matter of concern that there appears to be no general procedure for quashing
search warrants issued under the Income Tax Act, but assuming that is
so, I do not think that makes resort to the provincial procedure
constitutionally permissible.  The courts have, it is true, at times turned to
civil procedure to assist in formulating rules in criminal matters, but as
McIntyre J. emphasized in Meltzer, supra, at p. 1770, "[t]he
fact that a procedural step deriving from civil practice was employed to meet
this problem cannot be said to have converted the matter into anything
approaching a civil appeal."  In short, the rule discussed in Meltzer
was simply a rule of criminal procedure, though it was no doubt inspired by its
counterpart in civil procedure.  I must confess to finding it strange that this
Court would find it necessary to incorporate provincial civil procedure on
appeals into federal criminal procedure to remedy the alleged defect to protect
a person who is the object of a search under an income tax statute when it has
shown itself to be unwilling to make such an implication in relation to habeas
corpus, which not only has a civil component but involves the liberty of
the subject.  It also overlooks the policy referred to in Seaboyer, supra,
against importing appeals into interlocutory matters.  As Cory J. put it in Knox
Contracting, supra, at pp. 353-54:                     In
summary, the issuance of search warrants is an interlocutory procedure. 
Appeals from interlocutory orders by the parties in criminal proceedings must
be based upon a statutory provision.  No such statutory provision exists and
thus no appeal lies to the Court of Appeal.  It is appropriate that the Code
provides no avenue for appeal from these procedures, as such appeals are
neither desirable nor necessary and should not, as a general rule, be
encouraged.  See Mills v. The Queen, supra, and R. v. Meltzer,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 1764.  Matters of this kind are best dealt
with at trial.  Any other course invites delay.                     I should observe
that there are a number of pre-trial remedies available to a person who has
been the subject of a search.  I have earlier referred to s. 231.3(7) which
provides for review.  Under this provision, a judge may order the return of
anything seized that is not required for an investigation or a criminal
prosecution or was not seized in accordance with the warrant or s. 231.3.  Cory
J. refers to other possibilities in his reasons in Knox Contracting in
the following passage, at p. 353:                     This
does not mean that an accused is left without remedies.  Wide powers are
provided in the Criminal Code  for a person from whom articles are seized
pursuant to a search warrant to make a speedy application for their return. 
See Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, s. 490(7), (8), (10) and
(17).  If the matter should proceed to trial then of course the accused may
attack the search warrant in any way he considers appropriate, including the
allegation that it infringes the provisions of s. 8  of the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms .  If, for any reason, the matter should not go to
trial, a party may still seek civil damages for compensation.  No injustice
arises from the absence of a right to appeal the order issuing the search
warrants.  The "Anomaly"                     I will now comment
on the "anomaly" that different rights of appeal may exist depending
on whether a search warrant is sought before a judge of a provincial superior
court or a judge of the Federal Court.                     But, before
arriving at any conclusion about what a court should do in the face of this
alleged anomaly, one should examine the relevant policies behind the
legislation.  I should first of all say that the principal forum for the
operation of criminal procedure is, of course, in the provincial court system,
and there no appeal is provided.  The likelihood is that Parliament did not
really advert to the different procedures in the two courts.  The right of
appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal was not tailored to the needs of the
criminal justice process, as it was in respect of criminal procedure in the
provincial courts.  Rather the provision for appeal in the Federal Court is a
general one intended to meet the needs of the ordinary jurisdiction of that
court, the major function of which is to deal with questions of a civil and administrative
character and other matters peculiarly of federal concern, rather than the
criminal justice process where different considerations may come into play.  In
short, the anomaly may lie in the assumption that a right of appeal to the
Federal Court of Appeal exists.  For there are strong reasons of policy for not
providing appeals from interlocutory decisions in criminal proceedings
generally.  While I quite understand the temptation to read in a right of
appeal in this case for the sake of consistency, I am deeply concerned about
the general implications of courts of appeal reading in rights of appeals and
other procedures into criminal proceedings.  I might also note that there may
still be an issue of the appropriate role for appellate review of the issue of
search warrants by the Federal Court of Appeal pursuant to s. 28  of the Federal
Court Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-7 .  It would amount to an unusual venture of
the Federal Court of Appeal into the realm of what is largely criminal
procedure.                     There is another
factor that must be kept in mind.  I am not, as I shall indicate later,
completely certain that the judge issuing the warrant was intended to entertain
a constitutional question of the kind raised here.  If so, there could be no
appeal from that question and, in any event, since the issues with which the
judge deals in performing his functions are of a factual nature, there is
little, if any, room for an appeal at all.                     In view of all
these unanswered questions, it would be unsafe in the absence of argument to
simply assume that the general right of appeal set forth in the Federal
Court Act  applies to a proceeding provided in a separate statute that is a
mere adjunct to a general system of criminal procedure where appeals of this
nature are not provided.  If one reads all the relevant legislative provisions
harmoniously in accordance with their underlying purpose, it is certainly
arguable that Parliament did not intend by this minor grant of jurisdiction to
the Federal Court (in what is for it an untypical jurisdiction) to have had in
contemplation the general right of appeal devised for quite different types of
proceedings.  There may, in other words, be no anomaly at all.                     I should add that
there is nothing in Baron v. Canada, supra, that touches the
matter.  That case involved an action for a declaration which was clearly
subject to appeal.  At all events, no issue of jurisdiction was raised in that
case.  The Declaration of Unconstitutionality                     Since I agree with
my colleague that the appellants should be permitted to pursue their action for
a declaration, I can be brief.                     The action for a
declaration ultimately rests in the inherent powers of the Court of Chancery
(see Taylor v. Attorney-General (1837), 8 Sim. 413, 59 E.R. 164; and Guaranty
Trust Co. of New York v. Hannay & Co., [1915] 2 K.B. 536, at p. 538),
but the courts were for many years very wary about exercising it; see I. Zamir,
The Declaratory Judgment (1962), at pp. 7-9.  Two judicial policies
seemed to effectively prevent the use of the declaration:  first, the
discretion to refuse the declaration where other remedies were available, and
second, the refusal to grant the declaration where no other relief was sought. 
Statutory reform provided the initial impetus to free the use of the
declaration by removing the second barrier.  In England, statutory changes
culminated in Order 25, rule 5, adopted in 1883 which provided that a
declaration could be given even when no other relief was sought.  Statutory
provisions to the same effect now exist in all Canadian jurisdictions; in
British Columbia, it appears in the Rules of Court, r. 5(22).  Partly in
response to the statutory changes, the courts came to realize the value of the
declaration as a remedy in the modern law; see Zamir, supra, at pp.
4-6.  The landmark decision of Dyson v. Attorney-General, [1911] 1 K.B.
410, signalled the awareness in the courts of the utility of the declaration as
a remedy for contesting Crown actions.  This proved of great value in Canada as
a means of determining whether laws fell within federal or provincial powers;
see Attorney General of Canada v. Law Society of British Columbia,
[1982] 2 S.C.R. 307, and it seems quite natural that it should also be used as
a means of testing the conformity of legislation with the Charter  in
appropriate cases.                     In my view, the
action can appropriately be used here.  Since the declaration by its nature
merely states the law without changing anything (see B. L. Strayer, The
Canadian Constitution and the Courts (3rd ed. 1988)), it does not, in
essence, constitute a review of a decision taken in a criminal proceeding.                     It by no means
follows, however, that the declaratory judgment should be widely used as a
separate collateral procedure to, in effect, create an automatic right of
appeal where Parliament has, for sound policy reasons, refused to do so.  It
must be remembered that the inherent power of the courts to declare laws
invalid is a discretionary one, and that discretion must be used on a proper
basis.  If the power is routinely used whenever any particular step in a
criminal proceeding is thought to be unconstitutional, it would result in
bringing through the back door all the problems Parliament sought to avoid by
restricting appeals.                     The policy concern
against allowing declarations, even of unconstitutionality, as a separate and
overriding procedure is that they will, in many cases, result in undesirable
procedural overlap and delay.  As long as a reasonably effective procedure
exists for the consideration of constitutional challenges, I fail to see why
another procedure must be provided.  This is consistent with the discretion to
grant the declaratory remedy  in its traditional use (see Zamir, supra,
c. 6; Terrasses Zarolega Inc. v. Régie des installations olympiques,
[1981] 1 S.C.R. 94).  It is also consistent with the practice in respect of
public interest standing declarations, where the courts are concerned that
there be no other reasonable and effective way to bring the issue before the
courts; see Canadian Council of Churches v. Canada (Minister of Employment
and Immigration), [1992] 1 S.C.R. 236.                     The question then
becomes whether there is a reasonably effective procedure.  In the present
state of the law, I do not think there is.  While s. 231.3(7) and other
procedures afford a measure of protection to the appellants, they do not fully
respond to the concern that there is no adequate statutory provision for
constitutional review of a search warrant.  This may be contrasted with the
situation after an accused has been charged.  When the trial process begins,
there will be a "competent court", the trial judge, to deal with Charter 
applications and, where necessary, special problems can be dealt with by
interventions under s. 24(1)  by another superior court judge; see Rahey,
supra, Smith, supra.  At that stage, there must be few
circumstances indeed when an accused should be permitted to pursue an action
for a declaration, though it has proved useful as a tool by persons other than
the accused whose constitutional rights are directly affected by a decision
taken in the course of criminal proceedings; see Re Southam Inc. and The
Queen (No. 1) (1983), 41 O.R. (2d) 113 (C.A.), Canadian Newspapers Co.
v. Attorney-General for Canada (1985), 49 O.R. (2d) 557 (C.A.).                     It is different at
the pre-trial stage.  Where a search is being conducted, as in this case, there
is no trial judge and unlike the situation after the charge, no express Charter 
guarantee that proceedings must take place within a reasonable time.  An
investigation can go on indefinitely in continuing breach (if the search
provisions are unconstitutional) of the appellants' Charter  rights for
an extensive period. The property of the individual subject to the search may
remain in the custody of the state for a protracted period in violation of Charter 
norms.                     In ordinary
criminal cases, the problem presented in this case does not arise.  Power to
issue search warrants under s. 487  of the Criminal Code  is vested in a
justice of the peace and, accordingly, certiorari may issue from a
superior judge to test the legality of the procedure, and if found invalid, the
warrant may be quashed and any items seized must be returned.  The difficulty
here is that the power to issue a search warrant under the Income Tax Act
is vested in a superior court judge and at common law a decision of a superior
court judge cannot be the subject of collateral attack.                     The judge issuing
the warrant is not in a position to review for constitutionality at an ex
parte hearing, and I rather doubt that the judge, or another judge acting
for him, could do so on a Wilson type review: Wilson v. The Queen,
[1983] 2 S.C.R. 594.  Neither Wilson nor Meltzer is clear on this
point.                     The limited
function of the judge and the manner in which it must be performed, along
possibly with the fact that it is the kind of function ordinarily assigned to a
justice, may invite this construction.  I note that this Court has held that,
absent legislation, an extradition judge, who performs a function similar to a
justice at a preliminary hearing, has no jurisdiction to entertain Charter 
challenges:  Argentina v. Mellino, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 536.  The fact that
an extradition judge is usually a superior court judge does not alter the
matter.  But even assuming that the judge is competent to review the warrant
and the empowering legislation on the basis of constitutionality, I do not
think that would be a sufficiently effective remedy to bar resort to an action
for a declaration.  I say this because the judge's decision could not be
collaterally attacked at trial since it would be res judicata for a
trial judge and could not then be raised in appeals from the initial decision
(see Meltzer).  The end result, then, is that the appellants could well
be convicted on the basis of an unconstitutional statute, without opportunity
of review, and so be deprived of the full measure of constitutional protection
that is afforded in a prosecution under the Criminal Code  for even the
vilest offence.  The appellants would thus be caught between allowing the Crown
to retain their property indefinitely or lose the opportunity of having the
impugned provision tested on appeal in the ordinary way.  The same scenario
would follow by resorting to s. 24(1)  of the Charter ; see Mills, supra,
Meltzer, supra.  Since the decision of the judge would appear to
be a final one, it would, I should think, be open to appeal to this Court under
s. 40  of the Supreme Court Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. S-26  (see Argentina
v. Mellino, supra, at pp. 545-57), but such an appeal, of course,
can only be obtained with leave.                     My colleague,
Sopinka J., feels there must be a remedy.  I share that sentiment.  Like him, I
think it appropriate to permit the appellants to pursue an action for a declaration. 
Since the action for a declaration is a discretionary remedy, however, I think
it would be proper for a judge, in the exercise of his or her discretion, to
consider the specific circumstances presented and to refuse to entertain the
action if satisfied that criminal proceedings against the accused would be
initiated within a reasonable time.  This would avoid the overlap and delay
that have been among the major informing considerations in devising the rules
for the governance of the discretion to allow or not to allow an action for a
declaration to proceed.                     I conclude that a
declaration should issue declaring s. 231.3 of the Income Tax Act and
the search warrant issued thereunder to be of no force or effect.  While the
officials can be relied on to return the goods in light of this declaration, I
would further order the return of the goods and copies as consequential relief,
in order to make effective this declaration; see Attorney General of Canada
v. Law Society of British Columbia, supra, at pp. 329-31.  Another Remedy                     I stated earlier
that, at this stage of the proceedings, an action for a declaration is an
appropriate and just remedy.  I leave open the possibility, however, that certiorari
might have issued.  That would leave little room for the exercise of the
discretion to permit a declaratory action.  I realize, of course, that at
common law certiorari does not lie against a decision of a superior
court judge, and that there are very sound reasons for this rule.  But, it must
not be forgotten that what is alleged here is a breach of a constitutional
right which may call for an adaptation of the inherent powers of a superior
court to make the procedure conform to constitutional norms.  The courts are
the guardians of the Constitution and they must have the powers to forge the
instruments necessary to maintain the integrity of the Constitution and to
protect the rights it guarantees.  In Mills, supra, at pp.
971-72, I expressed my general approach to questions like these in words that
are apt here:                     It
should be obvious from the foregoing remarks that I am sympathetic to the view
that Charter  remedies should, in general, be accorded within the normal
procedural context in which an issue arises.  I do not believe s. 24  of the Charter 
requires the wholesale invention of a parallel system for the administration of
Charter  rights over and above the machinery already available for the
administration of justice.                     Nonetheless,
it is the Charter  that governs, and if the ordinary procedures fail to
meet the requirements of the Charter  fully, then a means must be found
to give it life.  In Ashby v. White (1703), 2 Ld. Raym. 938, 92 E.R.
126, at p. 136, Holt C.J. instructs us that "it is a vain thing to imagine
a right without a remedy".  The problem does not directly arise here, of
course, because the Charter  by s. 24(1)  provides that a court of
competent jurisdiction may provide such remedy as it considers appropriate and
just in the circumstances.  But there must at all times be a court to enforce
this remedy.  The notion that the remedy must fail or be ineffective for lack
of a competent court within the confines of the ordinary procedures for the
administration of criminal justice can no more be imagined than can the notion
of a right without a remedy.                     Even before the
advent of the Charter , this Court had asserted some constitutional
limits to the power of legislative bodies to insulate from judicial review
decision makers performing certain functions under statute; see Crevier v.
Attorney General of Quebec, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 220, and Canada Labour
Relations Board v. Paul L'Anglais Inc., [1983] 1 S.C.R. 147.  In these Charter 
days, this may call for a consideration of the extent to which proceedings that
involve the liberty and security of the individual can be insulated from prompt
and effective review for constitutionality by the device of assigning to a
superior court judge functions which for centuries have been performed by
inferior court judges subject to judicial review and which, even today, are
still performed by inferior court judges in the case of the most serious
criminal offences.  As I earlier mentioned, the judge issuing the warrant is
not really in a position to review for constitutionality at an ex parte
hearing, and assuming that judge is competent to review the warrant and the
empowering legislation for constitutionality later, the effect, since the
judge's decision is unreviewable, is to deprive the individual of that full
measure of constitutional protection which is afforded in a prosecution under
the Criminal Code  to even the vilest criminal.                     A court must look
at least askance at such a statutory scheme.  I note parenthetically that there
is at least one other instance where the actions of a superior court judge are
made subject to judicial review.  In extradition, the decision of the
extradition judge, who is usually a superior court judge, is subject to review
by habeas corpus.  Moreover, this Court has held that, absent
legislation, the reviewing judge, and not the extradition judge, is the court
of competent jurisdiction for the purposes of s. 24(1)  of the Charter ;
see Argentina v. Mellino, supra.                     I add one final
word.  I mentioned earlier that, at this stage of the proceedings, an action
for a declaration was appropriate.  It must be said, however, that certiorari
generally appears to be a more suitable instrument for reviewing the
constitutionality of the action.  The procedure has been honed to that use for
centuries.  Those who operate in the criminal law area fully understand its
workings.  It is a more expeditious instrument, and its discretionary character
is well known and adjustable to time and circumstance.  It has the advantage,
too, of being subject to a system of appeals carefully crafted and timed to
meet the needs of the criminal justice system.  I add that in view of
Parliament's obvious intention to insulate review the discretion should be
exercised in this kind of case subject to similar informing considerations as
those discussed in relation to declaratory relief to avoid overlap and delay in
proceedings.  If this approach is adopted, there would appear to be little use
for the declaratory action in this context.  Disposition                     For the above
reasons, I would, like my colleague, allow the appeal and set aside the
judgments of the British Columbia Court of Appeal and the British Columbia
Supreme Court, and would answer the constitutional question as follows:  Question:Whether
s. 231.3 of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended by
S.C. 1986, c. 6, limits the rights and freedoms guaranteed by ss. 7  and 8  of
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , Part I of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , being Schedule B of the Canada Act 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c.
11, and is consequently of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , Schedule B, Canada Act 1982, c. 11 (U.K.).  Answer:Yes,
in so far as s. 8  is concerned.  It is not necessary to consider s. 7 .                     A declaration
should issue declaring s. 231.3 of the Income Tax Act and the search
warrant issued against the appellants on February 27, 1993 are of no force or
effect.  In addition, an order should issue for the return of all documents, books,
records, papers and things seized together with any copies or notes that have
been made thereof.  The appellants are entitled to their costs throughout.  //L'Heureux-Dubé J.//                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     L'Heureux-Dubé
J. -- Although I was part
of the minority in Knox Contracting Ltd. v. Canada, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 338,
I feel bound by the majority decision in that case and, accordingly, join
Justice La Forest J.'s reasons in the present case.  //Sopinka J.//                     The reasons of
Sopinka, McLachlin and Iacobucci JJ. were delivered by                     Sopinka
J. --  I.  Introduction                     This is the second
of two decisions which concern the validity of search warrants under the Income
Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (hereinafter "ITA").  The
decisions arise in two appeals which were heard together.  In the first
decision, Baron v. Canada, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 416,  I concluded that s.
231.3 ITA and the search warrants issued under the authority of that
section violated s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
and were of no force or effect.  The present appeal raises the identical
substantive issue.  It arises out of an attack on a search warrant issued by
McEachern C.J.S.C. under s. 231.3 ITA.  But the respondent
contends that notwithstanding that these appeals raise identical issues, we
cannot come to the same conclusion nor provide the same relief in this appeal. 
This is because in Baron the Minister chose to apply to a Federal Court
judge for the search warrant whereas in this case the Minister applied to the
Chief Justice of the British Columbia Supreme Court in his capacity as a judge
of a provincial supreme court.  Relying on Knox Contracting Ltd. v. Canada,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 338, the respondent says there was no appeal to the Court of
Appeal and hence no appeal to this Court.                     I conclude that our
decision in Knox Contracting is not determinative in this case and that
the Court of Appeal had the jurisdiction to hear the appeal.  In this regard, I
limit my discussion to the form of proceedings for which an appeal was actually
sought in this case.  The basic relief requested was a declaration that the
relevant provisions of the ITA authorizing search and seizure violated
s. 8  of the Charter .  This was coupled with a motion to set aside the
warrants and seizure and for return of the documents.  This ancillary relief
was premised on the authorizing legislation is being declared invalid.  For the
reasons I gave in Baron, I conclude that the impugned provisions of the ITA,
the warrants issued under them and the searches and seizures carried out on the
strength of the warrants are inconsistent with s. 8  of the Charter  and
consequently of no force or effect, pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982 .  II.  The Facts                     The facts of the
present case are fully set out in the reasons for decision of McKenzie J. in Kourtessis
v. M.N.R. (1987), 15 B.C.L.R. (2d) 200 (S.C.), 36 C.C.C. (3d) 304
(hereinafter Kourtessis (Part 1), cited to C.C.C.).  Following an
investigation, officers of Revenue Canada formed the opinion that the
appellants Kourtessis and his company Hellenic Import-Export Co. had violated
s. 239 ITA in that they were evading or attempting to evade the payment
of taxes by making false and deceptive statements in income tax returns for the
years 1979-1984.  On October 22, 1986, Callaghan J. of the British Columbia
Supreme Court issued warrants to search for and seize documents which could
afford evidence of the alleged violations.  These warrants were subsequently
quashed by Proudfoot J. of the same court (as she then was) due largely to the
Department's nondisclosure of material information in the affidavit material
used before Callaghan J.  In particular, the Department had failed to disclose
that the investigators had been in contact with appellants' counsel who had
offered to supply any further documentation that was required.  The items that
had been seized were not, however, returned to the appellants and on February
27, 1987 McEachern C.J.S.C. (as he then was) issued the search warrant
challenged in this appeal for the seizure of relevant documents located at the
Department's premises, subject to the conditions that everything seized would
be sealed and the appellants would have 30 days to challenge the warrant.                     Within the 30-day
period the appellants instituted proceedings in the British Columbia Supreme
Court by way of originating petition challenging the warrant on constitutional
and other grounds.  The relief sought was an order:                     (a) 
quashing the warrant issued by McEachern C.J.S.C.;                     (b) 
quashing the search and seizure executed thereunder;                     (c) 
declaring s. 231.3 ITA to be inconsistent with ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Charter 
and consequently pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution Act, 1982  of no
force or effect;                     (d) 
to return the items seized;                     (e) 
to return all summaries, notes and outlines taken of the items seized;                     (f) 
prohibiting the Department from using the items or copies, summaries, notes or
outlines thereof or any information obtained therefrom; and                     (g) 
to destroy all copies, summaries, notes and outlines of the items that were not
for any reason returned to the appellants.                     The
non-constitutional grounds for the petition were summarized by McKenzie J. as
follows in Kourtessis (Part 1), supra, at pp. 310-11:                     The
[appellants] argue that the application for the second warrant [issued by
McEachern C.J.S.C.] was an abuse of the court's process in that it was an
attempt to relitigate issues which had been adversely and finally decided
against the Crown by Proudfoot J., that it was in effect a disguised appeal
from her order which cannot be entertained by another judge of the same court
and that the application and information put before the Chief Justice alleges
facts and raises issues which went to the root of the matter in the application
before Proudfoot J. and which should have been brought forward or emphasized at
that time, consequently the Crown is estopped from bringing forward those facts
at this stage.                     The appellants also
argued that the Department's application to McEachern C.J.S.C. for a warrant
was an interference with the court's administration of justice; that the
Department failed to exhaust all means available to them before applying for a
warrant, as required by Proudfoot J.'s order; that the information in support
of the application for a warrant failed to disclose the real purpose of the
search; and that the warrant was not reasonably specific.  The
non-constitutional attack was dismissed by McKenzie J. (Kourtessis (Part 1),
supra) and again by the Court of Appeal (Kourtessis v. Minister of
National Revenue (1989), 39 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, [1990] 1 W.W.R. 97, 50 C.C.C.
(3d) 201, 72 C.R. (3d) 196, [1990] 1 C.T.C. 241, 89 D.T.C. 5464 (hereinafter Kourtessis
(B.C.C.A.), cited to C.C.C.)).                     The constitutional
grounds for the petition were first, that for the reasons given as
non-constitutional grounds (abuse of process, disguised appeal, material
non-disclosure, etc.), the application for and issuance of the warrant violated
ss. 7  and 8  of the Charter  and second, that s. 231.3 ITA is
inconsistent with ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Charter  and consequently
pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution Act, 1982  of no force or effect. 
Neither the non-constitutional grounds nor the first leg of the constitutional
attack, challenging the application for and issuance of the warrant in this
case as distinct from the legislation under which the warrant was issued, were
pursued by the appellants before this Court.  The appellants' constitutional
attack is thus restricted to a direct attack on the legislation.  If the direct
attack succeeds, the warrant of February 27, 1987 and the search and seizure
will be declared invalid and set aside as a consequence of striking down the
legislation.  III.  Points in Issue  A.  Jurisdiction                     The following
preliminary issue arises which will occupy the bulk of my reasons: did the
British Columbia Court of Appeal have jurisdiction to entertain the appellants'
appeal from the judgment of McKenzie and Lysyk JJ. of the British Columbia Supreme
Court dismissing the appellants' application for a declaration and other
ancillary relief?  B.  The Charter                     On April 15, 1991,
a constitutional question identical to that stated in Baron was stated
by order of the Chief Justice:  Whether
s. 231.3 of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended by
S.C. 1986, c. 6, limits the rights and freedoms guaranteed by ss. 7  and 8  of
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , Part I of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , being Schedule B of the Canada Act 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c.
11, and is consequently of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , Schedule B, Canada Act 1982, c. 11 (U.K.).  IV.  Judgments Below                     Since our decision
in Baron is dispositive of the Charter  questions in this appeal,
and the judgments of the courts below in this appeal on the Charter 
issues were discussed in that case, it is unnecessary to reproduce here the
reasoning of the courts below on the Charter  challenge.  The following
summary thus concentrates on the jurisdiction issue.                     The appellants'
non-constitutional arguments were heard by McKenzie J. and dismissed on
July 6, 1987:  Kourtessis (Part 1), supra.  Their constitutional attack
was rejected on August 16, 1988 by Lysyk J., and as a result the entire
application was dismissed:  Kourtessis v. M.N.R. (1988), 30 B.C.L.R.
(2d) 342 (S.C.), [1989] 1 W.W.R. 508, 44 C.C.C. (3d) 79, [1989] 1 C.T.C. 56, 89
D.T.C. 5214.  The appellants appealed to the British Columbia Court of Appeal. 
Apparently unsure whether leave was required, they gave both notice of appeal
and notice of application for leave to appeal pursuant to the British Columbia Court
of Appeal Act, S.B.C. 1982, c. 7, ss. 6(1)(a) and 6.1(2).  The Minister
then brought a motion to quash the appeal on the ground that no appeal lay from
the B.C. Supreme Court's judgment.  After reserving judgment on the motion to
quash and hearing the merits of the appeal, the Court of Appeal allowed the
motion to quash, holding that it had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal and
that in any event it would dismiss the appeal on the merits:  Kourtessis
(B.C.C.A.), supra.  Leave to appeal to this Court was granted on
December 20, 1990, [1990] 2 S.C.R. viii.                     In the British
Columbia Court of Appeal, Taggart J.A., writing for a unanimous court on the
issue of appellate jurisdiction, held that the litigation in question was a
criminal proceeding subject to Parliament's exclusive jurisdiction to prescribe
criminal procedure, and that since no right of appeal could be found in the ITA
or the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46 , there was no appeal from
the Supreme Court's judgment.  The issue, according to Taggart J.A., was to
characterize the nature of the proceedings taken under s. 231.3 ITA.  If
they were criminal law proceedings, any right of appeal would have to be found
in the Criminal Code  due to s. 34(2)  of the Interpretation Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. I-21 , by virtue of which all the provisions of the Criminal
Code  concerning indictable and summary conviction offences apply to ITA
offences.                     Relying on the
reasoning in Goldman v. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. (1987), 35 C.C.C. (3d)
488, in which the Ontario Court of Appeal held that the offence provisions of
the Competition Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-23, could be sustained
exclusively by reference to the federal criminal law power in s. 91(27)  of the Constitution
Act, 1867  even though other parts of the Act might rely on the trade and
commerce power, Taggart J.A. concluded that while other parts of the ITA
may rely on other federal heads of power, the "offence and ancillary
provisions of the Act are constitutionally supported by s. 91(27) ":  Kourtessis
(B.C.C.A.), supra, at p. 210.  Accordingly, jurisdiction to entertain an
appeal from the British Columbia Supreme Court's judgment had to be found in
the ITA or the Criminal Code  and not the Court of Appeal Act. 
Taggart J.A. found no appeal right in the ITA or the Criminal Code . 
It made no difference in his view that the appellants were seeking a Charter 
remedy.  He held, following Mills v. The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 863, and
R. v. Meltzer, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1764, that the Charter  itself does
not confer an appeal right and moreover that in criminal proceedings there are
no appeals from interlocutory decisions which do not have the effect of
terminating the extant proceedings.  Since in his view the decisions of
McKenzie and Lysyk JJ. did not finally dispose of the trial proceedings, he
held that there was no appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal.  Finally, after
dismissing the appellants' remaining arguments, Taggart J.A. concluded that the
Court of Appeal was without jurisdiction to entertain the appeal and
accordingly the appeal was quashed.  V.  Analysis  A.  Does an Appeal Lie?                     I turn now to the
issue of whether an appeal lies to a provincial court of appeal from a superior
court judge's judgment dismissing an application which seeks, inter alia,
(1) a declaration that s. 231.3 is unconstitutional, and (2) an order quashing
and setting aside a s. 231.3 search warrant and the search and seizure carried
out thereunder.  This comes down to a question of the division of legislative
powers between the federal government and the provinces.  Whether the Province
of British Columbia has the power to legislate appellate procedure in respect
of the present proceeding turns on the nature of the proceeding.  This brings
us face to face with Knox Contracting, supra.                     In Knox
Contracting, officials of the Department of National Revenue brought an ex
parte application before a judge of the New Brunswick Court of Queen's
Bench for the issuance of search warrants under s. 231.3 ITA.  The
warrants were issued and executed, and the taxpayers applied to the issuing
judge to quash the warrants on the grounds that they were too vague or broad in
scope, they were based partly on information obtained in violation of a court
order, and being based partly on information illegally obtained they
contravened the unreasonable search provision in the Charter .  Unlike in
Baron or Kourtessis, no declaratory relief was sought.  The
issuing judge dismissed the application to quash the warrants.  An appeal to
the New Brunswick Court of Appeal was dismissed.                     The taxpayers'
appeal to this Court was also dismissed.  The issue before this Court was, as I
said in my reasons, "whether an appeal lies from the decision of a
superior court judge not to quash a search warrant issued pursuant to s. 231.3
of the Income Tax Act": Knox Contracting, supra, at p. 357. 
It will immediately be seen that the only relevant differences between Knox
Contracting and the present appeal are that the constitutionality of the
governing legislation was not challenged, nor was declaratory relief sought, in
Knox Contracting.  This Court split three ways and in the result held
that there was no appeal to the provincial court of appeal from the superior
court judge's decision on the application to quash the warrants.  Cory J.
(Wilson and Gonthier JJ. concurring) held that the proceeding in question was
truly criminal in that ss. 231.3 and 239 ITA were supportable by
reference to the federal s. 91(27)  criminal law power.  That being so, Cory J.
held, any appeal right must be found in federal legislation and since there was
no such provision in the ITA or the Criminal Code , the New
Brunswick Court of Appeal lacked jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.  It was
my opinion, on the contrary, in which L'Heureux-Dubé and McLachlin JJ.
concurred, that identifying s. 91(27)  as a source of constitutional support for
the ITA did not end the inquiry, as the ITA was also supportable
under the federal taxation power (s. 91(3) ).  That being so, the proceeding
instituted by the taxpayers had two aspects, one criminal and one civil, and
provincial rules of civil procedure would apply to give a right of appeal in
the absence of conflict with federal legislation, of which I found none. 
Finally, La Forest J. preferred my approach to the juristic character of the relevant
provisions of the ITA, but found that Parliament had shown an intention
to subject the proceeding to the ordinary rules of criminal procedure.  Hence
he agreed with Cory J.'s disposition of the appeal.                     With respect to the
juristic character of the ITA, which was supported by the majority, I
concluded that ss. 231.3 and 239 ITA were supportable under both the
criminal law power and the power in relation to federal taxation.  I said, at
pp. 358-59:                     While
I accept that ss. 231.3 and 239 are supportable under the power over criminal
law and procedure, that does not end the inquiry.  If these provisions are also
supportable under s. 91(3)  of the Constitution Act, 1867 , the federal
taxation power, then the jurisdiction to provide for an appeal is not exclusively
federal.  Section 92(14)  of the Constitution Act, 1867  confers
jurisdiction on the province to legislate in respect of procedure in civil
matters.  Accordingly, if ss. 231.3 and 239 are supportable under two heads of
power, one criminal and one civil in nature, a right of appeal can be conferred
by either federal or provincial legislation.  In the absence of conflict, both
forms of legislation are valid on the basis of the double aspect doctrine: see Multiple
Access Ltd. v. McCutcheon, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 161.                     The
notion that a statute is supportable under two heads of legislation is well
established: see R. v. Hauser, [1979] 1 S.C.R. 984; R. v. Wetmore,
[1983] 2 S.C.R. 284.  The fact that provision is made for enforcement,
including the creation of severe penalties, does not mean that the legislation
is necessarily criminal.                                                                     .
. .                     The
nature of the Income Tax Act is such that it was undoubtedly passed
under the federal taxation power.  Most of its provisions have nothing to do
with the criminal law power.  In support of this last proposition, I
referred to passages from R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R.
627, at p. 641, and Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of
Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), [1990]
1 S.C.R. 425, at pp. 516-17, to the effect that the ITA is essentially a
regulatory statute enacted under the federal taxation power, not a criminal
statute.  I went on to observe that, while the procedure to be followed in the
application of federal laws is within the paramount jurisdiction of Parliament,
provincial procedure was not ousted in the absence of conflict with federal
legislation.  Absent conflict, provincial laws of procedure, including rights
of appeal, were applicable except in respect of proceedings that are
exclusively criminal in nature.  Accordingly, in a matter arising under a
federal statute supportable under a head of power in addition to the criminal
law power, a provincial court which is seized of the matter may validly apply
its own rules of civil procedure unless precluded by federal legislation or the
matter is clearly related to a criminal proceeding.                     Applying this
analytical framework to the proceedings in Knox Contracting, I concluded
that there was no conflict with federal legislation and thus an appeal did lie
pursuant to the New Brunswick Judicature Act, R.S.N.B. 1973, c. J-2.  I
was, however, in the minority in this conclusion.  Cory J. (Gonthier and Wilson
JJ. concurring), as noted, having held that the relevant provisions were
enacted pursuant to the exclusive federal criminal law power, stated that a
right of appeal would have to be found in federal legislation and that it was
not necessary to inquire further into the relevant provisions' supportability
as tax law.  This was also a minority position.  The opinion of La Forest J.,
speaking for himself, which was decisive of the result, approved of my
reasoning on the juristic character of the ITA but agreed with Cory J.'s
disposition of the appeal.  He was of the view that in the circumstances
Parliament had shown a disposition to adopt "the ordinary procedures of
the criminal law for their enforcement" (at p. 356).  He concluded,
however, with the following caveat (at p. 357):  It
is unnecessary to consider whether a province could, in other circumstances,
constitutionally deal with procedure respecting a penal provision conjointly
supportable under the criminal law power and some other head of federal
legislative power.                     I conclude from the
foregoing that in Knox Contracting a majority supported the view that
the offence and search warrant provisions of the ITA are referrable to
both the federal criminal law and taxation power, and jurisdiction to legislate
procedure in matters relating to these provisions is shared between the
provinces and the federal government, subject to federal paramountcy in the
event of conflict between federal and provincial legislation.  I would add
that, in this situation, Parliament is free to assign jurisdiction to any
tribunal it chooses, whatever the source of its legislative power:  see R.
v. Trimarchi (1987), 63 O.R. (2d) 515 (C.A.), leave to appeal refused,
[1988] 1 S.C.R. xiv; Attorney-General for Alberta v. Atlas Lumber Co.,
[1941] S.C.R. 87.  If, however, federal legislation is silent, the ordinary
rule is that "where no other procedure is prescribed, a litigant suing on
a federal matter in a provincial court takes the procedure of that court as he
finds it:  see Alexander v. Vancouver Harbour Commrs., [1922] 1 W.W.R.
1254 (B.C.C.A.); Morris v. Morris, [1950] O.R. 697 (H.C.)":  Laskin's
Canadian Constitutional Law (5th ed. 1986), vol. 1, at p. 185.  This is
because the provincial superior courts are truly courts of general
jurisdiction, as Professor Hogg points out:                     The
general jurisdiction of the provincial courts means that there is no need for a
separate system of federal courts to decide "federal" questions.  Nor
does the power to decide federal questions have to be specifically granted to
the provincial courts by the federal Parliament.  On the contrary, if federal
law calls for the exercise of adjudication, but is silent as to the forum, the
appropriate forum will be the provincial courts.  (P.
W. Hogg, Constitutional Law of Canada (3rd ed. 1992), vol. 1, at p.
7-3.)                     This does not mean
that provincial legislation does not apply unless "adopted" by
federal legislation as my colleague suggests.  The authorities make it clear
that a province has legislative authority to adjudicate federal matters and
that such legislation is only ousted if it conflicts with federal legislation. 
In Adler v. Adler, [1966] 1 O.R. 732, Laskin J.A. (as he then was),
speaking for the Court of Appeal of Ontario, found s. 7(1) of the Matrimonial
Causes Act, R.S.O. 1960, c. 232, an Ontario statute, intra vires. 
This section provided that no appeal lay from a judgment absolute in divorce
cases.  Divorce is a federal matter and it was argued that provincial
legislation was incompetent.  At page 736, Laskin J.A. stated:  Of
course, it was open to the Ontario Legislature (save as competent Federal
legislation on divorce procedure might inhibit it) to vary its laws of
procedure in the disposition of divorce actions and appeals therein.  Moreover, in Ontario (Attorney
General) v. Pembina Exploration Canada Ltd., [1989] 1 S.C.R. 206, La Forest
J. went to considerable pains to stress the same point in relation to
admiralty.  In his judgment for the Court upholding provincial legislation
which conferred admiralty jurisdiction on a small claims court, he relied on a
number of authorities which upheld provincial jurisdiction in respect of the
adjudication of divorce cases.  At pages 219-20, he stated:                     The
foregoing position is supported by the following statement of Rand J. in Hellens
v. Densmore, [1957] S.C.R. 768, at p. 783:                     That
after Confederation a right of appeal could be given by provincial law (in
respect of divorce) appears to me to be unquestionable although the opposite
opinion seems to have been held in the provincial Courts:  the administration of
justice by the Province surely extends to the final determination within the
Province of the judgments of its own Courts.  Indeed,
unlike the cases already discussed, Rand J.'s holding cannot be explained on
the basis of the historical inherent jurisdiction of a superior court. 
Appellate jurisdiction must be conferred by statute.                     This conclusion was
no way dependent on adoption of provincial legislation by appropriate federal
legislation.  Rather, it was based on the provincial legislative power under s.
92(14)  of the Constitution Act, 1867 .  La Forest J. made this
plain in the following passage at p. 220:  It
seems to me, however, that such jurisdiction is inherent in the essentially
unitary character of the Canadian court system.  If, as indicated by the
divorce cases above cited, one accepts that jurisdiction in the provincial
superior courts is not solely derived from the specific character of superior
courts, but that s. 92(14)  of the Constitution Act, 1867  empowers the
provinces to grant them general jurisdiction, whether originally or on appeal
as in Hellens v. Densmore, supra, there is no reason why this
should not apply to provincial courts of inferior jurisdiction as well.  There
are considerations of a historical and practical nature that militate in favour
of this solution as well to which I shall advert later.  I turn first, however,
to a discussion of the cases that have dealt directly with the issue.                     The fact that there
is alleged to be a comprehensive procedure contained in federal legislation is
only relevant to determine whether provincial legislation is ousted because it
conflicts with federal legislation.  My colleague and I agree that it is not
ousted in relation to declaratory relief.  This includes, perforce, the right
of appeal conferred by provincial legislation.  In my view, it should also
extend to ancillary relief which enables the Court to give effect to the
declaration.                     It would be
anomalous if taxpayers who must challenge ITA search warrants in the
provincial superior courts were to find themselves without a right of appeal in
the event of an unsuccessful challenge, whereas no question arises with respect
to the appellate jurisdiction of the Federal Court of Appeal in identical
proceedings brought in the Federal Court.  The juxtaposition of Kourtessis
and Baron illustrates this practical difficulty.  In the former, the
Minister applied to the provincial superior court for a warrant, and in the
latter the Minister applied to the Federal Court for a warrant.  The ITA
provides that the Minister may make this choice in his or her discretion.  In
most cases, the option is exercised on the basis of convenience.  The exercise
of this option will have grave implications for the rights of the taxpayer if
we approve the blanket application of Knox Contracting to all
proceedings challenging ITA warrants in provincial courts.  If we uphold
the judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal in Kourtessis,
taxpayers who have the bad luck of being subject to a warrant issued by a
provincial superior court will have no appeal from a provincial superior court
judge's refusal to set aside the warrant, whereas if the warrant is issued by
the Federal Court there will be no problem of appellate jurisdiction, as Baron
demonstrates.  It would be unfortunate to allow a taxpayer's appellate rights
to be determined on the basis of the Minister's whim.                     My colleague, La
Forest J., suggests that there is no anomaly because, as I understand his
reasons, there may be no appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal in the
circumstances outlined in Baron.  The relief claimed in Baron was
identical to the relief claimed in this appeal and included a motion to set
aside the search warrants as well as an action for a declaration.  Relying on
this right of appeal, the Court of Appeal quashed the search warrants and
declared s. 231.3 ITA invalid.  That appeal was heard together with this
appeal in which jurisdiction was very much a live issue.  The issue of
jurisdiction in Baron, in contrast to this appeal, was not dealt with per
incuriam but on the basis that no question with respect to jurisdiction
existed.  If indeed the Federal Court of Appeal lacked jurisdiction, then this
Court's decision was a nullity.  Our jurisdiction to hear an appeal and to
affirm the judgment on appeal depends on the judgment on appeal being a valid
exercise of that court's jurisdiction.                     To avoid this
anomaly, I would distinguish Knox Contracting so as not to foreclose an
appeal in proceedings relating to:  (i)a
declaration that the statute authorizing a search warrant violates the
Constitution, coupled with                     (ii)an
application to set aside the search warrant.  In my view, having had the benefit of
a more elaborate explanation of my colleague's (La Forest J.) reasons in Knox
Contracting, these two remedies can be exercised, in combination, prior to
the laying of charges, and the result of such exercise may be appealed
consistently with the majority opinion in that case.  I will deal with each of
these two remedies separately.  (i)Motion
to Set Aside in Aid of an Action for a Declaration                     This form of remedy
is frequently employed to review the issuance of process pursuant to
legislation that is attacked on constitutional grounds.  Although often
combined with an action for a declaration, when employed alone, the distinction
between this remedy and an action for a declaration with consequential relief
is not of substance.  In both cases there is a finding or declaration that the
statute is invalid and anything obtained pursuant to the process issued
thereunder must be returned.  The principle of federal procedural exclusivity
in respect of proceedings to review search warrants issued under s. 231.3 ITA
would permit an action for a declaration that the statute is invalid and consequential
relief, including return of the articles seized.  This is discussed hereunder
and is a matter in respect of which my colleague and I are in agreement.  The
declaration that the statutory provision is invalid leads to the inexorable
conclusion that the warrant issued thereunder is also invalid.  Indeed, the
declaration could presumably expressly include the warrants.  If this
proceeding, conducted under provincial law, does not conflict with the
comprehensive regime relating to the enforcement of the ITA, I find it
difficult to accept that the additional mechanical step of setting aside the
warrant oversteps the bounds of constitutional propriety.  Indeed, it seems
peculiar to order the return of articles seized under a warrant that is left
standing, albeit mortally wounded by a declaration.                     Furthermore, it
must be stressed that a warrant under s. 231.3 ITA is granted ex
parte.  A motion to the superior court judge who issued the ex parte
order or to another judge of the same court to set aside the ex parte
order in accordance with civil procedure has been recognized by our Court as an
appropriate procedure to review an ex parte authorization to wiretap
issued under the Criminal Code .  In Wilson v. The Queen, [1983] 2
S.C.R. 594, McIntyre J., after reviewing a body of jurisprudence describing the
procedure for such review in civil cases, stated, at p. 608:  It
is my opinion that, in view of the silence on this subject in the Criminal
Code  and the confusion thereby created, the practice above-described should
be adopted.                     I see no reason why
a superior court judge reviewing an ex parte order would be precluded
from entertaining a Charter  argument.  Even if we assume that the
superior court judge issuing the ex parte order is not empowered to
decide a Charter  issue, this does not mean that the reviewing court will
be similarly limited.  For example, the reviewing judge with respect to a
wiretap authorization issued ex parte by a superior court judge is
entitled to entertain an attack at trial on the authorization under s. 8  of the
Charter  even if the reviewing judge is not a superior court judge.  See R.
v. Garofoli, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1421.  This conclusion applies a fortiori
when the reviewing judge is also seized of an action for a declaration of
invalidity based on the Charter .  In that situation, the motion to set
aside is simply called in aid to give effect to the right declared by the
court.  The court is clothed with jurisdiction to decide the Charter 
issue by virtue of the declaratory action.                     General federal
legislation should not be interpreted or applied to deny an effective remedy
where there has been a Charter  breach.  In Re Church of Scientology
and The Queen (No. 6) (1987), 31 C.C.C. (3d) 449, the Ontario Court of
Appeal considered the reviewability of search warrants issued under the Criminal
Code .  The court concluded that if certiorari did not apply because
the Charter  violation did not constitute an error of jurisdiction, the
reviewing judge was bound to consider a remedy under s. 24(1)  of the Charter . 
This accords with the view expressed by a unanimous Court in R. v. Smith,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1120, to which I refer hereunder.                     Accordingly, in my
view, in combination with an action for a declaration of constitutional
invalidity, a motion to set aside partakes of the same character as the
declaration for constitutional purposes.  For the reasons outlined below, when
employed in this manner it can be appealed as part of the disposition of a
proceeding for a declaration.                     I need not address
two other issues which are alluded to in my colleague's reasons, that is: 
whether a motion to set aside can be brought (i) independently of an action for
a declaration, or (ii) on grounds other than constitutional grounds.  Any
suggestion that s. 231.3(7) is the exclusive basis for questioning search
warrants under the ITA on conventional grounds must be left to
proceedings which raise that issue.                     I would simply note
that s. 231.3(7) does not appear to permit a challenge to the validity of the
warrant on grounds that have been traditionally permitted.  Indeed, in an
earlier proceeding in this case, warrants were quashed by Proudfoot J. for lack
of disclosure and specificity.  Searches and seizures involve the most serious invasion
of privacy.  Search warrants issued under the Criminal Code  can be
attacked by motion to quash brought before the superior court of the province. 
The grounds include failure to disclose, lack of specificity, the existence of
less intrusive investigatory procedures and the like.  See Shumiatcher v.
Attorney-General of Saskatchewan (No. 2) (1960), 34 C.R. 154 (Sask. Q.B.), Re
Church of Scientology, supra, and R. v. Sismey (1990), 55
C.C.C. (3d) 281.  I would be surprised if this procedure were not available to
a citizen who is subject to a search under the ITA.                     An application
under s. 231.3(7) would be a wholly inappropriate proceeding to test the
constitutional validity of the provision under which the seizure is made.  Subsection
(7) applies only if the judge is satisfied that the documents seized will not
be needed for an investigation or prosecution or were not seized in accordance
with the warrant.  It can only be resorted to if both the warrant and the
statutory provision under which the warrant was issued are valid.  The
subsection is similar to s. 490  of the Criminal Code  which sets up a
more elaborate and detailed procedure for the return of documents.  If the
respondent's argument were accepted, it would follow that a motion to quash a
search warrant issued under the Code could not be taken unless it were
somehow fitted into an application for relief under s. 490 .  In my view, not
only is subs. (7) not an appropriate forum with respect to a
constitutional challenge of the search and seizure provision, but a judge would
not have jurisdiction to deal with such a challenge upon a plain reading of the
words of the subsection.  To the extent that Kohli v. Moase (1988), 55
D.L.R. (4th) 737 (N.B.C.A.), suggests the contrary, I must respectfully
disagree with it.                     (ii)   Declaratory
Relief                     In the alternative,
I would distinguish Knox Contracting on the basis that the procedure
relating to proceedings for declaratory relief on constitutional grounds cannot
be characterized as criminal law so as to exclude a right of appeal.  In Knox
Contracting the proceeding taken was a motion to quash.  There was no
constitutional challenge to legislation.  In this case, the proceeding taken
was not simply to quash the warrant but an action for a declaration that s.
231.3 was invalid on constitutional grounds.  A motion to quash, when not
combined with an action for declaratory relief, may take its character for the
purpose of division of powers from the underlying proceeding which it attacked. 
See In re Storgoff, [1945] S.C.R. 526, at pp. 585-86.  On the other
hand, an action for a declaration as to the constitutional validity of a
statute does not necessarily partake of the character of the statute which is
attacked.  It has a life of its own.                     This type of
proceeding owes its independent character in part to the fundamental role of
the provincial superior courts in Canada's constitutional system, particularly
their power to declare federal and provincial legislation unconstitutional.  The
jurisdiction of the provincial superior courts to issue declaratory judgments
on the constitutional validity of provincial and federal legislation (whether
as to vires or consistency with the Charter ) is fundamental to
Canada's federal system:  see Attorney General of Canada v. Law Society of
British Columbia, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 307, at p. 328.  This jurisdiction is
"constant, complete, and concurrent" with the jurisdiction of a
criminal trial court:  Mills v. The Queen, supra, at p. 892, per
Lamer J. (as he then was) (Dickson C.J., concurring); see also at p. 956, per
McIntyre J. (Beetz and Chouinard JJ., concurring) (the provincial superior
court is always a court of competent jurisdiction), and at p. 972, per
La Forest J.  This plenary jurisdiction is necessary both to enable the
provincial superior courts to discriminate between valid and invalid federal
laws so as to refuse to apply the invalid ones (Attorney General v. Law
Society of British Columbia) and to ensure that the subject always has
access to a remedy for violation of his or her Charter  rights and
freedoms (Mills).                     The declaration is
a traditionally civil remedy which in its modern incarnation originated in the
United Kingdom rules of court of 1883 (W. Wade, Administrative Law (6th
ed. 1988), at p. 594).  They provided that no action was open to objection
simply because it sought a declaration and no other relief.  This provision is
preserved today in almost identical form in the British Columbia Rules of
Court, r. 5(22), and in the rules or statutory provisions of other
provinces.                     The declaratory
action to declare a statutory provision unconstitutional is not transformed
from a civil remedy to a criminal remedy merely because the declaration relates
to a criminal statutory provision.  In Borowski v. Canada (Attorney General),
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 342, this Court held that a citizen who had an interest in the Criminal
Code  provisions relating to abortion other than that of a potential accused
could bring an action for a declaration that it was invalid on constitutional
grounds.  The action was tried and appeals taken in accordance with the civil
rules of procedure.  The appeal to this Court was dismissed by reason of
mootness, the provisions under attack having been struck down by this Court's
judgment in R. v. Morgentaler, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30.  No issue was raised
at any stage questioning its civil character.  A taxpayer under investigation,
quite apart from his interest as a possible accused, must have a right at least
equal to that of an interested bystander to attack on constitutional grounds a
law under which his books and records have been seized and are being retained. 
The right to do so must surely include an equal right to take the case to a
higher court.                     This does not mean
that an action for a declaration can be used as a substitute for an application
to the trial judge in a criminal case in order to acquire a right of appeal. 
By virtue of s. 24(1)  of the Charter , there are some proceedings
available to an accused in the context of a criminal case in respect to issues
that could be the subject of an action for a declaration.  One example is an
application to quash an information or indictment on the grounds that the
section of the Criminal Code  upon which the charge is based violates the
Charter .  See R. v. Morgentaler (1984), 16 C.C.C. (3d) 1 (Ont.
C.A.).  The same issue could be litigated by means of an action to declare the
section invalid.  The superior courts have jurisdiction to entertain such
applications even if the superior court to which the application is made is not
the trial court.  However, a superior court has a discretion to refuse to do so
unless, in the opinion of the superior court, given the nature of the violation
and the need for a timely review, it is better suited than the trial court to
deal with the matter.  See Mills, supra, per Lamer J. at
pp. 891-96, and per La Forest J. at pp. 976-77, affirmed by
the full Court in R. v. Smith, supra, at pp. 1129-30.  The
superior court would therefore have jurisdiction to entertain an action for a
declaration seeking this kind of relief but subject to the same discretion to
refuse to exercise it.  The superior court's discretion to decline to exercise
its jurisdiction on the basis set out in Mills and Smith, supra,
is buttressed by the discretionary nature of declaratory relief by virtue of
which the court can refuse to entertain such an action for a variety of
reasons.  The court is justified in refusing to entertain the action if there
is another procedure available in which more effective relief can be obtained
or the court decides that the legislature intended that the other procedure
should be followed.  See  E. Borchard, Declaratory Judgments (2nd ed.
1941), at p. 303, and I. Zamir in The Declaratory Judgment (1962), at p.
226.  See also City of Lethbridge v. Canadian Western Natural Gas, Light,
Heat and Power Co., [1923] S.C.R. 652, at p. 659, and Terrasses Zarolega
Inc. v. Régie des installations olympiques, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 94, at pp. 103
and 106.  As a general rule, this discretion should be exercised to refuse to
entertain the action when declaratory relief is being sought as a substitute
for obtaining a ruling in a criminal case.  This will be the apt
characterization of any declaration which is sought with respect to relief that
could be obtained from a trial court which has been ascertained.  The same
considerations apply before a trial court has been ascertained if the relief
sought will determine some issue in pending criminal proceedings and does not
have as a substantial purpose vindication of an independent civil right.  In
such circumstances, the mere fact that relief was sought in the guise of an
action for a declaration would not confer a right of appeal from the refusal to
entertain the action.                     In the present
case, however, no issue was raised in respect of the British Columbia Supreme
Court's jurisdiction nor in respect of the exercise of its discretion to
entertain the appellants' application by way of originating petition.  There
was no trial court in sight because no charge or charges had been laid.  While
the attack on the validity of the statutory provision authorizing the search
would affect the admissibility, at trial, of the things seized, it was also
vital to the civil interests of the taxpayer.  The search warrant would not
only authorize a trespass but seizure of personal property.  The petition for a
declaration was therefore properly entertained under the British Columbia rules
of procedure.  There is no reason why those rules which clearly applied at
first instance should not apply to permit an appeal in the circumstances of
this case.  If Parliament did not intend to exclude a petition for a
declaration under provincial rules, it cannot have intended to exclude an appeal
pursuant to the same rules.  B.  Constitutionality of Section
231.3                     For the reasons
that I gave in Baron, supra, I hold that s. 231.3 ITA
violates the reasonable search guarantee found in s. 8  of the Charter ,
and is consequently, pursuant to s. 52(1)  of the Constitution Act, 1982 ,
of no force or effect.  I would answer the constitutional question in the
affirmative.  VI.  Disposition                     I would therefore
allow the appeal and set aside the judgments of the British Columbia Court of
Appeal and the British Columbia Supreme Court.  I would answer the
constitutional question as follows:  Question:Whether
s. 231.3 of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended by
S.C. 1986, c. 6, limits the rights and freedoms guaranteed by ss. 7  and 8  of
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , Part I of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , being Schedule B of the Canada Act 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c.
11, and is consequently of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , Schedule B, Canada Act 1982, c. 11 (U.K.).  Answer:Yes,
in so far as s. 8  is concerned.  It is not necessary to consider s. 7 .                     A declaration will
issue declaring that s. 231.3 ITA and the search warrant issued
thereunder are of no force or effect.  In addition, an order will issue for the
return of all documents, books, records, papers and things seized together with
any copies or notes that have been made thereof.  The appellants will have
their costs here and in the courts below.                      Appeal allowed with
costs.  Section 231.3 of the Income Tax Act infringes s. 8  of the Charter .                     Solicitors for the
appellants:  Phillips & Vineberg, Montréal.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  John C. Tait, Ottawa.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario:  The Ministry of the
Attorney General, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Attorney General of Quebec:  Ouellette, Desruisseaux,
Veillette, Montréal.      * Stevenson J. took no part in the judgment.  