Hall v. Quebec (Deputy Minister of Revenue),
[1998] 1 S.C.R. 220  Mary Margaret Hall                                                                         Appellant  v.  The Deputy Minister of Revenue of Quebec                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Hall v. Quebec (Deputy Minister of
Revenue)  File No.:  25369.  Hearing and judgment:  December 3, 1997.  Reasons delivered:  February 12, 1998.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec    The appellant’s husband died in 1985.  In his will, he
named her the residuary legatee of all the property of the estate, which
included an investment portfolio.  During its first fiscal year, the estate
received $38,329 in interest and dividend income from the investment
portfolio.  In that fiscal year, the estate reported approximately
$27,580 in investment income, while the appellant reported the $10,910
that had been distributed to her by the estate.  In 1987, the testamentary
executor ended his administration, paid the residue of the estate to the
appellant and transferred the securities to her name.  The following year, the
Ministère du Revenu issued a new notice of assessment to the appellant in
respect of the 1986 taxation year that added $30,329 to her income.  It
claimed that this amount, which represented interest and dividends not paid to
the appellant, was “payable” to her by the estate under s. 652 of the Taxation
Act (“T.A.”) and was therefore taxable in her hands.  The appellant
filed a notice of appeal in the Court of Québec against this new notice of
assessment.  The appeal was dismissed, and the Court of Appeal affirmed the
decision of the Court of Québec.  Held:  The appeal
should be allowed.  The new notice of assessment in respect of the 1986
taxation year should be quashed.  While the testator referred in his will to his
“trustees and executors”, which might be taken as expressing an intention to
create a trust, the absence of a transfer or conveyance of the property to a
trustee precludes such a conclusion.  The will simply created a testamentary
succession.  Furthermore, s. 646 T.A. does not have the effect of
equating a simple testamentary succession with a trust.  The legislature
employed a specific drafting technique and used the word “trust” to cover
several concepts in order to simplify the text of the Act.  The interest and dividends generated by the securities
bequeathed to the appellant were subject to the testamentary executor’s
seizin.  The effect of the right of accession provided for in art. 409 C.C.L.C.
is to make the fruits and income subject to the same rules as the principal
property.  Thus, universal legatees become ipso jure the owners of the
fruits and income produced by the property to which they are entitled. 
However, this right of ownership is subject to the same conditions as the
principal, that is, the fruits and income from the property covered by the
executor’s seizin are also included in that seizin and are not “payable” to the
universal legatee until the estate has been administered.  In this case, by
granting the executor a seizin in terms as broad as those provided for in the
will, the testator expected the executor to have the power to administer the
fruits and income generated by the bequeathed property.  The testator was under
no obligation to specify that these fruits and income were included in the
executor’s seizin, since they were included in it by operation of the law
alone.  It is only when a testator wishes to exclude the fruits and income from
the property included in the executors’ seizin that he or she must do so
expressly.  Furthermore, the rule that the income produced by the immoveables
is not included cannot be applied to the income produced by the moveables,
since the former are excluded from the seizin.  However, where, as here, the
testator states that the immoveables are included in the estate, the income
they produce is also included in the executors’ seizin by virtue of the
principle of accession.  Cases Cited  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Civil Code of Lower Canada, arts. 409, 596, 863 et seq., 871, 891, 918, 921, 981a
et seq.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, art. 777.   Authors Cited  Brière,
Germain.  Précis du droit des successions, 3e éd.
Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur, 1993.  Comtois, Roger.  “L’exécuteur
testamentaire” (1967), 2 R.J.T. 533.  Jolin, Marc.  Les impôts sur le
revenu et le décès.  Montréal:  Association québécoise de planification
successorale, 1978 (feuilles mobiles mises à jour en décembre 1994, envoi
no 19).  Mayrand, Albert.  Les
successions ab intestat.  Montréal:  Presses de l’Université de Montréal,
1971.   Planiol, Marcel, et Georges
Ripert.  Traité pratique de droit civil français, t. 5, 2e
éd. par André Trasbot et Yvon Loussouarn.  Paris:  L.G.D.J., 1957.   Toullier, Charles Bonaventure
Marie.  Le droit civil français, t. 4, 5e éd.  Paris: 
J. Renouard, 1830.  Traité de droit civil du Québec,
t. 5, par Hervé Roch.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur,         
1953.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[1996] R.D.F.Q. 41, 96 D.T.C. 6538, [1996] Q.J. No. 942 (QL), affirming a
decision of the Court of Québec, [1991] R.D.F.Q. 194.  Appeal allowed.  J. L. Marc Boivin, for
the appellant.  Pierre Séguin and Martine
Bergeron, for the respondent.  English version of the judgment of the Court delivered
by  //Gonthier J.//  1                        Gonthier J. -- Following the hearing of
this case, the appeal was allowed from the bench with reasons to follow.  These
are those reasons.  This appeal raises two fundamental issues relating to the
Quebec law of successions.  The first concerns the nature and effects of the
testamentary executor’s seizin.  The second is whether the fruits and income
generated by property after the testator’s death are subject to the executor’s
administration or whether they pass unconditionally to the heirs and legatees.  I.  Facts  2                        George W. Hall, the
appellant’s husband, died on May 3, 1985.  In his will, he named her the
residuary legatee of all the property of the estate.  3                        The estate included
an investment portfolio.  The will appointed the appellant and her son James
Douglas Hall as testamentary executors.  In view of the appellant’s
advanced age and lack of business experience, it was Mr. Hall who settled
the estate.  The will listed and specified the powers of the testamentary
executors, extending them beyond the year and a day provided for in
art. 918 of the Civil Code of Lower Canada.  More specifically,
clause 8 of the will read in part as follows:                                                                     . . .  My Executors and Trustees shall
have seizin and possession of all my property, moveable and immoveable, real
and personal, and with powers beyond the year and a day limited by law
and until the complete execution of this my will and the final division and
distribution of the capital of my estate.  In addition to all other powers
they have by law, my Executors and Trustees shall, without judicial
authorization or the consent of any beneficiary, have the following powers which
they may exercise in their uncontrolled discretion:                                                                       . . .  (f)   to determine whether any moneys received or
disbursed shall be on account of capital or of income or of both and in
what proportions, and all other questions of like character which may arise in
the course of their administration;                                                                     . . .  (j)   to postpone the sale, realization,
calling in and conversion of the whole or any part of the assets of my
estate without being responsible for any loss resulting from such postponement,
particularly as to any shares of The Royal Trust Company which I may own at the
time of my death, it being my desire that my Executors and Trustees may
retain them as long as they deem it advisable to do so;                                                                     . . .  (n)   and generally to perform all acts of
administration and also other acts or [sic] ownership in the same manner
and with the same effect as if they were the absolute owners of my estate
and to decide all questions which may arise in the course of their
administration, realization, partition or winding up of my estate and their
decision, whether made in writing or implied by their acts, shall be conclusive
and binding on all beneficiaries.  [Emphasis added.]  4                        During its first
fiscal year ending May 3, 1986, the estate received $38,329 in interest
and dividend income from the investment portfolio.  This sum was deposited in
the name of the estate in a bank account opened for that purpose.  During that
first fiscal year, the estate paid off the testator’s debts, paid a portion of
the individual legacies and distributed $10,910 to the appellant.  In its
income tax return for that fiscal year, the estate reported approximately
$27,580 in investment income, while the appellant reported the
$10,910 that had been distributed to her.    II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  7                        Sections 646, 652
and 663 T.A. read as follows at the relevant time:  646.  In this Part, a
trust, wherever it is created, or an estate, referred to in this title
as a “trust”, shall also include the trustee, testamentary executor,
administrator, heir or other legal representative having ownership or control
of the property of the trust or estate.  Likewise, a beneficiary
shall include every person having a right in a trust.  652.  For the purposes
of paragraph a of section 657 and sections 663, 667 and 672 to 676, an
amount shall not be considered payable in a taxation year unless it has
actually been paid in the year to the person to whom it was payable or unless
that person was entitled to demand payment of it in that year.  663.  The income of
a trust for a taxation year, before any deduction under section 130.1,
paragraphs a and b of section 657 or the regulations made under
paragraph a of section 130, must also, in the case of a trust
other than a trust governed by an employee benefit plan, be included in
computing the income of a beneficiary for the year to the extent that it has
become payable to him in the year, whether or not it is paid to him, and
must not be included for any subsequent year in which payment is made and, in
the case of a trust governed by such a plan, of a person who has contributed to
the plan as an employer to the extent that it was paid in the year to that
person.  [Emphasis added.]  8                        Articles 409, 871,
891, 918 and 921 C.C.L.C. provide as follows:  409.  The natural and industrial fruits of the earth, civil fruits, and
the increase of animals, belong to the proprietor by right of accession.  871.  Fruits and interest arising from the thing bequeathed accrue to
the benefit of the legatee from the time of the death of the testator, when the
latter has expressly declared in the will his intention to that effect.   In all other cases, fruits and
interest do not accrue until they are judicially demanded, or until the debtor
of the legacy is put in default.  891.  Legatees by whatever title, are, by the death of the testator, or
by the event which gives effect to the legacy, seized of the right to the thing
bequeathed, in the condition in which it then is, together with all its
necessary dependencies, and with the right to obtain payment, and to prosecute
all claims resulting from the legacy, without being obliged to obtain legal
delivery.  918.  Testamentary executors, for the purposes of the execution of the
will, are seized as legal depositaries of the moveable property of the
succession, and may claim possession of it even against the heir or legatee.  This seizin lasts for a year and a
day reckoning from the death of the testator, or from the time when the
executor was no longer prevented from taking possession.   When his duties are at an end, the
testamentary executor must render an account to the heir or legatee who
receives the succession, and pay him over the balance remaining in his hands.  If, under the will, his duties are
extended beyond the year and a day, he shall, upon the request of the heir or
legatee or of one of the heirs or legatees, produce from time to time a summary
account of his management and of the administration of the properties of the
succession if he is charged therewith, such account to be furnished without any
judicial formality or costs.  921.  The testator may modify, restrict or extend the powers, the
obligations and the seizin of the testamentary executor, and the duration of
his functions.  He may constitute the testamentary executor an administrator of
his property, in whole or in part, and may even give him the power to alienate
it with or without the intervention of the heir or legatee, in the manner and
for the purposes determined by himself.  III.  Judgments Below  A.  Court of Québec, Civil Division, [1991]
R.D.F.Q. 194  9                        In his judgment,
Judge Robichaud discussed the concept of “seizin”.  He noted that this concept
is of paramount importance, since in light of the law, academic opinion and the
will, a distinction must be made between two types of seizin:  that devolved
upon the legatee by operation of art. 891 C.C.L.C., and that of the
testamentary executor set out in art. 918 C.C.L.C.  10                      In Judge Robichaud’s
view, the seizin of a universal legatee has priority over that of the
testamentary executor (at p. 196):  [translation]
The Court is of the view, based on the writings of Mignault, that the seizin of
the universal legatee has priority over that of the testamentary executors, who
are regarded merely as depositaries, as their possession confers no attributes
incidental to the right of ownership recognized in our law, including in
particular that of enjoyment of the fruits generated by the capital.  11                      He rejected the
appellant’s argument that s. 646 T.A. equates an estate with a trust and
held, accordingly, that [translation]
“it should be concluded that it is the estate that became the owner -- albeit
temporarily -- of the assets of the estate” (p. 196).  According to the
judge, s. 646 must be read in light of the other provisions of the Taxation
Act, including s. 663, which provides that the income of a trust, or
an estate, must be included in computing the income of a beneficiary if it has
become “payable” to the beneficiary, as it had in the case at bar.  12                      Finally, Judge
Robichaud found that the fruits and interest produced by the property
bequeathed to the appellant were not included in the testamentary executor’s
legal seizin, since they were generated after the testator’s death and
therefore did not form part of the estate patrimony.  He added that the will
conferred no power of management on the executors in respect of the fruits and
income produced by the bequeathed property.  B.  Quebec Court of Appeal, [1996] R.D.F.Q. 41  13                      Forget J. (ad hoc)
(LeBel and Tourigny JJ.A. concurring) began by noting that the will of the de
cujus established a simple testamentary succession, governed by
arts. 863 et seq. C.C.L.C., not a trust within the meaning
of arts. 981a et seq. C.C.L.C.  Forget J. also rejected
the appellant’s contention that s. 646 T.A. equates a simple
testamentary succession with a trust.  14                      Although under s. 647
T.A., an estate can be a separate taxpayer and constitute a taxable
entity as of the testator’s death, s. 663 T.A. creates an exception in
providing that [translation] “the
income of a trust -- and consequently that of an estate -- must be included in
computing the income of a beneficiary -- the residuary universal legatee in
this case -- to the extent that it ‘has become payable’ to him in the year,
whether or not it is paid to him” (p. 44).  Section 652 T.A. for
its part provides that an amount becomes “payable” in the year if it has
actually been paid to the person to whom it was payable, or if that person was
entitled to demand payment of it.  15                      It therefore had to
be determined whether the appellant could demand payment of the income during
the first fiscal year of the estate.  The respondent answered in the
affirmative, while the appellant maintained that it was up to the testamentary
executors to choose the time when the amount would be paid, upon termination of
the administration of the estate.  Forget J. stated that since the Taxation
Act does not expressly derogate from the general law, the principles of the
civil law relating to successions and the rights of legatees must be applied to
answer this question.  16                      The Court of Appeal
pursued its reasoning by noting that the will creates a residuary universal
legacy of the testator’s moveable and immoveable property in favour of the
appellant.  Thus, the appellant became the owner of the bequeathed property on
the day of the testator’s death, without any formalities.  Pursuant to
art. 891 C.C.L.C., concerning the seizin of legatees, and the right
of accession provided for in art. 409 C.C.L.C., the appellant also
acquired ownership of the fruits of the bequeathed property, and the right to
obtain payment thereof and to prosecute all claims arising therefrom, upon her
husband’s death.  As for art. 871 C.C.L.C., which could limit the
appellant’s right to the fruits and interest arising from the bequeathed
property, Forget J. concluded that it does not apply to a universal
legatee, since the testator, having bequeathed his or her entire patrimony to
the universal legatee, does not need to expressly grant the interest arising
from the bequeathed property to him or her.  17                      As for the
testamentary executors, Forget J. reiterated that they have only de facto
possession of the estate, as opposed to the legatees’ de jure
possession.  Furthermore, according to the judge, the executors’ de facto
seizin does not cover the fruits and income from the bequeathed property, since
they are subsequent to the testator’s death and have never formed part of the
estate patrimony.  Finally, since the will of the late George Hall did not
refer to the income from the estate’s moveable property, it must be concluded
that it “devolved” upon the appellant at the same time as the bequeathed
property.  Accordingly, Forget J. concluded that the appellant was entitled to
control the income of the estate as of her husband’s death and was therefore
entitled to demand payment thereof.  He added that the appellant’s position
could lead to all sorts of abuse, such as income splitting.  IV.  Issues  18                1.    What is the legal
nature of the seizin of legatees and that of testamentary executors, and how do
they coexist?  2.                 Does a
testamentary executor’s seizin extend to investment income generated after the
testator’s death?  V.  Analysis  19                      Before discussing the
main issues, it must first be determined whether the will of the late George W.
Hall created a true trust, or simply a testamentary succession.  This
distinction is important because the two legal institutions are not governed by
the same provisions of the Civil Code of Lower Canada and have different
legal consequences.  20                      In his will, the
testator referred to his “trustees and executors”, which might be taken as
expressing an intention to create a trust.  However, the absence of a transfer
or conveyance of the property to a trustee precludes such a conclusion.  In the
fourth clause of his will, the testator transmitted his property to the
appellant in the following terms:  All the rest and residue of my
property, moveable and immoveable, real and personal, of which my succession
may be composed at the time of my death, I give and bequeath in absolute
ownership to my said wife.  It is thus clear that the testator did not intend to create a trust;
this was quite simply a testamentary succession.  21                      Furthermore, the
Court of Appeal was correct in concluding that s. 646 T.A. does not
have the effect of equating a simple testamentary succession with a trust.  As
it stated, the legislature simply wished to employ a specific drafting
technique by using the word “trust” to cover several concepts in order to
simplify the text of the Act.  A.  Coexistence of the Seizin of Legatees with that
of Testamentary Executors  22                      Pursuant to ss. 652
and 663 T.A., the income of an estate must be included in computing the
taxable income of a person who was entitled to demand payment of it
during the taxation year, whether or not the income was paid to the person.
However, the Taxation Act says nothing about a legatee’s right to demand
payment of the bequeathed property; it is therefore necessary to refer to the
principles of civil law, and more specifically to the concept of seizin, in
order to determine as of when a person is entitled to demand payment thereof:  Royal
Trust v. Québec (Sous-ministre du Revenu), [1990] R.D.F.Q. 36
(C.A.).  It follows that it is first necessary to consider the very nature of
the legatee’s seizin and of that of the testamentary executor and, second, to
determine whether one takes precedence over the other.  (1)   Seizin of the Legatee  23                      The source of the
legatee’s seizin is art. 891 C.C.L.C., which provides that legatees
“are, by the death of the testator, or by the event which gives effect to the
legacy, seized of the right to the thing bequeathed”.  This is a vague, and
often misunderstood, concept.  The term “seizin” has its origin in the German
expression for “possession” (G. Brière, Précis du droit des successions (3rd ed.
1993), at p. 64).  Without going into the history of this ancient concept,
it can be noted that under the Custom of Paris, seizin distinguished a
legitimate heir from a universal legatee, who was not [translation] “seized as of right” and had to apply to the
heir to obtain delivery of his or her legacy in order to be placed in
possession (Traité de droit civil du Québec, t. 5, by H. Roch,
1953, at p. 441).    [translation]
The seizin referred to in the maxim the dead seize the living is the
right of possession of the deceased, which continues in the person of the
heir.  At the very instant of death, and by operation of the law alone, this
right passes to the person the law calls to the succession; it passes
immediately and without interruption together with the right to possess,
irrespective of the fact of possession, even before the heir knows that the
succession has opened.  26                      Seizin thus has the
effect of avoiding a gap in possession.  It confers the rights relating to
possession on the legatee, without it being necessary for the legatee to be in
actual possession of the bequeathed property.  It may be that the legatee does
not even have the requisite intention for possession such as where, for
example, he or she is not even aware of the testator’s death.  Consequently,
seizin is [translation] “the
right one has to take effective possession of the patrimony of the de cujus
and undertake, both passively and actively, the actions available to him or
her” (Mayrand, supra, at p. 42).  In addition to having a seizin
that confers the rights relating to possession, it is indisputable that the
legatee is the owner of the bequeathed property as of the testator’s death.  (2)  Seizin of the Executor  27                      Article 918 C.C.L.C.
provides that testamentary executors, “for the purposes of the execution of
the will, are seized as legal depositaries of the moveable property of the
succession, and may claim possession of it even against the heir or legatee”. 
Thus, the executor’s seizin differs from that of the legatees in that it is
granted so that the executor may execute the will.  Article 921 C.C.L.C.
provides that this seizin may be expanded by the will.  It is therefore
necessary to refer to the will in order to determine the scope of the seizin. 
Once the execution of the will is terminated, the seizin comes to an end even
if the testator extended it beyond that time.  28                      The effect of the
seizin therefore appears to be that the executor is in a sense given a mandate
to carry out and give effect to the testator’s wishes.  As Mignault stated, the
executor’s seizin is [translation]
“the means to carry out this mandate and the purpose of the execution is to
give effect to the clauses of the will” (Mignault, supra, t. 4,
1899, at p. 464).  29                      Article 918 suggests
that the executor’s seizin is consistent with the concept of a depositary. 
However, the comparison between the execution of a will and a deposit is not
entirely appropriate, since the executor does not necessarily have custody of
the property, whereas a depositary must keep it until the end of the deposit
(R. Comtois, “L’exécuteur testamentaire” (1967), 2 R.J.T. 533, at
p. 538).  The executor is thus a mandatary whose mandate is to execute the
will; seizin is the means by which this execution can take place. (3)  Coexistence of the Two
Seizins  30                      According to the very
wording of art. 918 C.C.L.C., a testamentary executor may, during
the term of his or her seizin, claim possession of the moveable property even
against the heir and the legatee.  The codifiers’ intention in drafting
this article was clearly to confer on the testamentary executor more powers
than mere de facto possession.  Thus, the testamentary executor’s seizin
appears to have a certain priority over that of the heir during the
administration of the estate.  Notary Comtois, supra, at p. 538,
stated the following on this subject:  [translation]
The executor’s seizin does not exclude that of the successors.  There is a sort
of juxtaposition of seizins owing to the purpose of each of them.  Although
the successors are seized of the property, they cannot reap the benefits of
their seizin as long as the executor is discharging his or her duties, that is,
as long as the executor him- or herself has the seizin.  [Emphasis added.]  31                      This reasoning is
based on a joint reading of arts. 891 and 918 C.C.L.C.  For the
duration of their seizin, testamentary executors are entitled to claim the
moveable property of the estate, even in the legatee’s hands, because they must
ensure that the will is properly executed.  The testamentary executor’s seizin
must thus be given a certain priority over that of the legatee for purposes of
administration.  Even though the universal legatee is the real owner of the
bequeathed property, art. 918 C.C.L.C. provides that the executor’s
seizin prevails over that of the legatee.  The legatee therefore cannot
exercise his or her rights in the bequeathed property until the executor’s
seizin has terminated.  Smyth, supra, at p. 184, stated the
following in this respect:  [I]n one aspect, the executor’s seizin takes
precedence for he is empowered, in virtue of it, to claim possession of the
moveable property even against the heir or legatee.  32                      Thus, a more accurate
reading of the relevant provisions of the Taxation Act and the Civil
Code of Lower Canada, and in particular a joint reading of arts. 891
and 918 C.C.L.C., leads to the conclusion that a legatee is entitled to
demand payment of what the testamentary executor owes him or her, regardless of
whether or not he or she has been paid any amount, only once the testamentary
executor’s seizin has terminated.  The appellant cited the following passage
from Les impôts sur le revenu et le décès (1978 (loose-leaf)),
part II, at p. 1-4-7, by Marc Jolin, with which I agree:  [translation]
The Civil Code and Quebec commentators are far more specific as to the time
when legatees become entitled to the fruits and income than as to the time from
which they may demand payment thereof.  In the absence of a specific provision
on the subject, legatees appear to be entitled to demand payment of the
fruits and income arising from property bequeathed to them only from the time
when the administrative formalities of settlement of the estate are terminated. 
This time generally corresponds to the time from which a legatee has a right to
bring an action in revendication against an heir or executor who refuses to
deliver the bequeathed property.  [Emphasis added.]  In the case at bar, the right to bring an action in revendication
against the executor had not yet arisen, since the testator had extended the
duration of the executor’s seizin beyond the year and a day provided for in the
law and since the administration of the estate had not yet been completed in
1986.  33                      In its judgment, the
Court of Appeal appears to have failed to take into account, first, this aspect
of the juxtaposition of the testamentary executor’s seizin and that of the heir
over a certain period of time and, second, the fact that the seizin of the
former had priority over that of the latter.  With respect, I am therefore of
the view that the Court of Appeal erred in concluding that the legatee could
demand payment of the income from the moveable property in the first year of
the succession.  34                      Were this Court to
accept the Court of Appeal’s decision, every legatee would be entitled to
demand the bequeathed property during the actual liquidation of the
succession.  That would have the effect of depriving the executor of any power
of administration over the estate patrimony, which is surely not what the
legislature intended.  The testamentary executor’s seizin gives him or her
control over the estate patrimony, and legatees can demand their shares only
once that seizin has terminated.  The legatee’s rights are secondary to those
of the testamentary executor, who controls the property of the estate in
accordance with the instructions set out in the will.  35                      Furthermore, the
provisions of the new Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, seem to
have clarified Quebec law regarding the operation of seizin.  The new
art. 777 C.C.Q., which replaces art. 918 C.C.L.C.,
provides that during the administration of the estate, the liquidator has
priority over the legatees and heirs:  777.  The liquidator has, from the opening of the succession and
for the time necessary for liquidation, the seizin of the heirs and the
legatees by particular title.  The liquidator may even claim the
property against the heirs and the legatees by particular title.  [Emphasis
added.]  36                      The Court of Appeal
also concluded that, at any rate, the income from the bequeathed moveable
property was not included in the testamentary executor’s seizin because it [translation] “was subsequent to” the
testator’s death.  This second question must therefore be analysed.  B.   Is
Income Generated After the Testator’s Death Included in the Testamentary
Executor’s Seizin?   38                      In its judgment, the
Court of Appeal concluded that the executors’ seizin did not cover the fruits
and income arising from the property bequeathed to the appellant.  Applying the
principle that the universal legatee becomes the owner of the bequeathed
property on the day of death, without any formalities, the Court of Appeal
concluded that at that time the appellant, by virtue of the right of accession
provided for in art. 409 C.C.L.C., acquired all the rights to the
fruits and interest produced by the said property.  With respect, I am of the
view that the Court of Appeal erred in applying the principle of accession
provided for in art. 409 C.C.L.C.  More specifically, the Court of
Appeal applied art. 409 C.C.L.C. to the heir’s seizin but not to
that of the testamentary executor.  The Court of Appeal’s argument would appear
to be valid only if the effect of the testamentary executor’s seizin were to be
totally discounted.  According to the principles of the civil law, however,
even though executors have only de facto possession, art. 918 C.C.L.C.
authorizes them to claim possession of property in the hands of the heirs and
legatees during the period of their seizin.  In the case at bar, the terms of
the will extended the testamentary executor’s seizin to moveable and immoveable
property:  My Executors and Trustees shall
have seizin and possession of all my property, moveable and immoveable, real
and personal, and with powers beyond the year and a day limited by law and
until the complete execution of this my will and the final division and
distribution of the capital of my estate.  [Emphasis added.]  39                      Thus, art. 409 C.C.L.C.
should also apply to the testamentary executor’s seizin; the fruits and income
(accessories) will therefore follow the principal property (securities in this
case) in the testamentary executor’s hands.  40                      One may question
whether the respondent’s position is not based on a certain confusion among the
commentators as to whether the executor’s seizin applies to income produced by
a testator’s immoveables after his or her death.  Mignault (supra,
t. 4, at p. 461) wrote the following:  [translation]
In our law, it will be more prudent to adopt the opinion that has been approved
by the majority of the authors with respect to both the old law and the
contemporary law, and to decide that testamentary executors are not seized,
by virtue of legal seizin, of the income from immoveables that falls due
during the year of the seizin; this is based, inter alia, on the
peremptory reason that this income is not included in the testator’s estate but
is, on the contrary, the property of his or her heirs and legatees.  [Emphasis
added.]   (See also:  Smyth, supra, at p. 185; Brière, supra,
at pp. 279-80; Planiol and Ripert, Traité pratique de droit civil
français (2nd ed. 1957), t. 5, No. 686.)  41                      It is not surprising
that the majority of Quebec and French commentators have concluded that the
income generated by immoveables after the testator’s death is not included in
the executor’s seizin.  This is an application of the principle of accession
provided for in art. 409 C.C.L.C.  Since executors are not seized
of the immoveables (unless the will provides otherwise), it follows that by
virtue of the principle of accession, the executor is not seized of the post
mortem income derived therefrom.  Conversely, since testamentary executors
are lawfully seized of the moveable property, the income generated by that
property is subject to their seizin.   43                      The headnote of that
judgment contains the following statement:  “seizin of movable property of
successions by testamentary executors, under Art. 918 C.C., carries with
it the right to collect, during the year and a day of its duration, the
revenues of the immovable property”.  However, this statement is not supported
in the judgment.  After concluding that according to the commentators, the
income generated by a testator’s immoveables before his or her death is
part of the estate, Davidson J. stated the following (at p. 393):   44                      It is clear from this
passage that Davidson J. never concluded that the executor is seized of the
income generated by the immoveables after the testator’s death.  Rather, he
seems to have stated that the fruits and income generated during the life
of the testator are subject to the seizin.  45                      The effect of the
right of accession is to make the fruits and income subject to the same rules
as the principal property.  Thus, universal legatees become ipso jure the
owners of the fruits and income produced by the property to which they are
entitled.  However, this right of ownership is subject to the same conditions
as the principal, that is, the fruits and income from the property covered by
the executor’s seizin are also included in that seizin and are not “payable” to
the universal legatee until the estate has been administered.  The rule that
the income produced by the immoveables is not included cannot be applied to the
income produced by the moveables, since the former are excluded from the
seizin.   47                      Similarly, there is
also an obligation to state whether immoveables are included in the estate,
since art. 918 C.C.L.C. excludes them unless otherwise indicated. 
However, once the immoveables have been included, as in the present case, the
income they produce is also included in the executors’ seizin by virtue of the
principle of accession.  48                      In light of the
foregoing, it is clear that the Court of Appeal erred in holding that the
executors’ seizin did not extend to the fruits and income from the property
they were administering; it was simply an application of the principle of
accession.  A contrary conclusion would have the unfair effect of making
legatees pay tax on income from which they are not benefiting.  49                      As for the fear
expressed by the Court of Appeal that the appellant’s position would open the
door to all kinds of abuse, such as income splitting, I agree with the
appellant that income splitting is integral to the scheme of taxation of
estates and is not in any way reprehensible per se.  Furthermore, income
splitting has always been possible by means of a trust.  What could constitute
an abuse would be to keep the estate in existence as a taxpayer distinct from
the heir for an unreasonable length of time solely in order to reduce taxes. 
However, it is not s. 652 T.A. that will prevent such abuse.  Rather,
the best way to prevent tax evasion is to monitor the diligence of executors in
discharging their duties.  VI.  Conclusion  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellant:  Marc
Boivin, Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Veillette
& Associés, Montréal.  