Buanderie centrale de Montréal Inc.
v. Montreal (City); Conseil de la santé et des services sociaux de la
région de Montréal métropolitain v. Montreal (City), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 29  Conseil de la santé et des services sociaux de la région de Montréal métropolitain                                                                                      Appellant  v.  City of Montreal and Communauté urbaine de Montréal                                                   Respondents  and  The Attorney General of the Province of Quebec                                                                                                                Mis
en cause  and between  Buanderie centrale de Montréal Inc.                                               Appellant  v.  City of Montreal and Communauté urbaine de Montréal                                                               Respondents  Indexed as:  Buanderie
centrale de Montréal Inc. v. Montreal (City); Conseil de la santé et des
services sociaux de la région de Montréal métropolitain v. Montreal
(City)  File No.:  23604.  1994:  May 25;
1994:  September 30.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
quebec                         Held:  The appeal should be
allowed in part.   Cases Cited   Statutes and
Regulations Cited  Act
respecting an immoveable of La Communauté des S{oe}urs de Charité de la
Providence, S.Q.
1976, c. 75.     Companies
Act, R.S.Q. 1964,
c. 271.  Constitution
Act, 1867,
s. 125 .                     APPEAL from
judgments of the Quebec Court of Appeal, [1993] R.J.Q. 1051, 54 Q.A.C. 210,
affirming judgments of the Superior Court, [1990] R.J.Q. 408, dismissing the
appellants' actions in nullity and in reimbursement of taxes.  Appeal allowed
in part.                     Pierre Boyer, for the appellants.                     Serge Barrière, for the respondent the City of
Montreal.                     Gérard Beaupré, Q.C., Réjean Rioux and
George Kovac, for the respondent the Communauté urbaine de Montréal.                     English version of
the judgment of the Court delivered by                          Its member
establishments are exclusively public hospital centres or reception centres,
within the meaning of ss. 10 and 11 A.H.S.S.S.  In the same way the
Buanderie is the exclusive supplier of laundry services to these
establishments, as since 1983 the Ministère des Affaires sociales has no longer
provided any grants for establishing this kind of service within hospitals and
has instead required the latter to become members of the Buanderie.  The
services provided by it are limited to washing the linen of member
establishments, which once again is exclusively owned by them.                     In addition to the
question of services, the Buanderie's method of operation is also very
instructive.  It may be noted that the corporation's budget is determined
solely by operating costs and provides no profit.  In fact the entire cost is
divided among the establishments served, which pay a share proportionate to the
services received.  Additionally, each member of the corporation also acts as a
director.  Under the Buanderie's supplementary letters patent, issued on
February 26, 1985, the number of members of the corporation was increased
to nine, three being appointed by the Regional Council, two by the Minister of
Social Affairs and four by the user establishments, with the further condition
that the latter must be accepted by the corporation's board of directors. 
Finally, a provision of the original letters patent states that in the event of
dissolution of the corporation and distribution of its assets, property
acquired in whole or in part by means of a grant by the Ministère des Affaires
sociales would belong to the Regional Council.  Apart from this aspect, the
Regional Council is not financially or commercially involved in providing
laundry services but acts as another administrative committee, responsible in
this case for overseeing the achievement of the legislative purposes set out in
s. 18 A.H.S.S.S.                     From the beginning
of their existence until December 1985, the Regional Council and the Buanderie
had been exempt from real estate and business tax respectively as public
establishments pursuant to ss. 204(14) and 236(1.1) A.M.T.  During
that period the City of Montreal and the Communauté urbaine de Montréal
received grants from the provincial government proportionate to the taxes they
might otherwise have collected from these establishments.  This compensation
was paid pursuant to s. 255 of the same Act.                     On October 18,
1985, however, the Ministère des Affaires municipales informed the City of
Montreal that the grants were being terminated, the reason being that the
Buanderie and the Regional Council would no longer benefit from the tax
exemption they had enjoyed until that time.  Following this notice the
Communauté urbaine de Montréal in December 1985 issued certificates of
amendment for 1984 and 1985 making the immovable occupied by the Buanderie
subject to real estate tax.  On March 25, 1986 the City of Montreal sent
the Regional Council a notice of amendment to the valuation roll retroactive to
January 1, 1984 as well as its invoices for municipal, school and olympic
taxes.  Accordingly the immovable was subsequently entered on the roll from
1984 to 1988.  These amendments initially affected the Regional Council since
it was the owner of the immovable within the meaning of s. 1 A.M.T. 
On June 8, 1987 the City of Montreal also altered the roll of rental
values and entered the immovable on the roll for 1987 and 1988, thereby
depriving the Buanderie of the business tax exemption it had enjoyed.  On the
following July 17 the City sent the Buanderie a further notice of
amendment to the roll of rental values and this time entered the immovable on
the roll for 1986.                     The Regional
Council and the Buanderie challenged these entries in the Superior Court by an
action to set aside which also sought repayment of taxes paid under protest. 
Their actions were joined for hearing.  The Regional Council then sought to
amend the conclusions of its action to claim reimbursement of the amounts paid
for 1987 and 1988.  In support of its arguments it maintained that it is a
public establishment within the meaning of s. 204(14) A.M.T., in
the same way as the health establishments of which it said it is merely an
extension, and that it should accordingly benefit from the same real estate tax
exemptions.  The Buanderie submitted, for its part, that it is the alter ego
of its member establishments and that accordingly no business tax can be
imposed on it since its activities are those of a hospital centre or reception
centre within the meaning of s. 236(1.1) of the said Act.   Superior Court, [1990] R.J.Q. 408                     According to
Lemieux J., it is clear that the Regional Council is not a public
establishment within the meaning of s. 10 A.H.S.S.S.  She also
dismissed the Council's argument that it was the mandatary, agent or extension
of the member establishments of the Buanderie.  After reviewing the cases
submitted in support of this argument, which I shall also have occasion to
consider, she concluded, at p. 414:                     [translation]  With respect,
this line of authority does not apply in the present case.  In all those cases
the Crown was the owner or lessee of the taxed land.  Under very specific
legislation the Crown was exempt from real estate tax.  The situation is
different here.                     Lemieux J.
noted that the Regional Council is a mandatary of the Crown subject to the A.M.T.
pursuant to s. 488.  In its capacity as emphyteutic lessee it is an owner
within the meaning of s. 1 of the Act and its immovable is therefore
taxable under s. 203 unless it falls within the exemptions set out in
s. 204.  Lemieux J. found no exemption that could cover the Council. 
At page 414 she said the following:                     [translation]  Paragraph 14 of
that section refers to a public establishment within the meaning of the [A.H.S.S.S.],
a term explained in ss. 10 and 11 of that Act.  The [Regional Council] is
not a public establishment according to the definition contained in those
sections.  Since the exemptions must be interpreted restrictively, it follows
that the legislature did not intend to exempt a mandatary of the Crown from the
payment of real estate tax.                      The actions of the
Regional Council and the Buanderie were dismissed.  Court of Appeal, [1993] R.J.Q. 1051                     In the opinion of
Brossard J.A., the legislative definition of the status of the Regional Council
is sufficient in itself to dispose of the appeal.  At page 1055 he said:                      Brossard J.A.
further noted that it is clear from reading ss. 10, 11 and 18 A.H.S.S.S.
together that the legislature has made a formal distinction within the Act
itself between a public establishment and the Regional Council.  He concurred
in the conclusion of the trial judge that the Regional Council is not a public
establishment within the meaning of ss. 10 and 11 A.H.S.S.S. and
clearly does not fall within the exemptions set out in s. 204(14) A.M.T. 
In this connection he approved at p. 1056 the reasoning by which the
Superior Court judge arrived at the latter conclusion, namely:  [translation]  . . .
under the rules of interpretation, tax legislation must be interpreted so as to
achieve its purpose, general taxation being the rule and exemption, the
exception:  any tax exemption, like any exception, must therefore be
interpreted restrictively.                      Additionally,
Brossard J.A. held that the reasoning developed earlier applied mutatis
mutandis to the question of the business tax imposed on the Buanderie.  He
noted that in carrying on an economic activity involving services, the latter
is prima facie covered by s. 232 A.M.T. unless it can take
advantage of the exemptions provided for in s. 236(1) and (1.1) A.M.T.,
the only two which could apply here.  Brossard J.A. could not subscribe to
the conclusion that laundry and linen services are the usual activities of a
hospital centre or reception centre.  On this basis, therefore, he held that
the Buanderie was subject to the business tax.                     Brossard J.A.
nevertheless considered the appellants' argument that they were the alter
egos of the public establishments for whose benefit they act and that, as
such, they should therefore be able to claim the same tax exemptions as the
latter.  After reviewing the decisions submitted in support of this argument he
concluded, at p. 1059, that they could be distinguished from the case at
bar since the appellants [translation]
"carry on their activities and provide their services in an immovable
which could not be said in any way to belong to a public establishment within
the meaning of the Act".  In his opinion the only exception was the
judgment of this Court in City of Halifax v. Halifax Harbour Commissioners,
[1935] S.C.R. 215, in so far as it might suggest recognition of the concept of
an alter ego in real estate taxation matters.  At page 1059,
however, Brossard J.A. refused to apply this decision for the following
reasons:                     [translation]  In my opinion,
for there to be a similarity between the facts of that case . . . and
those of the case at bar, [the Buanderie] would have to be a mere manager and
administrator of laundry and linen services provided within each public
establishment on behalf of and under the direct authority of the individual
administration of each of those establishments, which is not the case. 
[Emphasis in original.]                     Brossard J.A.
also disposed of an alternative and supplementary argument raised by the
Buanderie on appeal regarding an amendment made to s. 232 A.M.T. in
1986 and discussed by the Court of Appeal in Ville de Montréal v.
Association des chirurgiens dentistes du Québec, [1990] R.J.Q. 2155.  In
view of the conclusion we have reached on the principal argument it will not be
necessary to deal with it here.                     The Court of Appeal
unanimously dismissed both appeals.                      To determine
whether the Regional Council and the Buanderie may respectively benefit from
the tax exemptions provided for in ss. 204(14) and 236(1.1) A.M.T.
with respect to real estate tax and business tax the following two questions
must be considered:  (1)  What are the principles
that should guide the courts in interpreting tax legislation?  (2)  In light of these
principles, can the Regional Council and the Buanderie be regarded as the alter
egos of the public establishments served by them, or be assimilated to them
in any way, so as to come within the scope of ss. 10 and 11 A.H.S.S.S.,
indirectly referred to in ss. 204(14) and 236(1.1) A.M.T.?                      At the
relevant times the A.H.S.S.S. read as follows:  1.                In this Act and the
regulations, unless the context indicates a different meaning, the following
expressions and words mean:                     (a)  "establishment": 
a local community service centre, a hospital centre, a social service centre or
a reception centre;                     (b)  "public
establishment":  an establishment contemplated in sections 10 and 11;  10.  The following are public establishments:                     (a)  every
establishment constituted under this Act or resulting from an amalgamation or
conversion made under this Act;     18.  The principal functions of
a regional council shall be:                                                                     . . .                     (c)  to
receive and hear the complaints of persons for whom an establishment situated
in the region for which the regional council is established has not furnished
the health services and the social services that this Act entitles them to
receive, and make the recommendations it considers appropriate in this regard
to the establishment concerned and the Minister;                                                                     . . .                     (e)  to
promote the exchange, the elimination of duplication and the better
distribution of services in the region and the setting up of common services
for several establishments;                     (e.1)  to
act as exclusive representative of the establishments or a category of
establishments in the whole or part of its region                     i.  for
the supply in common of such goods as it determines, except the classes of
goods indicated by the Minister;                     ii.  for
the supply of common services in the cases and on the conditions determined by
the Minister;                      The A.M.T.
provided the following:  1.  In this act, unless the context indicates otherwise,                                                                     . . .                     "owner"
means                                                                     . . .                     (3)  the
person who possesses an immovable as usufructuary, institute of a substitution
or emphyteutic lessee, or, where the immovable is Crown land, the person who
occupies it under a promise of sale, occupation licence or location ticket;  203.  An immoveable entered on
the roll is taxable and its taxable value is that entered on the roll under
sections 42 to 48, unless the law provides that only a part of that value is
taxable.  204.  The following are exempt
from all municipal or school real estate taxes:                     (1)  an
immoveable belonging to the Crown in right of Québec or to the Société
immobilière du Québec;                     (1.1)  an
immoveable belonging to the Crown in right of Canada or to a mandatary thereof;                                                                     . . .   232.  A municipal corporation
may impose and levy a business tax on any person entered on the roll of rental
values carrying on, in the territory of the municipal corporation, an economic
or administrative activity in matters of finance, trade, industry or services,
a calling, an art, a profession or any other activity constituting a means of
profit, gain or livelihood, whether or not the activity is carried on for
lucrative purposes, except an employment or charge.  236.  No business tax may be
imposed with respect to                     (1)
an activity mentioned in section 204 . . . carried on anywhere by the
Crown, a body, an institution or a person contemplated in that section;                     (1.1)
an ordinary activity carried on anywhere by the Crown, a body, an institution
or a person contemplated in any paragraph of section 204 that does not mention
any particular activity, except for the activity of a person operating a system
contemplated in section 66, 67 or 68;                     Section 19 of
c. 34 of the 1986 Statutes had the effect of deleting the word
"ordinary".                     Section 12 of
c. 42 of the 1987 Statutes amended s. 236 as follows:  236.  No business tax may be
imposed with respect to                     (1)  an
activity carried on by the Crown in right of Québec or the Crown in right of
Canada, a mandatary of the Crown in right of Canada, the Société immobilière du
Québec, the Corporation d'hébergement du Québec, the Régie des installations
olympiques, the Société de la Place des Arts de Montréal . . .  488.  This act binds the Crown
and its mandataries.   A.Rules for interpreting tax legislation                             I
acknowledge, however, that just as there has been a recent trend away from
strict construction of taxation statutes . . . so too has the recent
trend in tax cases been towards attempting to ascertain the true commercial and
practical nature of the taxpayer's transactions.  There has been, in this
country and elsewhere, a movement away from tests based on the form of
transactions and towards tests based on what Lord Pearce has referred to as a
"common sense appreciation of all the guiding features" of the events
in question. . . .                     This
is, I believe, a laudable trend provided it is consistent with the text and
purposes of the taxation statute.  [Emphasis added.]                     I note at the
outset that the Chief Justice was discussing the application of this principle
to the transactions undertaken by a taxpayer, whereas in the case at bar the
point for consideration is really the true nature of a corporate organization. 
This Court's intention is not to prompt an automatic quest for substance in tax
matters.  The risk that this will occur is in any case quite small if the key
elements of the interpretation as set out above are kept in mind.  I note in
this regard that in Bronfman Trust, the legislative context prevented
this Court from accepting the taxpayer's arguments that substance should take
precedence over form.  In short, the courts should recognize the existence of a
fundamental rule which, when judiciously applied, will have the effect of
focusing attention on the real nature of a situation, when in many cases
considering only the formal structure would lead to a different interpretation
of a given situation.  It should, however, be borne in mind that this rule only
has real meaning if it is consistent with the analysis of legislative intent.  B.The
Regional Council and the Buanderie as alter egos of the member establishments
served by them                     The Superior Court
and the Court of Appeal both dismissed this argument of the appellants.  This
conclusion was arrived at following an analysis of a number of decisions put
forward by the latter in support of their theory.  I refer to Corporation
municipale de Shannon v. Maple Leaf Services, [1971] C.A. 433; Maple
Leaf Services v. Townships of Essa and Petawawa (1963), 37 D.L.R. (2d) 657
(Ont. C.A.); Montreal v. Montreal Locomotive Works Ltd., [1947] 1 D.L.R.
161 (P.C.); and Regina Industries Ltd. v. City of Regina, [1947] S.C.R.
345.                     With respect, these
decisions were all made in the very special context of the division of powers
and the focus of their analysis lies in a province's lack of authority to tax a
federal government undertaking.  With this in mind we have to recognize that
the alter ego theory proceeds directly here from what a court must do in
analysing a factual situation when a breach of s. 125  of the Constitution
Act, 1867  is alleged.  Nevertheless, I reserve comment on another decision
submitted by the appellants, namely Halifax Harbour Commissioners, supra,
which, although decided in the same context, applies the alter ego
concept on the basis of factors having more to do with the actual nature of the
corporate organization in question.  I shall have occasion to return to this
point.                     Other decisions
have dealt with the issue more directly.  My intention is not to review them
but to determine what is essential and identify the areas in which the concept
has been used.  In Lennard's Carrying Co. v. Asiatic Petroleum Co.,
[1915] A.C. 705 (H.L.), and Clarkson Co. v. Zhelka (1967), 64 D.L.R.
(2d) 457 (Ont. H.C.), the alter ego concept proved useful in dealing
with the civil or criminal liability of a corporation or its management.  In my
opinion, the concept has been mainly used to describe the situation where a
corporate entity can only act through its directing mind and so to illustrate
the control which one may exercise over the other.                     Additionally, in Smith,
Stone & Knight, Ltd. v. Birmingham Corp., [1939] 4 All E.R. 116 (K.B.),
Atkinson J. came to the conclusion that a parent company could sue the
persons responsible for damage caused to one of its subsidiaries.  For the case
at bar, and regardless of this latter conclusion, most relevant is the way in
which the judge arrived at the finding that the subsidiary was not operating on
its own account but solely as an integral part of the parent company's
activities.  To this end he consulted a number of decisions, all of which
involved tax law, which needless to say is not without relevance to the case
now before the Court.  Using these decisions, he identified, at p. 121,
six factors that could justify treating two corporations as one for tax
purposes.  I set them out below:  (1)
Were the profits treated as the profits of the [parent] company?  (2)
[W]ere the persons conducting the business appointed by the parent company?  (3)
[W]as the [parent] company the head and the brain of the trading venture?  (4)
[D]id the [parent] company govern the adventure, decide what should be done and
what capital should be embarked on the venture?  (5)
[D]id the [parent] company make the profits by its skill and direction?  (6)
[W]as the [parent] company in effectual and constant control?                     Finally, I note Aluminum
Company of Canada Ltd. v. City of Toronto, [1944] S.C.R. 267, which this
time clearly dealt with tax law, and the following passage from Rand J.,
at p. 271, which illustrates the special relationship sought by the courts
in order to justify treating two corporations as one for tax purposes:                     By
the decision of this Court in the case of City of Toronto v. Famous
Players' Canadian Corporation Ltd., it is now settled that the business of
one company can embrace the apparent or nominal business of another company
where the conditions are such that it can be said that the second company is in
fact the puppet of the first; when the directing mind and will of the former
reaches into and through the corporate facade of the latter and becomes,
itself, the manifesting agency.  In such a case, it is not accurate to describe
the business as being carried on by the puppet for the benefit of the dominant
company.  The business is in fact that of the latter.  This does not mean,
however, that for other purposes the subsidiary may not be the legal entity to
be dealt with.                     The
question, then, in each case, apart from formal agency which is not present
here, is whether or not the parent company is in fact in such an intimate and
immediate domination of the motions of the subordinate company that it can be
said that the latter has, in the true sense of the expression, no independent
functioning of its own.                     In light of the
foregoing cases, a corporation may be regarded as the alter ego of
another corporation when there is such a close relationship between them that
what apparently concerns one actually pertains to the activities of the other. 
Undoubtedly a large number of factors can be identified to determine the
existence of such a relationship:  in my opinion, however, the one that is most
explicit and most likely to cover all aspects of the concept is control.                       In this case the
search for the legislative intent reveals a fundamental purpose, namely
efficiency in the operation of hospital laundries.  This purpose is in turn
illustrated by two specific manifestations, namely the merger and the pooling
of resources, and the introduction of a single, independent administrator a
majority of the members of which are appointed by the Regional Council and the
Ministère des Affaires sociales.  I note that this change in legal structure
does not alter the fact that the same hospital activities continued on behalf
of the same institutions.  In view of this it could be argued forthwith that it
would go against common sense for the legislature to have intended to penalize
public establishments for their decision to combine into a more efficient and
less costly form of organization.  That is quite true.  The fact remains,
however, that the Regional Council and the Buanderie are independent
organizations which are not controlled by the establishments for whose benefit
they operate.                     With this in mind,
should the appellants be treated like the establishments they serve for tax
purposes?  Halifax Harbour Commissioners, supra, is worthy of
closer consideration.  That case, which at first glance is no different from
those submitted by the appellants in support of the alter ego theory,
was nevertheless the subject of an interesting comment by Brossard J.A. in
the Court of Appeal.  I reproduce it again for the sake of convenience:                     [translation]  In my opinion,
for there to be a similarity between the facts of that case . . . and
those of the case at bar, [the Buanderie] would have to be a mere manager and
administrator of laundry and linen services provided within each public
establishment on behalf of and under the direct authority of the individual
administration of each of those establishments, which is not the case. 
[Emphasis in original.]                     The two
differentiating points noted by Brossard J.A., namely operation in common
by several establishments, all of which enjoy an exemption, rather than under
the direct authority of each of them, and operation somewhere other than within
each establishment, do not seem to me to be conclusive.  We must accordingly
look more closely at the corporate nature of the Halifax Harbour Commissioners
("the corporation").  In that case Duff C.J. undertook a very
detailed analysis of the rights and powers conferred on the corporation by the
statute creating it (S.C. 1927, c. 58).  Before examining their substance,
however, it is worth noting the purposes for which the corporation was created. 
These were twofold:  first, the responsibility of managing and administering
the Port of Halifax; second, regulation of the way in which navigation was
carried on within the port.  It appears from Duff C.J.'s analysis that the
corporation in fact held vast powers of acquisition, alienation, expropriation
and regulation in order to carry out the purposes for which it had been
created.  The broad latitude which it appeared to enjoy a priori was
nonetheless limited by the obligation which it had to submit each of these
activities to the approval of the Governor General in Council.  This Court, per
Duff C.J., saw this situation as demonstrating the element of control
essential for the alter ego concept to apply.  I would mention again
that this aspect is not in itself of any assistance in solving the problem now
before this Court.                     I note, however,
the importance attached to the patrimonial aspect in that decision.  The real
property on which the corporation was operating was owned exclusively by the
Crown.  The same was true for any subsequent acquisition of real property,
which was to be acquired for and on behalf of His Majesty.  Further, again
under the Act incorporating it, the corporation could also borrow money without
being subject to a requirement that it come from the Government of Canada or
another source.  The facts nevertheless indicated that the government had
assumed some financial responsibility for the corporation by undertaking to
supply capital in the subsequent years.                     In analysing
legislative intent, the courts are entitled to give precedence to substance
over form in implementing tax legislation.  A common factor, namely the
patrimonial aspect, emerges from Halifax Harbour Commissioners, supra,
and the case at bar.                     In this connection,
as I noted earlier, the legislation at issue makes it clear that the intent of
the legislature was to promote efficiency in the operation of hospital
laundries.  In its concrete effects this objective took the following form: 
first, for administrative purposes a sector of hospital activity was allocated
by the legislature to an independent third party which incurred no risk in the
undertaking; second, from the standpoint of patrimony there was an almost
complete identity between the appellants and the establishments for whose
benefit they operated.                     The evidence
revealed that none of the parties concerned make a profit, as the Buanderie's
budget was based entirely on the operating costs assumed by the hospital
establishments and the reception centres.  I also note that ownership of the
assets needed to provide laundry services remains, beyond the legal form, with
the member establishments; clearly, in the event of a dissolution of the
Buanderie and distribution of its assets, those establishments would see any
assets covered in whole or in part by a grant from the Ministère des Affaires
sociales revert to the Regional Council.  In my opinion that does not lead to
disregarding the fact that whatever was not provided by the government would
become the property of the hospitals and reception centres.  Finally, it is the
latter, and not the administrator imposed on them, namely the Regional Council,
that continue to have full financial responsibility for the operation by
assuming inter alia all its operating costs.                     It seems to me that
the Regional Council and the Buanderie form a single "conduit" to the
establishments they serve and that this situation is not affected by the fact
that administrative functions or the titular ownership of property have been
conferred on them.  In pursuing its objective the legislature made no essential
change to the substance of the patrimony of the establishments as a whole,
whether in terms of financial responsibility or ownership of property. 
Taxation relates solely to patrimony.  It may therefore be concluded that, in
requiring the creation of a community laundry, the legislature did not intend
to affect the exempt status which had always applied to the public
establishments before they were merged.  No indication is given to the
contrary.  Such a conclusion would run counter to the legislature's aim of
reducing costs.  Moreover, as a concluding note, the change of policy of the
Ministère des Affaires municipales has never been reflected in the legislation.                        It
is . . . why the courts have not required the taxpayer to proceed
before the administrative tribunals:  they have concluded that in this matter
of taxation and exemption a taxpayer retains the right to go directly to a
judicial forum like the Superior Court, which has the power to decide the
matter with the force of res judicata.  What is the position if, instead of
deciding the matter on the merits, the Superior Court merely finds that the
action brought before it is extinguished?  Does the BREF which duly has a
complaint before it lose its jurisdiction?  Two points must be considered in
order to answer these questions.                      Furthermore, in
this regard the purpose of the action in nullity in the Superior Court is to
determine the validity of an action or regulation adopted under the law.  A
taxpayer who chooses to go directly to this forum, which is called superior on
account of its inherent superintending and reforming powers, agrees at the outset
that if his action is dismissed the matter will be res judicata so far
as an administrative tribunal like the BREF is concerned.  There is no basis
here for making a distinction between a decision of the court on the merits of
the case and a mere finding that the action before it is prescribed.  This
superintending and reforming remedy must be exercised in accordance with the
rules applicable to it.  If it is dismissed because the latter were not
observed, the effect is nevertheless to make the disputed action valid and
beyond challenge between the parties.                     Finally, it is not
this Court's function to order reimbursement of the taxes paid by the
appellants under the aforementioned entries, since ss. 182, 248 and 249 A.M.T.
govern how this will be done, pursuant to the judgment of a court setting aside
the entries in question.  Under s. 182 A.M.T., it is the clerk of
the municipal corporation who has the duty of amending the roll to make it
comply inter alia with a final decision rendered on an action to set
aside the roll.  That amendment must be made within 30 days of the final
judgment.  Additionally, under s. 249 A.M.T. a refund of taxes is
not due as the result of a circumstance contemplated in s. 248 (including
an amendment of the roll made pursuant to s. 182) until 30 days after
the roll has been amended.                      The appeal is
allowed in part.  The judgments of the Superior Court and the Court of Appeal
are set aside and the actions are allowed as follows:   Declares
null and void certificates of amendment Nos. 816001 for 1984 and 816002
for 1985 issued by the Communauté urbaine de Montréal;  Declares
null and void both for the real estate valuation roll and for the collection
roll the taxable entry for 1984, 1985, 1986 and 1988 inclusive referred to in
account No. 38774250;  Declares
null and void the notice of amendment to the roll for 1984, 1985 and 1986, as
well as the invoices for municipal, school and olympic taxes for 1984, 1985,
1986 and 1988 in respect of the immovable referred to in invoice 38774250;                     The whole with costs
throughout.   Declares
null and void certificates of amendment to the roll of rental values
Nos. 033764 for 1986 and 012819 for 1987 issued by the Communauté urbaine
de Montréal;  Declares
null and void for the roll of rental values the taxable entry for 1986, 1987,
1988 referred to in account No. 38725295;  Declares
null and void the notices of amendment to the roll for 1986 and 1987 and the
water, services and business taxes referred to in account 38725295, as well as
the tax invoices sent pursuant thereto;  Declares
null and void for the roll of rental values the taxable entry for 1988 referred
to in No. 38725295;                     The whole with
costs throughout.                     Appeal allowed in
part with costs.                     Solicitors for the
appellants:  Lafleur Brown, Montreal.                     Solicitors for the
City of Montreal:  Jalbert, Séguin, Verdon, Caron, Mahoney, Montreal.                     Solicitors for the
Communauté urbaine de Montréal:  Beaupré, Trudeau, Montreal.  