Neuman v. M.N.R. , [1998] 1 S.C.R. 770  Melville Neuman                                                                               Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Neuman v. M.N.R.  File No.:  25565.  1998:  January 28; 1998:  May 21.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Income tax -- Dividends -- Attribution -- Taxpayer
incorporating family holding company for tax planning and income splitting
purposes -- Taxpayer’s wife elected sole director of company -- Wife declaring
dividends on her own and on taxpayer’s shares -- Whether dividend income
received by wife should be attributed to taxpayer for income tax purposes --
Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, s. 56(2).  The appellant N incorporated a family holding company
and immediately  sold all of his shares in another company to it on a
tax-deferred basis for the same number of Class “G” voting shares in the
holding company.  N’s wife was issued 99 non-voting Class “F” shares at $1 per
share.  At the first annual meeting of shareholders N’s wife was elected sole
director of the holding company and N and his wife were appointed as officers. 
In 1982, the holding company received $20,000 in dividends on the shares it
owned.  A board of directors meeting was held at which N’s wife, pursuant to a
discretionary dividend clause in the company’s articles of incorporation,
declared a dividend of $5,000 to be paid on N’s Class “G” shares and another
dividend of $14,800 to be paid on her own Class “F” shares.  N’s wife
immediately loaned him $14,800 and received a demand promissory note as
security in return.  N’s wife died in 1988.  The loan was not repaid.  The
dividend income paid to N’s wife in 1982 was attributed to N as being a payment
or transfer of property made pursuant to the direction of or with the
concurrence of N as described in s. 56(2) of the Income Tax Act (ITA)
and he was assessed tax on this income.  N appealed his 1982 assessment to the
Tax Court of Canada and in 1992 that assessment was vacated.  The respondent
appealed to the Federal Court, Trial Division without success, but a further
appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal was allowed.  Held:  The appeal should be allowed.  Section 56(2) of the ITA does not apply to the
dividend income received by N’s wife.  While s. 56(2) strives to prevent
tax avoidance through income splitting, it is a specific tax avoidance
provision and not a general provision against income splitting.  It can only
operate to prevent income splitting where the following preconditions to its
application are specifically met:  (1) the payment must be to a person other
than the reassessed taxpayer; (2) the allocation must be at the direction or
with the concurrence of the reassessed taxpayer; (3) the payment must be for
the benefit of the reassessed taxpayer or for the benefit of another person
whom the reassessed taxpayer wished to benefit; and (4) the payment would have
been included in the reassessed taxpayer’s income if it had been received by
him or her.  McClurg v. Canada provides that as a general rule,
s. 56(2) does not apply to dividend income since, until a dividend is
declared, the profits belong to the corporation as retained earnings.  The
declaration of a dividend therefore cannot be said to be a diversion of a
benefit which the taxpayer otherwise would have received.  Such an entitlement
requirement is consistent with the purpose of s. 56(2), which is to
capture and attribute to the reassessed taxpayer receipts which he or she
otherwise would have obtained.  Unless a reassessed taxpayer had a preexisting
entitlement to the dividend income paid to the shareholder of a corporation,
the fourth precondition cannot be satisfied and consequently s. 56(2)
cannot operate to attribute the dividend income to that taxpayer for income tax
purposes.  Assuming that proper consideration was given for the
shares when issued, there is no exception to the rule that s. 56(2) does
not apply to dividend income where the recipient of the dividend income in a
non-arm’s length transaction has not made a legitimate contribution to the
corporation.  The fact that a company is closely held or that no contribution
is made to the company by a shareholder benefiting from a dividend in no way
changes the underlying nature of a dividend.  Dividends are paid to
shareholders as a return on their investment in the corporation.  Since the
distribution of the dividend is not determined by the quantum of a
shareholder’s contribution to the corporation, it would be illogical to use
contribution as the criterion that determines when dividend income will be
subject to s. 56(2).  Further, taxpayers are entitled to arrange their
affairs for the sole purpose of achieving a favourable position regarding
taxation and no distinction is to be made in the application of this principle
between arm’s length and non-arm’s length transactions.  Cases Cited  Considered:  McClurg
v. Canada, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 1020, aff’g [1988] 2 F.C. 356; distinguished: 
Winter v. Canada, [1991] 1 F.C. 585; referred to:  Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; Murphy v. The Queen,
80 D.T.C. 6314; Fraser Companies, Ltd. v. The Queen, 81 D.T.C. 5051.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, ss. 12(1)(j),
56(2), 74.4 [ad. 1986, c. 6, s. 38], 82(1), 85(1), 245 [rep. & sub.
1988, c. 55, s. 185].  Authors Cited  Krishna, Vern.  “Share Capital
Structure of Closely-Held Private Corporations” (1996), 7 Can. Curr. Tax
7.  Krishna, Vern, and J. Anthony Van
Duzer.  “Corporate Share Capital Structures and Income Splitting:  McClurg
v. Canada” (1992-93), 21 Can. Bus. L.J. 335.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal,
[1997] 1 F.C. 79, 201 N.R. 358, [1996] 3 C.T.C. 270, 96 D.T.C. 6464, [1996]
F.C.J. No. 1108 (QL), allowing an appeal from a judgment of Rothstein J.,
[1994] 2 F.C. 154, 72 F.T.R. 17, [1994] 1 C.T.C. 354, 94 D.T.C. 6094, [1993]
F.C.J. No. 1332 (QL), dismissing an appeal from a judgment of Sarchuk T.C.C.J.,
[1992] 2 C.T.C. 2074, 92 D.T.C. 1652, [1992] T.C.J. No. 288 (QL), allowing an
appeal from an assessment of income tax.  Appeal allowed.  Joe E. Hershfield, Q.C.,
Ralph D. Neuman and Christopher M. Paterson, for the appellant.  Roger Taylor and Robert
Gosman, for the respondent.  //Iacobucci J.//  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Iacobucci J. -- The
principal question raised by this appeal is whether dividend income, paid by a
closely held family corporation to a non-arm’s length shareholder who has not
contributed to or participated in the business of the corporation, in this case
Ruby Neuman, should be attributed to the shareholder’s spouse, the appellant
Melville Neuman, for income tax purposes in accordance with s. 56(2) of the Income
Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 as amended (the “ITA”).  I
conclude that s. 56(2) does not apply to dividend income such that the dividend
income received by Ruby Neuman cannot be attributed to the appellant for income
tax purposes.  1.   Facts  2                                  
The appellant was at all material times a lawyer with the firm of
Neuman, MacLean in Winnipeg.  The appellant and his partners at the law firm
each owned 1,285.714 common shares in Newmac Services (1973) Ltd. (“Newmac”),
which owned commercial property in downtown Winnipeg, including the offices of
Neuman, MacLean.  The appellant acted as secretary of Newmac.  The appellant’s
wife, Ruby Neuman, had no involvement in the business of Newmac.  3                                  
On April 29, 1981, the appellant incorporated Melru Ventures Inc.
(“Melru”) as a family holding company.  Rothstein J. of the Federal Court,
Trial Division found that Melru was incorporated for tax planning and income
splitting purposes and that it had no other independent business purpose
([1994] 2 F.C. 154, at p. 160).  4                                  
The capital structure of Melru provided for different classes of shares
with different rights and privileges.  The dividends were to be declared at the
sole discretion of the directors; distributions could be done selectively among
the various classes of shares. The rights and conditions of the Class “G” and
“F” shares are as follows:  (a)   the holders of Class “G” shares shall in each year, in the
discretion of the directors, be entitled out of any or all profits or surplus
available for dividends to non-cumulative dividends at such rate as may from
time to time be declared on any such shares but not exceeding the equivalent of
1% per annum on “redemption price” above the maximum prime bank rates. . . .                                                                     .
. .  (e)   all dividends paid or declared and set aside for payment in any
fiscal year, after making payments on Class “G” shares and preference shares of
dividends declared shall be paid firstly on Class “F” shares until dividends
aggregating 1¢ per share on the Class “F” shares then outstanding have been
paid and then any additional dividends shall be set aside for payment on common
shares until the common shares then outstanding shall have received 1¢ per
share and any additional dividends shall be paid on Class “F” shares until they
receive that fraction of profits properly available for payment of dividends as
the number of Class “F” shares then outstanding bear to the total number of
Class “F” shares and common shares then outstanding and the balance shall in
the discretion of the directors be paid on common shares or set aside for
future payment on common shares at the discretion of the board of directors.   5                                  
Pursuant to an agreement dated April 29, 1981, the appellant sold his
shares in Newmac to Melru for 1,285.714 Class “G” shares of Melru.  The shares
were sold on a tax-deferred basis pursuant to s. 85(1) of the ITA and
they were described as having a fair market value of $120,000.  On May 1, 1981,
a meeting of the first director was held at which the appellant was appointed
president and Ruby Neuman was appointed secretary.  One voting common share of
Melru was issued to the appellant for $1.   A special general meeting of the
shareholders was held that same day at which the appellant resigned as first
director and was elected director of Melru until the first annual meeting of
the corporation.  Ruby Neuman acted as secretary at this meeting.  That same
day there was a meeting of the board of directors which the appellant chaired. 
A resolution was passed authorizing the issue of  1,285.714 Class “G” shares to
the appellant in accordance with the agreement of sale.  A second resolution
was passed authorizing the issue of 99 non-voting Class “F” shares to Ruby
Neuman at $1 per share.  6                                  
The first annual meeting of shareholders was held on August 12, 1982.  
Ruby Neuman was elected sole director of Melru and the appellant and Ruby
Neuman were appointed as officers.  7                                  
In 1982, Melru received $20,000 in dividends on the Newmac shares. 
These were the first dividends paid on the Newmac shares.  A board of directors
meeting was held on September 8, 1982 at which time Ruby Neuman declared a
dividend in the amount of $5,000 to be paid on the Class “G” shares and another
dividend of $14,800 to be paid on the Class “F” shares.  The minutes indicate
that the holder of the common shares (i.e., the appellant) was prepared to have
money set aside for future payment on his shares.  8                                  
Ruby Neuman immediately loaned $14,800 to the appellant and she received
in return a demand promissory note as security.  Ruby Neuman died in 1988.  The
loan was not repaid.  9                                  
  Rothstein J. made the following relevant findings of fact (at
pp.160-61):  1.                The dividends declared by Ruby
Neuman on her own Class “F” shares and the appellant’s Class “G” shares were
declared pursuant to a discretionary dividend clause in the Articles of
Incorporation of Melru.  The dividends of $14,800 on the “F” shares and $5,000
on the “G” shares were arbitrary numbers.  2.                Ruby Neuman made no contribution
to Melru, nor did she assume any risks for the company.  3.                The appellant’s evidence was that
when his wife was elected director of Melru, he explained to her the duties of
a director, that directors manage the corporation, that they have a duty to the
corporation, and that they make the decisions.  The appellant said that he made
recommendations to his wife which she accepted but that the decision as to the
declaration of dividends was hers.  10                              
The dividend income paid to Ruby Neuman in 1982 was attributed to the
appellant as being a payment or transfer of property made pursuant to the
direction of or with the concurrence of the appellant as described in s. 56(2)
of the ITA and he was assessed tax on this income.  11                              
The appellant appealed his 1982 assessment to the Tax Court of Canada
and in 1992 the assessment was vacated:  [1992] 2 C.T.C. 2074.  (Proceedings
had been delayed pending the final determination in McClurg v. Canada,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 1020.)  The respondent appealed to the Federal Court,
Trial Division without success, but a further appeal to the Federal Court of
Appeal was successful:  [1997] 1 F.C. 79.  2.  Judicial
History  A.    Tax
Court of Canada  12                              
Sarchuk T.C.C.J. allowed the appellant’s appeal and referred the
assessment back to the respondent for reconsideration on the basis that the
dividend income received by Ruby Neuman was not to be included in the
appellant’s income under s. 56(2).  In reaching this conclusion, he relied on
the opinion expressed by this Court in McClurg that as a general rule s.
56(2) does not apply to dividend income.   Sarchuk T.C.C.J. acknowledged
Dickson C.J.’s obiter dicta in  McClurg (at p. 1054):  . . . if a distinction is to be drawn in the application of s. 56(2)
between arm’s length and non-arm’s length transactions, it should be made
between the exercise of a discretionary power to distribute dividends when the
non-arm’s length shareholder has made no contribution to the company (in which
case s. 56(2) may be applicable), and those cases in which a legitimate
contribution has been made.  13                              
However, Sarchuk T.C.C.J. was of the view that since this comment was obiter
he was not bound by it.  In his opinion, the Court had left open the question
of the applicability of s. 56(2) to non-arm’s length transactions and the possibility of piercing the corporate
veil to stop complex tax avoidance schemes.  However, the case at bar, in his
view, did not warrant this action.  Although there were facts that would
support the attribution of the income back to the appellant, the plan could not
be described as a “blatant tax
avoidance scheme” (p. 2085).  B.    Federal
Court of Canada, Trial Division  14                              
Rothstein J. dismissed the appeal from the decision of the Tax Court on
the grounds that s. 56(2) was not designed to prevent income splitting in the
context of the director-shareholder relationship.  15                              
He first considered whether Ruby Neuman, in declaring the dividend, was
acting under the direction or with the concurrence of the appellant.  Rothstein
J. said he was “reluctant to presume that Ruby Neuman was acting pursuant to
the direction of, or with the concurrence of, the [appellant] when she, as
director, declared dividends on behalf of Melru” (p. 162).  Although this would
determine the appeal, this point was not pressed by the parties, and Rothstein
J. did not decide the case on this point.  16                              
Rothstein J. went on to consider this Court’s holding in McClurg;
the McClurg decision was critical to the outcome of the case at bar
since the only material difference between the facts, in Rothstein J.’s view,
is that Ruby Neuman made no contribution to Melru while Wilma McClurg did make
contributions to the corporation from which she received dividend income.  17                              
Applying McClurg, Rothstein J. concluded that the declaration of
dividends pursuant to the discretionary dividend clause was valid and he then
went on to consider the tax law issue.  Rothstein J. noted that in McClurg
Dickson C.J. recognized two prerequisites to the application of s. 56(2): that
the dividend income would otherwise have been obtained by the reassessed
taxpayer, and that the payment must be a “benefit” for which there was no
adequate consideration.   Dickson C.J. concluded that s. 56(2) did not
generally apply to dividends since the reassessed taxpayer would not have
received the money if it had not been paid to the shareholder because it would
have been retained as earnings by the company.   Dickson C.J. also concluded
that, on the facts in McClurg, the dividend income received by Wilma
McClurg was consideration for the significant contribution which she
made to the corporation; the dividend received by her was not, therefore, a
“benefit”.  18                              
Rothstein J. concluded that Dickson C.J. had not intended to dispose of
the McClurg case on the basis of Wilma McClurg’s contributions to the
corporation; rather, his comments about her contributions were intended to
address the third precondition to the application of s. 56(2) articulated in
the provision itself, i.e., was the money “for the benefit of the taxpayer or
as a benefit that the taxpayer desired to have conferred on the other person”?  19                              
Rothstein J. proceeded to consider Dickson C.J.’s suggested exception to
the general rule that s. 56(2) does not apply to dividend income.  Rothstein J.
recognized that this Court did not determine in McClurg whether a
distinction can be made between non-arm’s length and arm’s length transactions
because in McClurg the recipient of the dividend made a legitimate
contribution to the company; therefore the dividend did not constitute a
benefit to Wilma McClurg and s. 56(2) could not apply for that reason.  20                              
The problem faced by Rothstein J. was whether, on the facts before him,
where Ruby Neuman had made no contribution to the company and the receipt of
the dividend was thus a “benefit” to her, a distinction must be drawn between
non-arm’s length and arm’s length transactions.   He concluded, relying on 
Urie J.’s  ruling in the Federal Court of Appeal in McClurg, [1988] 2
F.C. 356 (which ruling had not been overturned by the reasons of Dickson
C.J.), that there is nothing in s. 56(2) which contemplates a distinction
between non-arm’s length and arm’s length transactions.    Rothstein J. noted
that this Court found, in more general terms, that there was no distinction
between arm’s length and non-arm’s length transactions (Stubart Investments
Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536).  21                              
Having found that a distinction cannot be drawn between non-arm’s length
and arm’s length transactions in the application of s. 56(2), Rothstein J.
decided that he need not consider whether a dividend payment is a benefit for
the purposes of s. 56(2) where the recipient did not make a contribution to the
corporation.  22                              
Rothstein J. noted that there is nothing in the ITA which
suggests an overall intention to prevent income splitting; an income splitting
transaction must actually violate a section of the ITA in order for the
Minister to challenge it.  23                              
In the absence of sham, and with all corporate formalities having been
observed, Rothstein J. held that the transaction was valid and he dismissed the
appeal.  C.  Federal
Court of Appeal  24                              
The Federal Court of Appeal allowed the respondent’s appeal and held
that the appellant was taxable on the dividend income received by Ruby
Neuman.   The court held that the dictum of Dickson C.J. in McClurg
regarding the possible application of s. 56(2) in non-arm’s length transactions
was binding on the Trial Division.  The court relied, in reaching its
conclusion, on the fact that the incorporation of Melru and the declaration of
the dividend to Ruby Neuman had no bona fide business purpose and lacked
commercial reality.   In reaching its conclusion, the court essentially pierced
the corporate veil.  25                              
The court was of the view that the respondent had satisfied the four
elements necessary to invoke s. 56(2): (1) payment or transfer made to a person
other than the taxpayer; (2) made at the direction of or with the concurrence
of the taxpayer; (3) for the taxpayer’s benefit; and (4) the payment would have
otherwise been included in the taxpayer’s income.  26                              
More specifically, the court found that Ruby Neuman was acting with the
concurrence of the appellant when she declared the dividends.  The court also
held that the payment of the dividend was “for the benefit of the taxpayer” as
required by s. 56(2).   The appellant benefited through a reduction in his own
tax liability; he benefited a second time by having his wife lend him the money
interest-free.  In addition, the court found that the property would have been
included in the appellant’s income had it been received by him and not Ruby
Neuman by operation of ss. 12(1)(j) and 82(1) of the ITA.  27                              
Next the court had to deal with this Court’s ruling in McClurg
that s. 56(2) does not generally apply to dividend income because the
reassessed taxpayer would not have received that money had it not been paid to
the shareholder.  In order to overcome that general rule, the court invoked the
exception to the rule recognized by Dickson C.J. in obiter in McClurg:
that where a non-arm’s length shareholder does not make a legitimate
contribution to the corporation, a person who directed or concurred in the
payment of a dividend to that shareholder could be assessed for taxes on the
amount of the dividend under s. 56(2).  The court concluded (at p. 111) that
the recognition by Dickson C.J. of this possible exception to the rule is
binding on courts as it represents the “considered opinion of a majority” of
the Supreme Court of Canada.  28                              
The court then found that the facts before them fit within the exception
detailed in McClurg.   Unlike Wilma McClurg, Ruby Neuman had made no
contribution to Melru, a company which was incorporated solely for tax planning
and income splitting purposes.  The court found that applying s. 56(2) “would
not be contrary to the commercial reality of the declaration of the dividend to
Ruby Neuman, since there was none” (p. 105).  29                              
The appellant argued that the court should apply Winter v. Canada,
[1991] 1 F.C. 585 (C.A.), which stands for the proposition that there is
a fifth precondition to the application of s. 56(2) which requires proof that
the payee would not be subject to tax on the dividend income.  The court
declined to find that there was a fifth pre-condition to the application of s.
56(2).  30                              
As a result, the Federal Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and affirmed
the Minister’s assessment attributing the dividend income received by Ruby
Neuman to the appellant.  3.  Issues  31                              
The central question raised by this appeal is whether the dividend
income received by Ruby Neuman should be attributed to the appellant for tax
purposes under s. 56(2) of the ITA.  Section 56(2) provides:  56. . . .  (2)       A payment or transfer of property made
pursuant to the direction of, or with the concurrence of, a taxpayer to some
other person for the benefit of the taxpayer or as a benefit that the taxpayer
desired to have conferred on the other person shall be included in computing
the taxpayer’s income to the extent that it would be if the payment or transfer
had been made to him.  32                              
In order for s. 56(2) to apply, four preconditions, each of which is
detailed in the language of the s. 56(2) itself, must be present:  (1) the payment must be to a person other than the reassessed taxpayer;  (2) the allocation must be at the direction or with the concurrence of
the reassessed taxpayer;  (3) the payment must be for the benefit of the reassessed taxpayer or
for the benefit of another person whom the reassessed taxpayer wished to
benefit; and  (4) the payment would have been included in the reassessed taxpayer’s
income if it had been received by him or her.  I agree that
these four prerequisites to attribution are an appropriate analytical framework
for the interpretation of s. 56(2)  (see Cattanach J. in both  Murphy v. The
Queen, 80 D.T.C. 6314 (F.C.T.D.), at pp. 6317-18, and in Fraser
Companies, Ltd. v. The Queen, 81 D.T.C. 5051 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 5058).  33                              
Because I conclude that s. 56(2) does not apply to dividend income since
dividend income, by its very nature, cannot satisfy the fourth precondition
absent a sham or other subterfuge, it is not necessary to discuss the other
three prerequisites to the application of s. 56(2).  4.  Analysis  A.  Introduction.  34                              
As the judicial history of this appeal reveals, the interpretation of
this Court’s majority decision in McClurg lies at the heart of the present
case.  This Court held in McClurg that generally s. 56(2) will
not apply to dividend income.   However, Dickson C.J. suggested in obiter
in McClurg that s. 56(2) may apply where dividend income is distributed
through the exercise of a discretionary power to a non-arm’s length shareholder
who has made no legitimate contribution to the company  (at p. 1054).  
The Federal Court of Appeal felt bound by the potential exception articulated
by Dickson C.J. in obiter since the facts in the present case were similar
to the facts in McClurg with the only material difference being that
Ruby Neuman, unlike Wilma McClurg, had not made any contribution to the
corporation.  35                              
 A large part of my analysis will involve a review of the holdings in McClurg. 
Before I turn to McClurg, however, I wish to make some observations to
place the present debate into its proper perspective.  First, s. 56(2) strives
to prevent tax avoidance through income splitting; however, it is a specific
tax avoidance provision and not a general provision against income splitting. 
In fact, “there is no general scheme to prevent income splitting” in the ITA
(V. Krishna and J. A. Van Duzer, “Corporate Share Capital Structures and Income
Splitting: McClurg v. Canada” (1992-93), 21 Can. Bus. L.J. 335,
at p. 367).   Section 56(2) can only operate to prevent income splitting where
the four  preconditions to its application are specifically met.  36                              
Second, this case concerns income received by Ruby Neuman during the
1982 taxation year at which time the ITA did not provide specific
guidelines to deal with corporate structures designed for the purposes of
income splitting and tax minimization. 
Professor V. Krishna, in an article entitled “Share Capital Structure of
Closely-Held Private Corporations” (1996), 7 Can. Curr. Tax  7, at p. 9,
made the following comment with respect to income splitting in the corporate
context:  Except when specifically curtailed by the Income Tax Act (for
example, by the attribution rules), income splitting per se is
not a sanctioned arrangement.  Thus, corporate structures that facilitate
income splitting in private companies should not be penalized without clear
statutory language and intent.  [Emphasis added.]   Parliament has
since fashioned legislation to regulate corporate income splitting (s. 74.4 of
the ITA, introduced in 1985), but this legislation does not apply to the
present appeal.  37                              
Third, this appeal is limited to the interpretation and application of s.
56(2) of the ITA; the appeal is not based on the general anti-avoidance
rule set out in s. 245 of the ITA (“GAAR”).  GAAR came into force
on September 13, 1988 and it applies only to transactions entered into on or
after that date.  38                              
Fourth, the respondent has not argued that the appellant was involved in
a sham or an artificial transaction and this was acknowledged by counsel for
the respondent during the hearing.  39                              
Finally, it is important to remember that this Court held
unanimously in Stubart, supra, at p. 575, that a transaction
should not be disregarded for tax purposes because it has no independent or bona
fide business purpose (Estey J. wrote for himself and  Beetz and McIntyre
JJ.; Wilson J. wrote concurring reasons for herself and Ritchie J.).  Thus,
taxpayers can arrange their affairs in a particular way for the sole purpose of
deliberately availing themselves of tax reduction devices in the ITA. 
Estey J. rejected the suggestion that a distinction must be drawn between
non-arm’s length and arm’s length transactions in the application of this
principle (at pp. 570-72).  According to Stubart, therefore, non-arm’s
length arrangements can also be created for the sole purpose of taking
advantage of tax reduction devices.  40                              
With these points in mind, I now turn to the decision of the Court in McClurg.  B.  McClurg  41                              
McClurg involved a taxpayer and business associate who were the
sole directors of a corporation which they had set up and in which they and
their wives were shareholders.  The corporation operated an International
Harvester truck dealership. The capital structure of the corporation provided
for three classes of shares with different rights and privileges: Class A
shares were common, voting and participating shares; Class B shares were
common, non-voting and participating where so authorized by the directors; and
Class C shares were preferred non-voting shares.  The dividends were to be
declared at the sole discretion of the directors; distributions could be done
selectively among the three classes of shares.   Essentially, the capital
structure was designed to permit income splitting.  42                              
Jim McClurg and his associate held Class A and C shares whereas their
wives held Class B shares.   In 1978, 1979, and 1980 the wives of the directors
each received $100/share on their Class B shares: $10,000/year.  These were the
only dividends declared in those years.  43                              
Wilma McClurg made legitimate contributions to the business.  She
exposed herself to extensive liability by assisting in the financing of the
business.  She also worked as an administrative assistant, drove a truck when
necessary, and generally fulfilled needs as they arose.  44                              
The Minister reassessed Jim McClurg’s income for 1978 to 1980 on the
basis that $8000 of the $10,000 in dividends paid to his wife each year was
attributable to him through the operation of s. 56(2).   The Minister also
challenged the validity of the discretionary dividend provision.  (i) The ratio in McClurg  45                              
Dickson C.J., writing for himself and Sopinka, Gonthier and Cory JJ.
(Wilson, La Forest and L’Heureux-Dubé JJ. in dissent), first dealt with the
issue of whether the discretionary dividend provision was valid as a matter of
corporate law; he concluded that it was.   He then turned to the tax issue and
he held that the dividend income paid to Wilma McClurg was not
attributable to her husband for income tax purposes through the operation of s.
56(2).  46                              
This Court concluded that, as a general rule, s. 56(2) does not apply to
dividend income since, until a dividend is declared, the profits belong to the
corporation as retained earnings.  The declaration of a dividend cannot be
said, therefore, to be a diversion of a benefit which the taxpayer would
have otherwise received (at p. 1052).  Dickson C.J. explained the ruling as
follows (at p. 1052):  While it is always open to the Courts to “pierce the corporate veil” in
order to prevent parties from benefitting from increasingly complex and
intricate tax avoidance techniques, in my view a dividend payment does not fall
within the scope of s. 56(2).  The purpose of s. 56(2) is to ensure that
payments which otherwise would have been received by the taxpayer are not
diverted to a third party as an anti-avoidance technique.  This purpose is not
frustrated because, in the corporate law context, until a dividend is declared,
the profits belong to a corporation as a juridical person: [B. Welling, Corporate
Law in Canada (1984), at pp. 609-10].  Had a dividend not been declared and
paid to a third party, it would not otherwise have been received by the
taxpayer.  Rather, the amount simply would have been retained as earnings by
the company.  Consequently, as a general rule, a dividend payment cannot
reasonably be considered a benefit diverted from a taxpayer to a third party
within the contemplation of s. 56(2).  [Emphasis added.]   47                              
Although not explicitly stated, Dickson C.J.’s preceding comments
concern the fourth precondition to the application of s. 56(2): that the
payment would have been included in the reassessed taxpayer’s income if it had
been received by him or her.  In essence, dividend income does not satisfy this
prerequisite to attribution since the reassessed taxpayer would not have received
the income had it not been paid to the shareholder.  In effect, this Court
implicitly interpreted the fourth precondition to include an entitlement
requirement; entitlement is used in the sense that the reassessed taxpayer
would have otherwise received the payments in dispute.  This was correctly
noted by Rothstein J. at the Federal Court, Trial Division in similar terms
where he acknowledged that Dickson C.J. qualified the application of s. 56(2)
by requiring that the payment in issue “would otherwise have been obtained by
the reassessed taxpayer” (p. 164).  48                              
An entitlement requirement in the sense I have described is consistent
with the stated purpose of s. 56(2), which is to capture and attribute to the
reassessed taxpayer “receipts which he or she otherwise would have obtained” (McClurg,
at p. 1051).   Dividend income cannot pass the fourth test because the
dividend, if not paid to a shareholder, remains with the corporation as
retained earnings; the reassessed taxpayer, as either director or shareholder
of the corporation, has no entitlement to the money.  49                              
This is the only interpretation which makes sense and which avoids
absurdity in the application of s. 56(2), as noted by Dickson C.J. (at p.
1053):  . . . but for the declaration (and allocation), the dividend would
remain part of the retained earnings of the company.  That cannot legitimately
be considered as within the parameters of the legislative intent of s. 56(2). 
If this Court were to find otherwise, corporate directors potentially could be
found liable for the tax consequences of any declaration of dividends made to a
third party. . . . this would be an unrealistic interpretation of the
subsection consistent with neither its object nor its spirit.  It would violate
fundamental principles of corporate law and the realities of commercial
practice and would “overshoot” the legislative purpose of the section.  50                              
I note that the decision in Winter, supra, which was
rendered shortly before this Court’s ruling in McClurg, appears to
challenge the view that where a taxpayer is not entitled to a payment that
payment cannot be attributed to him or her under s. 56(2).  Winter,
however, did not involve the attribution of dividend income.  51                              
In Winter, the majority shareholder in an investment company
caused the corporation to sell some of its shares to his son-in-law, who was
also a shareholder in the corporation, for a price of $100 per share. The
Minister calculated the fair market value of the shares at approximately $1,000
per share and reassessed the majority shareholder under s. 56(2) by adding as
income the difference between what the son-in-law paid for the shares and their
market value.  52                              
Marceau J.A., writing for the court, held that the fact that the taxpayer
had no direct entitlement to the shares did not preclude attribution since
there was no indication that s. 56(2) was intended to be so confined. Marceau
J.A. concluded (at p. 593) that:  when the doctrine of “constructive receipt” is not clearly involved,
because the taxpayer had no entitlement to the payment being made or the
property being transferred, it is fair to infer that subsection 56(2) may
receive application only if the benefit conferred is not directly taxable in
the hands of the transferee.  [Emphasis added.]   Marceau J.A.
distinguished the Federal Court of Appeal’s ruling in McClurg where Urie
J. held that s. 56(2) does not apply to dividend income, which holding was
affirmed by this Court, as follows (at pp. 591-92):  the McClurg decision was concerned with a declaration of
dividend in accordance (in the views of the majority) with the powers conferred
by the share structure of the corporation, and I do not see it as having
authority beyond the particular type of situation with which it was dealing.    53                              
I agree with Marceau J.A.: Winter concerned the conferral of a
benefit which was not in the form of dividend income.  The application of s.
56(2) to non-dividend income was not before this Court in McClurg and it
is not before this Court in the present case.  But the entitlement requirement
implicitly read into the fourth precondition of s. 56(2) in McClurg
clearly applies to dividend income.  54                              
I conclude that, unless a reassessed taxpayer had a preexisting
entitlement to the dividend income paid to the shareholder of a corporation,
the fourth precondition cannot be satisfied and consequently s. 56(2) cannot
operate to attribute the dividend income to that taxpayer for income tax
purposes.   (ii) The obiter dicta in McClurg and the exception to
the general rule  55                              
The finding that dividend income cannot satisfy the fourth precondition
to the application of s. 56(2), as modified by the implicit entitlement
requirement, was dispositive of the McClurg case.   La Forest J. agreed
with the majority’s conclusion that bona fide dividend income does not
fall within the scope of s. 56(2).  However, he dissented on the finding under
corporate law that the discretionary dividend clause was valid; therefore the
dividend income at issue in McClurg was not, in his view, bona fide and
s. 56(2) applied (see p. 1073).  56                              
Despite these conclusions, Dickson C.J. went on to consider the third
precondition, that the payment must be for the benefit of the reassessed
taxpayer or for the benefit of another person whom the reassessed taxpayer
wished to benefit, and in so doing, he qualified his earlier interpretation of
the fourth precondition.    In his view, Wilma McClurg’s receipt of the funds
was not a “benefit” as required by s. 56(2) (the third precondition) since her
contributions to the corporate enterprise could be described as a “legitimate quid
pro quo and were not simply an attempt to avoid the payment of taxes” (p.
1054).  Since Wilma McClurg had made legitimate contributions to the
corporation, the application of s. 56(2) “would be contrary to the commercial
reality of this particular transaction” (p. 1053).  57                              
Dickson C.J. seemed to be of the view that the character of a
shareholder’s dividend income is to be determined by that shareholder’s level
of contribution to the corporation.  This approach ignores the fundamental
nature of dividends; a dividend is a payment which is related by way of
entitlement to one’s capital or share interest in the corporation and not to
any other consideration.  Thus,  the quantum of one’s contribution to a
company, and any dividends received from that corporation, are mutually
independent of one another.  La Forest J. made the same observation in his
dissenting reasons in McClurg (at p. 1073):       With respect, this fact is irrelevant to the issue before us.  To
relate dividend receipts to the amount of effort expended by the recipient on
behalf of the payor corporation is to misconstrue the nature of a dividend.
As discussed earlier, a dividend is received by virtue of ownership of the
capital stock of a corporation.  It is a fundamental principle of corporate law
that a dividend is a return on capital which attaches to a share, and is in no
way dependent on the conduct of a particular shareholder. [Emphasis added.]   58                              
Dickson C.J.’s finding that Wilma McClurg’s contributions to the
corporation resulted in the dividend being consideration for her efforts rather
than a “benefit” as required by s. 56(2) opened the door to his obiter
comments which have led to some confusion (at p. 1054):       In my opinion, if a distinction is to be drawn in the application
of s. 56(2) between arm’s length and non-arm’s length transactions, it should
be made between the exercise of a discretionary power to distribute dividends
when the non-arm’s length shareholder has made no contribution to the company
(in which case s. 56(2) may be applicable), and those cases in which a
legitimate contribution has been made.   59                              
Dickson C.J. is suggesting, it would seem, that where a non-arm’s length
shareholder receives a dividend from a corporation to which he or she has made
no contribution (the dividend income therefore constituting a “benefit” for the
purposes of s. 56(2) in Dickson C.J.’s view), precondition four, interpreted by
him to include an entitlement requirement, is automatically considered satisfied,
or need not be satisfied, with the result that s. 56(2) applies.  60                              
In my view, it is wrong to suggest that there may be an exception to the
rule that s. 56(2) does not apply to dividend income where the recipient of the
dividend income in a non-arm’s length transaction has not made a “legitimate
contribution” to the corporation.   In so stating, I assume, of course, that
proper consideration was given for the shares when issued.  I am not aware of
any principle of corporate law that requires in addition that a so-called
“legitimate contribution” be made by a shareholder to entitle him or her to
dividend income and it is well accepted that tax law embraces corporate law
principles unless such principles are specifically set aside by the taxing
statute.  61                              
Furthermore, there is no principled basis upon which this distinction
can be drawn; the fact that a company is closely held or that no contribution
is made to the company by a shareholder benefiting from a dividend in no way
changes the underlying nature of a dividend.   Neither the fact that the
transaction is non-arm’s length nor the fact that the shareholder has not
contributed to the corporation serves to overcome the conclusion that dividend
income cannot satisfy the fourth precondition to attribution under s. 56(2).  62                              
Moreover, the obiter comments raise the difficult task of
determining what constitutes a legitimate contribution.   What will be the
criteria upon which one can ascertain with any degree of precision or certainty
that a contribution is legitimate?  63                              
Finally, the requirement of a legitimate contribution is in some ways an
attempt to invite a review of the transactions in issue in accordance with the
doctrines of sham or artificiality.  Implicit in the distinction between
non-arm’s length and arm’s length transactions is the assumption that non-arm’s
length transactions lend themselves to the creation of corporate structures
which exist for the sole purpose of avoiding tax and therefore should be caught
by s. 56(2).    However, as mentioned above, taxpayers are entitled to arrange
their affairs for the sole purpose of achieving a favourable position regarding
taxation and no distinction is to be made in the application of this principle
between arm’s length and non-arm’s length transactions (see Stubart, supra).  
The ITA has many specific anti-avoidance provisions and rules governing
the treatment of non-arm’s length transactions.  We should not be quick
to embellish the provision at issue here when it is open for the legislator to be
precise and specific with respect to any mischief to be avoided.  64                              
To summarize, it is inappropriate to consider the contributions of a
shareholder to a corporation when determining whether s. 56(2) applies. 
Dividends are paid to shareholders as a return on their investment in the
corporation.   Since the distribution of the dividend is not determined by the
quantum of a shareholder’s contribution to the corporation, it would be
illogical to use contribution as the criterion that determines when dividend
income will be subject to s. 56(2).   The same principles apply in the context
of both non-arm’s length relationships such as often exist between small
closely held corporations and their shareholders, and arm’s length
relationships such as exist between publicly held corporations and their
shareholders.  5.   Conclusion  65                              
For the foregoing reasons, s. 56(2) does not apply to the dividend
income received by Ruby Neuman.  The appeal is therefore allowed, the decision
of the Federal Court of Appeal is reversed, and that portion of the
respondent’s assessment which attributes the dividend income received by Ruby
Neuman to the appellant is set aside with costs throughout.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Taylor, McCaffrey,
Winnipeg.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.    