  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent   Neutral citation:  2000 SCC 36.  File No.:  26601.  1999:  November 10; 2000:  July 20.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal    Held (Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should
be dismissed.    Here, the appellant is not entitled to claim the two
manufacturing and processing tax incentives.  For the taxation years in issue,
the plant was used primarily in the manufacturing or processing of goods
supplied through contracts for work and materials, not through sale.  Property
in the asphalt was transferred to the appellant’s customers as a fixture to
real property.  Per Gonthier, McLachlin
and Binnie JJ. (dissenting):  The appellant is entitled to claim the two
manufacturing and processing tax incentives at issue.  This appeal does not
turn on the percentages of asphalt sold under different types of contract, but
on the fact that the asphalt plant produced a manufactured product in a
saleable condition.  The evidence is that about 25 percent of the product was
appropriated by the taxpayer and sold as is to customers.  It disposed of the
balance of the asphalt under various paving contracts for work and materials. 
None of the asphalt was retained by the taxpayer.  It is common ground that if
the taxpayer had sold to its paving customers the asphalt in one contract and
the installation of it in another, it would be entitled to the deduction.  The customer’s objective was to obtain an asphalt driveway, and the
services provided by the taxpayer were incidental to realization of that
objective.  The price was paid, and the customer became the owner of the
asphalt in his driveway.  The taxpayer and its customers were likely oblivious
to the fact that, in the eye of the law, title to the steaming stretch of
asphalt passed by accession.  It is important in a self-assessment tax system
to promote an interpretation of provisions, where possible, that is
comprehensible to the taxpayers themselves.  Neither the appellant nor the
customers were likely to understand the distinction between accession and sale.    Cases Cited  By Major J.   By Binnie J. (dissenting)   Statutes and Regulations Cited    Sale of Goods Act, 1893 (U.K.), 56 & 57 Vict., ch. 71.  Authors Cited  Arnold, Brian J.  “Statutory
Interpretation:  Some Thoughts on Plain Meaning”, in Report of Proceedings
of the Fiftieth Tax Conference.  Toronto:  Canadian Tax Foundation, 1999,
6:1.  Benjamin’s Sale of Goods.  Edited by A. G. Guest.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1974.  Bowman, Stephen W. 
“Interpretation of Tax Legislation:  The Evolution of Purposive Analysis”
(1995), 43 Can. Tax J. 1167.   Canada.  House of Commons
Debates, vol. II, 1st Sess., 29th Parl.,
February 19, 1973, p. 1428.  Canada.  House of Commons
Debates, vol. III, 4th Sess., 28th Parl., May 8, 1972,
p. 2002.  Canada.  House of Commons
Debates, vol. V, 1st Sess., 29th Parl., June 13, 1973, p. 4725.  Canada.  House of Commons
Debates, vol. VII, 1st Sess., 30th Parl., June 23, 1975,
p. 7028.  Driedger, Elmer A.  Construction
of Statutes, 2nd ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1983.  Driedger on the Construction of
Statutes, 3rd ed. by Ruth Sullivan.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1994.  Duff, David G.  “Interpreting the
Income Tax Act – Part 1:  Interpretive Doctrines” (1999), 47 Can. Tax J.
464.  Duff, David G.  “Interpreting the
Income Tax Act – Part 2:  Toward a Pragmatic Approach” (1999), 47 Can. Tax
J. 741.  Fulcher, J. E. (Ted).  “The Income
Tax Act:  The Rules of Interpretation and Tax Avoidance.  Purpose vs. Plain
Meaning:  Which, When and Why?” (1995), 74 Can. Bar Rev. 563.  Hogg, Peter W., and
Joanne E. Magee.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law. 
Scarborough:  Carswell, 1995.  Hogg, Peter W., Joanne E. Magee,
and Ted Cook.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law, 3rd ed. 
Scarborough:  Carswell, 1999.  Kernochan, John M.  “Statutory
Interpretation: An Outline of Method” (1976), 3 Dalhousie L.J. 333.  Sharlow, Karen.  “The
Interpretation of Tax Legislation and the Rule of Law – Rejoinder – J.E. (Ted)
Fulcher – (1995), 74 Can. Bar Rev. 563” (1996), 75 Can. Bar Rev. 151.     Willis, John.  “Statute
Interpretation in a Nutshell” (1938), 16 Can. Bar Rev. 1.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal
(1998), 232 N.R. 381, 98 D.T.C. 6203, [1998] F.C.J. No. 234 (QL)
dismissing the taxpayer’s appeal from a decision of the Tax Court of Canada,
[1996] 2 C.T.C. 2426, 97 D.T.C. 506, [1996] T.C.J. No. 281 (QL).  Appeal
dismissed, Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie JJ. dissenting.  Philip Anisman and Robert
B. MacLellan, for the appellant.   The judgment of L’Heureux-Dubé, Iacobucci, Major and
Bastarache JJ. was delivered by      1                                  
MAJOR J. — This appeal concerns the appellant’s
ability to claim two manufacturing and processing tax incentives in respect of
its 1988, 1989 and 1990 taxation years based upon the capital cost of an
asphalt plant it constructed in 1988.  The availability of both incentives, an
accelerated capital cost allowance and an investment tax credit, turns upon
whether using the plant to produce asphalt to be supplied in connection with
paving services constitutes use primarily for the purpose of manufacturing or
processing goods for sale.  I.  Factual Background  2                                  
The appellant, Will-Kare Paving & Contracting Limited (“Will-Kare”),
paves driveways, parking lots and small public roadways for commercial and
residential customers.  3                                  
Until 1988, Will-Kare purchased all its asphalt from competitors, making
it vulnerable in terms of price and availability.  That year, Will-Kare
constructed its own asphalt plant to remove its reliance upon third-party
suppliers.  As additional motivation, it anticipated that owning its own plant
would allow it to bid on larger contracts.  Finally, while Will-Kare’s previous
asphalt consumption did not justify construction of its own plant, it was
confident that third-party sales of excess production would make the plant
economically feasible.  4                                  
After acquiring the plant, Will-Kare’s sales and revenues from paving
contracts increased as expected.  For the taxation years in question,
approximately 75 percent of Will-Kare’s asphalt output was utilized in its own
paving business and approximately 25 percent of its output was sold to third
parties.  5                                  
In the taxation years 1988, 1989 and 1990, Will-Kare included the plant
and additions to it in Class 39 of Schedule II of the Income Tax Regulations,
C.R.C. 1978, c. 945 (“Regulations”), claiming that the plant was property used
primarily in the manufacturing and processing of goods for sale.  As such,
Will-Kare claimed an accelerated capital cost allowance under s. 20(1)(a)
of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (“Act”).  Will-Kare also
claimed the s. 127(5) investment tax credit on the basis that the plant was
“qualified property” within the meaning of s. 127(9) of the Act.  Finally,
Will-Kare claimed the s. 125.1(1) manufacturing and processing profits deduction
for its 1988 and 1989 taxation years with respect to the whole of its income in
accordance with s. 5201 of the Regulations, the so-called “Small Manufacturers’
Rule”.  6                                  
The Minister of National Revenue reassessed Will-Kare, reclassifying the
plant as Class 8 property for capital cost allowance purposes and denying the
investment tax credit, in both cases on the basis that the plant was not being
used primarily for the manufacturing or processing of goods for sale.  As a
consequence of the reassessment, Will-Kare’s active business income was raised
above $200,000, necessitating that the manufacturing and processing profits
deduction be calculated based upon the general pro-rata formula set out in s.
5200 of the Regulations rather than applying the deduction to Will-Kare’s
entire income in accordance with s. 5201 of the Regulations.  7                                  
Will-Kare’s appeals to both the Tax Court of Canada and the Federal
Court of Appeal were dismissed.  II. Relevant
Statutory Provisions  8                                  
For ease of reference, the following statutory provisions are set out.  Income Tax
Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (now R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .))  20.  (1) Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a),
(b) and (h), in computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year
from a business or property, there may be deducted such of the following
amounts as are wholly applicable to that source or such part of the following
amounts as may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto:  (a) such part of the capital cost to the taxpayer of property,
or such amount in respect of the capital cost to the taxpayer of property, if
any, as is allowed by regulation;  127. . . .  (5) There may be deducted from the tax otherwise
payable by a taxpayer under this Part for a taxation year an amount not
exceeding the least of  (a) his annual investment tax credit limit
for the year,  (b) the aggregate of  (i) his investment tax credit at the end of the year in respect of
property acquired, or an expenditure made, before the end of the year,                                                                     .
. .   (9) In this section and section 127.1,  ...  “investment tax credit” of a taxpayer at the end of a taxation year
means the amount, if any, by which the aggregate of  (a) the aggregate of all amounts each of which is the specified
percentage of  (i) the capital cost to him of a qualified property . . .  ...  “qualified property” of a taxpayer means property . . . that is                                                                     .
. .  (b) prescribed machinery and equipment acquired by the taxpayer
after June 23, 1975,  that has not been used, or acquired for use or lease, for any purpose
whatever before it was acquired by the taxpayer and that is  (c) to be used by him in Canada primarily for the purpose of  (i) manufacturing or processing goods for sale or lease, . . .  .
. .  “specified percentage” means  (a) in respect of a qualified property ...  (iii) acquired primarily for use in the Province of Newfoundland,
Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia or New Brunswick or the Gaspé Peninsula,     (A) after November 16, 1978 and before 1989, 20%, and     (B) after 1988, 15%, . . .   Income Tax
Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 945  4600. ...   (2)  Property is prescribed machinery and equipment
for the purposes of the definition “qualified property” in subsection 127(9) of
the Act if it is depreciable property of the taxpayer . . . that is  .
. .  (k) a property included in any of Classes 21, 24, 27, 29, 34, 39
and 40 in Schedule II.                                                                      .
. .   Schedule II  .
. .   CLASS
8  (20
per cent)  Property not included in Class 2, 7, 9, 11 or 30 that is  (a) a structure that is manufacturing or processing machinery or
equipment; .
. .  CLASS
29   Property that would otherwise be included in another class in this
Schedule  (a) that is property manufactured by the taxpayer, the
manufacture of which was completed by him after May 8, 1972, or other property
acquired by the taxpayer after May 8, 1972,  (i) to be used directly or indirectly by him in Canada primarily in the
manufacturing or processing of goods for sale or lease, ...                                                                     ...  (b) that is  (i) property that, but for this class, would be included in Class 8,
...                               ...  and  (c) that is property acquired by the taxpayer  (i) before 1988, or  (ii) before 1990 (A) pursuant to an obligation in writing entered into by the taxpayer
before June 18, 1987,  (B) that was under construction by or on behalf of the taxpayer on June
18, 1987, or  (C) that is machinery or equipment that is a fixed and integral part of
a building, structure, plant facility or other property that was under
construction by or on behalf of the taxpayer on June 18, 1987.                                                                      ...  CLASS
39  Property acquired after 1987 that is not included
in Class 29, but that would otherwise be included in that class if that class
were read without reference to subparagraphs (b)(iii) and (v) and
paragraph (c) thereof.  III. Judicial
History  A. Tax
Court of Canada, 97 D.T.C. 506  9                                  
Sarchuk T.C.C.J., in dismissing Will-Kare’s appeal, viewed its
entitlement to both the investment tax credit and the Class 39 accelerated
capital cost allowance as depending upon whether the asphalt plant was acquired
primarily for the purpose of manufacturing or processing goods for sale or lease. 
Adopting the reasoning in Canada v. Hawboldt Hydraulics (Canada) Inc.
(Trustee of), [1995] 1 F.C. 830 (C.A.), Sarchuk T.C.C.J. concluded that use
of the plant to produce asphalt for use in Will-Kare’s own paving business did
not constitute the manufacture of goods for sale, but rather for use in
contracts for work and materials.  10                              
Sarchuk T.C.C.J. also dismissed Will-Kare’s argument that because
potential third-party sales of asphalt were of equal importance in its decision
to acquire the plant, the manufacturing of goods for sale was one of the
plant’s prospective primary uses.  As third-party sales never represented more
than 25 percent of total sales, Sarchuk T.C.C.J. concluded that the plant’s
primary use could not be the manufacture of goods for sale.  B. Federal
Court of Appeal, 98 D.T.C. 6203  11                              
Strayer J.A. dismissed the appeal and concluded that Sarchuk T.C.C.J.
correctly characterized the asphalt plant as not being acquired primarily for
the manufacturing of goods for sale, but for the production of asphalt for use
in Will-Kare’s own paving business.  Strayer J.A. also agreed that the phrase
“goods for sale” be given the same meaning it would be given by the law of sale
of goods to exclude contracts for work and materials.  Therefore, Will-Kare had
not acquired the plant primarily for the purpose of manufacturing or processing
goods for sale.  IV. Issue  12                              
Does the capital cost of Will-Kare’s asphalt plant qualify for the
investment tax credit provided for by s. 127(5) of the Act and the accelerated
capital cost allowance provided for by Class 39 of Schedule II of the
Regulations and s. 20(1)(a) of the Act?  V. Analysis  13                              
Will-Kare’s ability to claim both the s. 127(5) investment tax credit
and the Class 39 accelerated capital cost allowance depends on an
interpretation of a statutory requirement common to both incentives.  14                              
It was not disputed that Will-Kare was entitled to depreciate its
asphalt plant for tax purposes by claiming a capital cost allowance in accordance
with s. 20(1)(a) of the Act.  What is disputed, however, is into which
of the asset pools enumerated in Schedule II of the Regulations Will-Kare’s
plant was to be placed.  15                              
Will-Kare clearly prefers that its plant be characterized as Class 39 property
and, as such, be depreciated at an accelerated rate vis-à-vis the
plant’s alternate characterization as Class 8 property.  Schedule II of the
Regulations defines Class 39 property essentially as Class 29 property acquired
after 1987.  Therefore, for the plant to qualify as Class 39 property,
Will-Kare must have acquired it “to be used directly or indirectly . . . in
Canada primarily in the manufacturing or processing of goods for sale or
lease”.  16                              
Will-Kare’s ability to claim the s. 127(5) investment tax credit is
contingent upon the plant being characterized as “qualified property” within
the meaning of s. 127(9) of the Act, generally defined as prescribed machinery
and equipment to be used by the taxpayer in Canada primarily for the purpose of
manufacturing or processing goods for sale or lease.  Pursuant to s. 4600(2)(k)
of the Regulations, property is prescribed machinery and equipment if it is
property included in, inter alia, Class 39 of Schedule II.  17                              
Therefore, for Will-Kare to receive the benefit of the above incentives,
it must establish that it acquired the asphalt plant primarily for the purpose
of manufacturing or processing goods for sale or lease.  18                              
Submissions were made concerning a third incentive, the s. 125.1
manufacturing and processing profits tax credit.  The availability of this
incentive was not raised in the courts below and is not an issue in this
appeal.  Manufacturing
or Processing Goods for Sale  19                              
Canadian jurisprudence to this point has adopted two divergent interpretations
of the activities that constitute manufacturing and processing goods for sale. 
Without canvassing these authorities exhaustively, it may be helpful to outline
briefly those cases which delineate these two distinct approaches.  20                              
One point of view is expressed in Crown Tire Service Ltd. v. The
Queen,  [1984] 2 F.C. 219 (T.D.), where the court imports common law and
provincial sale of goods law distinctions in defining the scope of the
manufacturing and processing incentives’ application.  Only capital property
used to manufacture or process goods to be furnished through contracts purely
for the sale of such goods qualifies.  Property used to manufacture or process
goods to be supplied in connection with the provision of a service, namely
through a contract for work and materials, is not viewed as being used directly
or indirectly in Canada primarily in the manufacturing or processing of goods for
sale, and as such, does not qualify for either the accelerated capital cost
allowance or the investment tax credit.  21                              
The Crown Tire case related to whether the application of treads
manufactured by the taxpayer to tires brought in by customers for repair
constituted the manufacture or processing of goods for sale.  Strayer J. (later
J.A.) disallowed the taxpayer’s claim to the s. 125.1 manufacturing and
processing profits deduction as the manufactured tread was supplied through a
contract for work and materials, a characterization based upon the method
through which property transferred to the buyer.  See p. 223:  In Benjamin’s Sale of Goods (London, 1974),
in considering the distinction between a contract of sale of goods and a
contract for work and materials, it is stated:  Where work is to be done on the land of the employer or on a chattel
belonging to him, which involves the use or affixing of materials belonging to
the person employed, the contract will ordinarily be one for work and
materials, the property in the latter passing to the employer by accession and
not under any contract of sale. ...  I believe that the situation here fits within the
general principle as stated in Benjamin.  With respect to the retreading
of tires owned by customers, it appears to me that the customers retain
ownership throughout the process.  22                              
A second line of authority departs from the point of view in Crown
Tire and declines to apply statutory and common law sale of goods rules in
delineating that capital property to which the manufacturing and processing
incentives apply.  Rather, these cases advocate a literal construction of
“sale” such that the provision of a service incidental to the supply of a manufactured
or processed good does not preclude receiving the benefit of the incentives. 
Any transfer of property for consideration would suffice.  See Halliburton
Services Ltd. v. The Queen, 85 D.T.C. 5336 (F.C.T.D.), aff’d 90 D.T.C. 6320
(F.C.A.), and The Queen v. Nowsco Well Service Ltd., 90 D.T.C. 6312
(F.C.A.).  23                              
Halliburton and Nowsco considered the form of contract
entered into between the taxpayer and customer to be irrelevant.  In both cases
the Federal Court of Appeal quoted with approval language from Reed J.’s
decision in Halliburton at the Trial Division that appears to suggest an
alternative test based upon the source of the taxpayer’s profit.  As stated by
Reed J., at p. 5338:  . . . I do not find any requirement that the contract which gives rise
to the taxpayer’s profit must be of a particular nature, eg: one for the sale
of goods and not one of a more extensive nature involving work and labour as
well as the goods or material supplied.  In my view it is the source of the
profit, (arising out of processing) that is important . . . not the nature of
the taxpayer’s contract with its customers.  24                              
Rolls-Royce (Canada) Ltd. v. The Queen, 93 D.T.C. 5031 (F.C.A.),
attempted to reconcile these diverging lines of authority by restricting Crown
Tire’s reasoning to circumstances that do not evidence the manufacture of a
discrete and identifiable good prior or contemporaneous to the provision of a
service.  As stated by MacGuigan J.A. at p. 5034:  The crucial distinction between Crown Tire
and Halliburton seems to me to be . . . that the processing in Crown
Tire “did not involve the creation of a good antecedent to its use in the
provision of a service”. . . . The rubber strip in Crown Tire was not on
the evidence manufactured or processed by the taxpayer, whereas the cement in Halliburton
was made by the taxpayer, indeed was custom-made according to very exact
specifications.  25                              
In Hawboldt Hydraulics, supra, the respondent taxpayer
relied upon the Rolls-Royce interpretation of Crown Tire to claim
a Class 29 accelerated capital cost allowance and s. 127(5) investment tax
credit with respect to property used to manufacture parts for use in repair
services.  Rejecting the taxpayer’s claim, the court reverted to the original Crown
Tire approach.  Isaac C.J. wrote at p. 847:  We are invited by the modern rule of statutory interpretation to give
those words their ordinary meaning.  But we are dealing with a commercial
statute and in commerce the words have a meaning that is well understood. ... Strayer
J. was right, in my respectful view, to say in Crown Tire, at page 225
that:  ... one must assume that Parliament in speaking of “goods for sale or
lease” had reference to the general law of sale or lease to give greater
precision to this phrase in particular cases.  26                              
In this appeal, Will-Kare admits that asphalt supplied in connection
with its paving services is provided pursuant to a contract for work and
materials.  Nevertheless, Will-Kare requests that we adopt the Halliburton
and Nowsco ordinary meaning interpretation such that the manufacturing
of goods for sale includes all manufactured goods supplied to a customer for
consideration, regardless of whether paving services are provided in connection
with that supply.  To the contrary, the respondent asserts that, as noted in Crown
Tire and Hawboldt Hydraulics, use of the term sale in the
manufacturing and processing incentives necessarily imports common law and
statutory sale of goods concepts.  27                              
Both parties make extensive reference to Hansard as support for their
respective interpretations of Parliament’s intent in utilizing the words “goods
for sale” in connection with the manufacturing and processing incentives.  I do
not propose to review this legislative material as I generally agree with the
characterization ascribed to it by Isaac C.J. in Hawboldt Hydraulics, supra,
at pp. 846-47:  ... it is clear from the total context of the legislation, including
the passages from the House of Commons Debates to which I have referred,
that Parliament’s objective in enacting the legislation was encouragement of
increased production of manufactured and processed goods to be placed on the
domestic and international markets in competition with foreign manufacturers. 
That that is the activity which Parliament sought to encourage is, to my mind,
plain from the Debates.  It is equally plain that Parliament intended to
benefit manufacturers and processors who engaged in those activities.  In other
words, the relevant statutory provisions were designed to give Canadian
manufacturers and processors an advantage over their foreign competitors in the
domestic and foreign markets.  It is also clear that Parliament had in mind
specific target groups and specific target activities.  The legislation was not
intended to benefit every manufacturing activity or every manufacturer.  The
language of the statute is clear that the activity to be benefited was the
manufacture of goods for sale or lease ... .  28                              
From the legislative material accompanying the manufacturing and
processing incentives, it is clear that Parliament’s objective was to encourage
the manufacturing and processing sector’s ability to address foreign
competition in the domestic and international markets and foster increased
employment in that sector of the Canadian economy.  Furthermore, it is clear
that Parliament did not wish to define exhaustively the scope of manufacturing
or processing, words which do not have distinct legal meanings, but left it to
the courts to interpret this language according to common commercial use.  The
language in Hansard is not helpful as to the meaning which Parliament intended
to subscribe to the words “for sale or lease”.  It neither dictates, nor
precludes, the application of common law sale of goods distinctions.  29                              
Notwithstanding this absence of direction, the concepts of a sale or a
lease have settled legal definitions.  As noted in Crown Tire and
Hawboldt Hydraulics,  Parliament was cognizant of these meanings and the
implication of using such language.  It follows that the availability of the
manufacturing and processing incentives at issue must be restricted to property
utilized in the supply of goods for sale and not extended to property primarily
utilized in the supply of goods through contracts for work and materials.  30                              
It is perhaps true, as Will-Kare submitted and as noted in Halliburton,
supra, at p. 5338, that the use of sale of goods law distinctions
sometimes yields the anomalous result that the provision of services in
connection with manufactured and processed goods will disqualify property that
would, but for the services, qualify for the incentives.  Nevertheless, it
remains that in drafting the manufacturing processing incentives to include
reference to sale or lease, Parliament has chosen to use language that imports
relatively fine private law distinctions.  Indeed, the Act is replete with such
distinctions.  Absent express direction that an interpretation other than that
ascribed by settled commercial law be applied, it would be inappropriate to do
so.  31                              
To apply a “plain meaning” interpretation of the concept of a sale in
the case at bar would assume that the Act operates in a vacuum, oblivious to
the legal characterization of the broader commercial relationships it affects. 
It is not a commercial code in addition to a taxation statute.  Previous
jurisprudence of this Court has assumed that reference must be given to the
broader commercial law to give meaning to words that, outside of the Act,
are well-defined.  See Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada, [1998]
2 S.C.R. 298.  See also P. W. Hogg, J. E. Magee and T. Cook, Principles of
Canadian Income Tax Law (3rd ed. 1999), at p. 2, where the authors note:  The Income Tax Act relies implicitly on the general
law, especially the law of contract and property. ... Whether a person is an
employee, independent contractor, partner, agent, beneficiary of a trust or
shareholder of a corporation will usually have an effect on tax liability and
will turn on concepts contained in the general law, usually provincial law.  32                              
Referring to the broader context of private commercial law in
ascertaining the meaning to be ascribed to language used in the Act is also
consistent with the modern purposive principle of statutory interpretation.  As
cited in E. A. Driedger, Construction of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983), at p.
87:  Today there is only one principle or approach,
namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their
grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the
object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament.  See Rizzo
& Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at para. 21.  The modern
approach to statutory interpretation has been applied by this Court to the
interpretation of tax legislation.  See 65302 British Columbia Ltd. v.
Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 804, at para. 5, per Bastarache J., and at
para. 50, per Iacobucci J.; Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen,
[1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at p. 578. 33                              
The technical nature of the Act does not lend itself to broadening the
principle of plain meaning to embrace popular meaning.  The word sale has an
established and accepted legal meaning.  34                              
Will-Kare’s submissions essentially advocate the application of an
economic realities test to the interpretation of what constitutes a sale for
the purpose of the manufacturing and processing incentives.  However, as noted
above, in the absence of express legislative direction to the contrary, I view
the incentives’ reference to the concepts of sale and lease as importing
private law distinctions.  As such, the provisions at issue are clear and
unambiguous and reference to economic realities is not warranted.  See Shell
Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 622, at para. 40.  35                              
It would be open to Parliament to provide for a broadened definition of
sale for the purpose of applying the incentives with clear language to that
effect.  Given, however, the provisions merely refer to sale, it cannot be
concluded that a definition other than that which follows from common law and
sale of goods legislation was envisioned.  36                              
For the taxation years in issue, approximately 75 percent of the asphalt
produced by the Will-Kare’s plant was supplied in connection with Will-Kare’s
paving services.  Thus the plant was used primarily in the manufacturing or
processing of goods supplied through contracts for work and materials, not
through sale.  Property in the asphalt transferred to Will-Kare’s customers as
a fixture to real property.  37                              
The principles enunciated in Crown Tire and Hawboldt
Hydraulics, to the extent they dictate reference to a common law and
statutory definition of sale, offer a guide preferable to the broader
interpretation of sale described in Halliburton and Nowsco.  38                              
Therefore I would dismiss the appeal with costs throughout.  The reasons of
Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie JJ. were delivered by  39                              
Binnie J. (dissenting) — The fundamental issue in this case is the
interpretation of everyday words used by Parliament in the context of a tax
regime based on self-assessment.  In 1997, the last year for which precise
statistics are available, 20,453,540 tax returns were filed with Revenue
Canada.  Most taxpayers are not (and likely have no desire to be) learned in
the law.  When confronted as here with the phrase “primarily
in the manufacturing or processing of goods for sale or lease”
under s. 127(9) of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (“Act”), he or she is entitled, in my
opinion, to the benefit of the plain meaning of an everyday word like “sale”.  The taxpayer was denied that
benefit by the Minister in this case.  The millions of taxpayers who are not
lawyers cannot be expected to reach for Benjamin’s Sale of Goods to
research the difference between a contract for the sale of goods and a contract
for work and materials and to apply these distinctions in the assessment of
their own income tax liability.  I would therefore allow the appeal.  40                              
The taxpayer appellant, who was originally in the paving business,
expanded his operation to include the manufacture of asphalt, and thereafter
claimed an accelerated capital cost allowance under s. 20(1)(a) of
the Act.  (The appellant also seeks an investment tax credit pursuant to
s. 127(5) of the Act.)  Entitlement to the accelerated capital cost
allowance (“fast tax write-off”)
turns on the taxpayer’s ability to demonstrate that its investment in the
asphalt plant was made to acquire property  to be used
directly or indirectly by him in Canada primarily in the manufacturing or
processing of goods for sale or lease [emphasis added]   within the meaning of s. 20(1)(a)
of the Act and Classes 39 and 29 in Schedule II of the Income Tax
Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 945.  Entitlement to the investment tax credit
turns on similar wording in s. 127(9)(c)(i).  41                              
The asphalt plant produced a manufactured product in a saleable
condition.  The asphalt came fully into existence prior to any paving services
being rendered, obviously.  The evidence is that about 25 percent of the
product was appropriated by the taxpayer and sold as is to customers.  It
disposed of the balance of the asphalt under various paving contracts for work
and materials.  None of the asphalt was retained by the taxpayer.  The Minister
denied the fast tax write-off because, while the asphalt plant produced a
saleable product, the taxpayer chose to dispose of it primarily under contracts
for work and materials rather than under contracts of sale within the meaning
of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 (U.K.), 56 & 57 Vict., c. 71, and
various derivative provincial statutes.  42                              
It is common ground that if the taxpayer had sold to its paving
customers the asphalt in one contract and the installation of it in another, it
would be entitled to the deduction.  43                              
In this case, the Tax Court of Canada and the Federal Court of Appeal
upheld the Minister’s decision based on an interpretation developed by
Strayer J. in Crown Tire Service Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 2 F.C.
219 (T.D.), where he said at p. 225:  While the distinctions employed here may seem somewhat technical and
remote from revenue law, one must assume that Parliament in speaking of “goods for sale or lease” had
reference to the general law of sale or lease to give greater precision to this
phrase in particular cases.   44                              
As applied to the facts of this case, however, the asphalt at the
plant door was in fact “for sale”. 
The Minister’s interpretation requires that the statutory text be supplemented
with additional words so that, as extended, it would read “goods
to be disposed of under contracts for sale or lease”. 
I agree in this respect with the approach of Reed J. speaking
of a comparable provision of the Act in Halliburton Services Ltd. v. The
Queen, 85 D.T.C. 5336 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 5338, aff’d 90 D.T.C. 6320
(F.C.A.):  It seems to me to be quite clear that what was intended was a tax
deduction with respect to profit arising out of the manufacturing and
processing of goods, not a requirement that the goods had to be sold in a
particular fashion.   45                              
Considerable argument was addressed to us and in the courts below about
the percentage of asphalt that was disposed of under contracts of work and
materials as opposed to contracts of sale.  This debate was precipitated by the
word “primarily” in the
definition.  In my view, the taxpayer’s case, if it is to succeed, does not
turn on these percentages, but on the proposition that all of the asphalt
produced at the plant was for sale and asphalt disposed of under a contract for
work and materials was a “sale”
of the manufactured asphalt within the plain meaning of the Act.  Contracts for Work and Material  46                              
The appellant’s standard form customer contract was “for furnishing all
labour, materials and equipment required for the performance” of the work.  In
the sample contract provided in the appellant’s record, the handwritten
notation undertook to “excavate unsuitable material, supply necessary gravel,
grade, compact and pave with 2½" of asphalt”.  The global price for the
job is then stipulated.  The evidence was that about half of the contract price
was for materials, of which about half was for asphalt.  These percentages are
not significant because the tax benefit relates not to a percentage of the
paving contract price but to the $433,535 wholly spent to acquire the asphalt
plant.  47                              
I note at the outset that this case differs from the “repair cases” such
as Rolls-Royce (Canada) Ltd. v. The Queen, 93 D.T.C. 5031 (F.C.A.),
application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada refused, [1993]
2 S.C.R. x, where it was held that the overhauling of aircraft engines
constituted “manufacturing or processing” but not “for sale” because the
engines in issue were throughout owned by customers of the taxpayer.  Crown
Tire, supra, is to the same effect.  No such issue arises here.  In
the beginning, the taxpayer owned the asphalt.  At the end, the customer did. 
The only issue on this appeal is whether the asphalt as manufactured was for
sale.  48                              
La Forest J. pointed out in H. W. Liebig & Co. v. Leading
Investments Ltd., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 70, at p. 83, that “the primary meaning
of sale is the transfer of property to another for a price”.  Referring to the
definition in the Oxford English Dictionary of “sale” as “[t]he action or an act of
selling or making over to another for a price; the exchange of a commodity for
money or other valuable consideration”, La Forest J.
said of the word “sale”, in the
admittedly different context of a real estate purchase agreement, “I do not think the technical meaning that lawyers may attach
to a word for certain purposes should be substituted for the ordinary meaning
of that word in everyday speech unless there is evidence that the parties
intended to use it in that special or technical sense”
(p. 84).  In my view, ordinary words in the Act like “for
sale” should also be interpreted in light of “the ordinary meaning of the word in everyday speech”.  Here, the supply of asphalt was specified, although the
price was not allocated in the contract as between work and materials.  The
customer’s objective was to obtain an asphalt driveway, and the services
provided by the taxpayer were incidental to realization of that objective.  The
price was paid, and the customer became the owner of the asphalt in his
driveway.  The taxpayer and its customers were likely oblivious to the fact
(relied on by the Minister) that, in the eye of the law, title to the steaming
stretch of asphalt passed by accession.  49                              
This Court has frequently endorsed the “plain
meaning” rule of interpretation in relation to the
Act.  A recent instance is Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R.
622, per McLachlin J., as she then was, for the Court, at para. 40:  Where the
provision at issue is clear and unambiguous, its terms must simply be applied.
...   For this proposition, McLachlin
J. cited Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 298,
at para. 51, per Bastarache J.; Tennant v. M.N.R., [1996] 1
S.C.R. 305, at para. 16, per Iacobucci J.; Friesen v. Canada,
[1995] 3 S.C.R. 103, at para. 11, per Major J.; Alberta (Treasury
Branches) v. M.N.R., [1996] 1 S.C.R. 963, at para. 15, per Cory J. 50                              
This is not to say that the “plain meaning” is to be applied by a court oblivious to the context.  In Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at p. 578,
Estey J. emphasized that “[c]ourts today apply to
this statute [the Income Tax Act] the plain meaning rule, but in a
substantive sense”, which he elaborated by reference to
the oft-quoted passage from E. A. Driedger, Construction of Statutes
(2nd ed. 1983), at p. 87 (which Driedger styled “the
modern rule”):  Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an
Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and
ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act,
and the intention of Parliament.   51                              
“[W]ords, like people, take their colour from
their surroundings”, observed Professor J. Willis at p.
6 in “Statute Interpretation in a Nutshell” (1938), 16 Can. Bar Rev. 1, the classic article
cited by Estey J. at p. 577 of Stubart Investments, supra.  More
recently, Professor J. M. Kernochan has made a similar point:  “The precise words which are in issue in relation to the
facts must be weighed in the light of successive circles of context” (“Statutory Interpretation: An Outline
of Method” (1976), 3 Dalhousie L.J. 333, at
pp. 348-49).  The Stubart Investments principles were further
addressed by Cory J. in Alberta (Treasury Branches) v. M.N.R., supra,
at para. 15:  Even if the
ambiguity were not apparent, it is significant that in order to determine the
clear and plain meaning of the statute it is always appropriate to consider the
“scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the
intention of Parliament”.   52                              
In Québec (Communauté urbaine) v. Corp. Notre-Dame
de Bon-Secours, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 3, Gonthier J., for the Court, cited
and applied the Stubart Investments principles and, at p. 17, adopted
the following statement as summarizing his conclusion on the issue of ambiguity
in the legislative text:  There has been
one distinct change [after Stubart], however, in the resolution of
ambiguities.  In the past, resort was often made to the maxims that an
ambiguity in a taxing provision is resolved in the taxpayer’s favour and that
an ambiguity in an exempting provision is resolved in the Crown’s favour.  Now
an ambiguity is usually resolved openly by reference to legislative intent. 
[Emphasis added by Gonthier J.]   The emphasis on purposive
interpretation in Notre-Dame de Bon-Secours, supra, is occasionally
portrayed as somewhat out of step with the modern plain meaning rule:  see,
e.g., B. J. Arnold, “Statutory Interpretation:  Some
Thoughts on Plain Meaning”, in Report of Proceedings
of the Fiftieth Tax Conference (1999), 6:1, at p. 6:20, but I don’t
think this observation is correct.  The Notre-Dame de Bon-Secours judgment was directed
against excessive resort to “predetermined presumptions” and advocated greater
focus on the actual “legislative provision in question” (p. 20).  The Court
held that where, after going through the Stubart Investments analysis, a
court concludes that the words themselves do not disclose a “plain meaning”,
other interpretive tools must necessarily gain in influence, including “the
context of the statute, its objective and the legislative intent” (p. 20).  Far
from downplaying the “plain meaning”, Gonthier J., at p. 21, was at pains to
explore the statutory text, finally concluding at p. 27 that:  If the legislature had intended that the tax exemption of a
reception centre should be subject to the existence of a permit issued by the
proper authority, it would have said so expressly as it did for day-care
centres.  The same textual argument can be drawn from s. 204(15)....   53                              
The first rule identified in the Notre-Dame de Bon-Secours
summary at p. 20 is that “[t]he interpretation of
tax legislation should follow the ordinary rules of interpretation”.  The “ordinary rules” include the modern plain meaning rule, as noted by J. E.
Fulcher, a tax counsel with the Department of Justice, in “The
Income Tax Act:  The Rules of Interpretation and Tax Avoidance.  Purpose vs.
Plain Meaning:  Which, When and Why?” (1995), 74 Can.
Bar Rev. 563.  Commenting at p. 578 on the later case of Canada v.
Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312, he says:  [T]he case
never gets beyond the first rule in Bon-Secours.  The ordinary rule of
interpretation here is that unambiguous provisions are to be interpreted as
written, and while finding ambiguity is a subjective undertaking, why come to
the Finance Department’s aid when the provision is drafted with such blinding
certainty?   54                              
The primary rule of statutory interpretation is to ascertain the
intention of Parliament.  Where the meaning of the words used is plain and no
ambiguity arises from context, then the words offer the best indicator of
Parliament’s intent:  R. v. McIntosh, [1995] 1 S.C.R. 686, at p. 697, per
Lamer C.J., and at p. 712, per McLachlin J., dissenting.  No doubt the
statement that words have a “plain meaning” is itself a conclusion based on a contextual analysis. 
However, once the tools of interpretation have been deployed and the issue
considered from the different perspectives identified by Professor Driedger, if
the result of that exercise is the conclusion that the meaning of the words
used by Parliament is plain, then effect must be given to them.  The Stubart
Investments gloss on “plain meaning” was thus reaffirmed by Major J. in Friesen, supra,
at para. 10.  He said that, if, after examining the context and purpose of the
tax provision, the Court nevertheless concludes that “a
provision is couched in specific language that admits of no doubt or ambiguity
in its application to the facts, then the provision must be applied regardless
of its object and purpose”: Friesen, supra,
at para. 11, quoting P. W. Hogg and J. E. Magee, Principles
of Canadian Income Tax Law (1995), at p. 454.  55                              
The strength of the “plain meaning” rule is its recognition that it is the words of the
provision themselves that constitute the vehicle used by Parliament to convey
its intent to the people who are trying to assess their rights and tax
liabilities under the Act.  As the Court said in Antosko, supra,
at pp. 326-27:  While it is
true that the courts must view discrete sections of the Income Tax Act
in light of the other provisions of the Act and of the purpose of the
legislation, and that they must analyze a given transaction in the context of
economic and commercial reality, such techniques cannot alter the result where
the words of the statute are clear and plain and where the legal and practical
effect of the transaction is undisputed. . . .   56                              
Even less attractive, I think, is the attempt in the present case to
narrow the words “sale or lease”
by reference to technical legal distinctions among various types of disposal
contracts which are totally extraneous to the Act and are not easily accessible
to the self-assessing taxpayer.  Apart from everything else, such imported
technical distinctions may frustrate not only the plain meaning, but the
legislative purpose of the tax provision.  Where (as here) Parliament has
spoken in language that continues to speak plainly despite “successive
circles of context”, I think the taxpayer is entitled
to the benefit voted by Parliament.  It is the Minister (or the Minister’s
colleague, the Minister of Finance) who recommended the particular wording to
Parliament, and it is the Minister or his colleague who may recommend
amendments to the Act if it is thought desirable to narrow the tax benefit.  Commentary
by the Tax Bar  57                              
The “plain meaning”
approach as defined in Stubart Investments, supra, has been much
discussed in the recent tax literature, including S. W. Bowman, “Interpretation of Tax Legislation:  The Evolution of
Purposive Analysis” (1995), 43 Can. Tax J. 1167;
Fulcher, supra; K. Sharlow, “The Interpretation
of Tax Legislation and the Rule of Law – Rejoinder”
(1996), 75 Can. Bar Rev. 151; R. Taylor, “The
Interpretation of Fiscal Statutes:  The ‘Plain Meaning’ Approach in Recent
Supreme Court of Canada Decisions”, in Report of
Proceedings of the Forty-Eighth Tax Conference (1997), 64:1; Arnold, supra. 
More recently still, the “plain meaning” rule has been discussed in detail and criticized by
Professor D. G. Duff in two articles titled “Interpreting
the Income Tax Act” (1999), 47 Can. Tax J. 464
and 741.  At p. 770, Professor Duff says that by over-simplifying the
interpretive task, the plain meaning rule in its pure form (i.e., before Estey
J. married the “plain meaning”
rule to Driedger’s “modern rule”
in Stubart Investments, supra)  obscures the
process of statutory interpretation, artificially limits its scope, produces
decisions contrary to legislative intentions and statutory purposes, permits
substantial judicial discretion, and places an unreasonable burden on
legislative drafters.   Whatever might have been said
about the original “plain meaning”
rule, I do not think that the modern plain meaning rule spelled out in Stubart
Investments is fairly subject to these criticisms.  58                              
To take Professor Duff’s points in reverse order, I do not think it
unreasonable to require the legislative drafter to make it plain (if such be
the intent) that the product must not only be manufactured for sale, but must
be disposed of under a specific type of contract, e.g., excluding contracts for
work and materials.  It would be a simple matter to signal to the taxpayer in
ordinary language that if he or she supplies services along with the
manufactured product, the fast write-off and the investment tax credit will be
forfeited.  59                              
Secondly, adoption of the plain meaning in this case reduces rather than
enlarges judicial discretion.  The Court respects the very words Parliament has
used, and operates on the assumption that Parliament meant what it said:  Friesen,
supra, at para. 53.  It does not complicate the Act with ideas borrowed
from the Sale of Goods Act, 1893.  60                              
Thirdly, a review of the related text in the Act and the legislative
history confirms the fact that the “plain meaning” accords with Parliament’s intent expressed by the
responsible Minister and senior officials, a type of evidence the Court has
ruled admissible as part of the interpretive exercise:  Symes v. Canada,
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at pp. 749-50; Thibaudeau v. Canada, [1995] 2
S.C.R. 627, at para. 173; Friesen, supra, at para. 63.  While the
criticism may occasionally be made that “[j]udges have
considerable freedom in formulating their descriptions of legislative purpose” (R. Sullivan, Driedger on the Construction of
Statutes (3rd ed. 1994), at p. 60), the fact is that in this case there is
a wealth of authoritative guidance on point.  61                              
On May 8, 1972, the Minister of Finance, the Honourable John
Turner, introduced to the House of Commons a tax amendment to
permit machinery and equipment required for manufacturing operations to be
written off within two years (“the fast write-off”) to provide “a substantial
incentive for the establishment in Canada of new manufacturing enterprises and
the expansion of existing enterprises by increasing the return that can
ultimately be realized on capital investment” (House of Commons Debates,
vol. III, 4th Sess., 28th Parl., at p. 2002).  A major emphasis was on creating
jobs.  Asphalt plants create jobs irrespective of the form of the asphalt
disposal contract.  62                              
The Minister of Finance returned to the theme of encouraging investment
in manufacturing facilities in his budget address of February 19, 1973 (House
of Commons Debates, vol. II, 1st Sess., 29th Parl., at p. 1428), and in the
post-budget debate on June 13, 1973, when he pointed out that “increasing the
after-tax rate of return on investment, these measures will help to achieve
these national objectives by encouraging the establishment in many parts of the
country of new manufacturing and processing industries and of supporting
service industries” (House of Commons Debates, vol. V, 1st Sess., 29th
Parl., at p. 4725).  Whatever else may be said of the taxpayer’s activities in
this case, it acquired a new manufacturing plant and it worked the plant in
conjunction with its paving service business.  63                              
On June 23, 1975, the Finance Minister returned to the same theme,
explaining that “I am therefore proposing to introduce an investment tax credit
as a temporary extra incentive for investment in a wide range of new productive
facilities” (House of Commons Debates, vol. VII, 1st Sess., 30th Parl.,
at p. 7028).  64                              
In the same year, he explained to the Canadian Tax Foundation that:  We want the
application of the policy to be clear as well.  Grey areas in tax
administration are no more popular with governments than with taxpayers.  To apply the reduced rate, a taxpayer must be able to answer two
questions:  Am I carrying
on a manufacturing or processing activity?  If I am, how
much of my business income is subject to the reduced rate?  (“Banquet
Address”, in Report of Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Tax Conference
(1973), 278, at p. 281.)   65                              
In the following year, R. D. Weil, C.A., of the Technical
Interpretations Division of the Department of National Revenue, further
explained the tax changes in an address to the Canadian Tax Foundation and gave
an example which is apposite in the present appeal:  Where a
company enters into a supply and erect contract, the off-site
manufacturing of building products is not considered to be construction,
whereas the activities of erecting and installing these products in place at
the construction site are considered to be construction.  Where a building
product such as ready-mix concrete or asphalt is manufactured or
processed off site and then is installed at the place of construction by
the same company, some concern may exist that there is no sale of the
concrete or asphalt.  In these and similar circumstances, the product is
considered to be sold at the time the completed structure is sold and therefore
such activities will qualify.  [Italics in original; underlining added.]  (“Manufacturing
and Processing Tax Incentives”, in Report of Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
Tax Conference (1974), 124, at p. 127.)   66                              
Administrative policy and interpretation are not determinative but are
entitled to weight and can be an important factor in case of doubt about the
meaning of legislation: Harel v. Deputy Minister of Revenue of Quebec,
[1978] 1 S.C.R. 851, at p. 859, per de Grandpré J.; Nowegijick v. The
Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29, at p. 37, per Dickson J. 
Bulletin No. IT-145 issued by the Department of National Revenue on February 5,
1974, incorporated Mr. Weil’s interpretation as follows:  9.    Where a
building product such as ready-mix concrete or asphalt is manufactured
or processed off site and then is installed at the place of construction by
the same corporation, some concern may exist that there is no sale of the
concrete or asphalt.  In these and similar circumstances, the product is
considered to be sold at the time the completed structure is sold and
therefore such activities will qualify.  [Emphasis added.]   67                              
These comments seem directed to construction projects which are a traditional
heartland of work and materials contracts, and, I think, undermine the
Minister’s narrow interpretation urged here.  68                              
Moreover, this legislative history makes it clear that the distinction
drawn from the niceties of contract law adopted by the Minister and the courts
below to defeat the taxpayer’s claim is unrelated to the purpose of the
deductions.  By basing the availability of the tax incentives on the
distinction between a contract for the sale of goods and a contract for work
and materials, the Minister applies doctrines developed in a non-tax context
aimed at the totally different (and irrelevant) law governing the rights and
obligations of buyers and sellers.  There are, no doubt, provisions in the Income
Tax Act which require for their proper understanding resort to commercial
law or accounting practice, but the provisions at issue in the present appeal
are not among them.  69                              
Notre-Dame de Bon-Secours, supra, at p. 18, recognized
that, while at one time tax legislation was arguably limited to raising funds
to cover government expenses, “[i]n our time it has been recognized that such
legislation serves other purposes and functions as a tool of economic and social
policy.  . . .  Both are legitimate purposes which equally embody the
legislative intent and it is thus hard to see why one should take precedence
over the other.”  In my view, the legislative purpose here is to give positive
encouragement to manufacturing and processing plants.  This corroborates and
reinforces the “plain meaning” of the Act.  70                              
While the plain meaning principle to some extent limits the scope of the
interpretive exercise, it does not do so “artificially”.  It arrives at the
intent of Parliament by the most direct route, namely by giving effect to the
words Parliament has used where Parliament has made its meaning plain.  While
there is little danger that the Act will ever become user-friendly or self-explanatory,
it is of particular importance in a self-assessment tax system to promote an
interpretation of provisions, where possible, that is comprehensible to the
taxpayers themselves.  Disposition  71                              
I would therefore allow the appeal and remit the matter to the Minister
to be dealt with in accordance with these reasons.  Appeal
dismissed with costs, Gonthier,
McLachlin and Binnie JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors
for the appellant:  Philip Anisman, Toronto; Burchell MacDougall,
Truro, Nova Scotia.  Solicitor
for the respondent:  The Department of Justice, Halifax.   