SUPREME COURT OF CANADA Morguard Properties Ltd. v. City of Winnipeg, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 493 Date: 1983-12-15 Morguard Properties Ltd., Aronovitch &
Leipsic Limited, Kensington Building Ltd., Black & Armstrong (1977) Ltd., Dordan
Drugs Ltd., operating as Shoppers Drug Mart, Delafield Properties Ltd., Carlton
Realty Company Limited, Omega Realty Ltd., Mitchell Consolidated Stores Ltd.,
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Core Industries Ltd., Domcan Management Advisory
Services Ltd., Ruth Realty Company Limited, L & B Corporation Ltd., Sylvia C. Wolfe Enterprises, Sylvia C. Wolfe,
LaPorte Realty Ltd., Rivan Kenneth Halprin, The Permanent, Mercury Holdings Ltd.,
Peter Gaye Fur Gallery, James N. Connacher, Famous Players Limited, Canada
Trust, North West Trust Company, National Trust Company Limited, Harvey Zane Hurtig,
Moyer Morton Hurtig, Joyce Diner, North Star Inn Ltd., Adason Properties
Limited, Eaton's, Thomas Gary Investments Limited, Holt, Renfrew & Co.,
Limited, Metropolitan Stores of Canada Limited, Excelsior Life Insurance
Company, S.F.M. Investments Ltd., Tritt Investments Ltd., Portage Holdings
Ltd., Horizon Investments Ltd., Clifford's Ladies' Wear Ltd., and Hudson's Bay
Company Appellants; and The City of Winnipeg Respondent. File No.:
17350. 1983: October
18; 1983: December 15. Present:
Ritchie, Beetz, Estey, Chouinard and Wilson JJ. ON APPEAL FROM
THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR MANITOBA Assessment — Freeze — The City of Winnipeg
Act providing review procedure — Whether legislation instituting 'freeze program"
superseded the provisions of The City of Winnipeg Act — Whether Board of
Revision prohibited from hearing assessment complaints — Construction of taxing
statute — An Act Respecting the Assessment of Property for Taxation in
Municipalities in 1981 and 1982, 1980 (Man.), c. 71, s. 4(1) — The City of
Winnipeg Act, 1971 (Man.), c. 105, s. 159(3). [page 494] Respondent applied to the Manitoba Court of
Queen's Bench for an order prohibiting the Board of Revision of the City of
Winnipeg from considering appellants' applications, made pursuant to s. 159(3)
of The City of Winnipeg Act, to lower the 1981 assessment of their
properties. The respondent maintained that s. 4(1) of An Act Respecting the
Assessment of Property for Taxation in Municipalities in 1981 and 1982 (hereinafter
referred to as the 1980 Act) estopped the Board from reassessing the
appellants' properties. Section 4(1) provides that "the same level of
values as were used in assessing lands ... for the year 1980" shall apply
when making assessments for the years 1981 and 1982. The Court granted
respondent's application, concluding that the effect of the section was to
freeze the assessment of property for the years 1981 and 1982 to the assessment
established for the year 1980. The Court of Appeal confirmed the judgment,
holding that the words used in the 1980 Act superseded the provisions of
The City of Winnipeg Act, including the provision respecting assessment
appeals. Hence this appeal to determine whether s. 4(1) of the 1980 Act has
the effect of suspending the operation of s. 159(3) of The City of Winnipeg
Act. Held: The
appeal should be allowed. The Board of Revision of the City of Winnipeg
had jurisdiction to proceed with appellants' applications. Section 159(3) of The
City of Winnipeg Act which gave taxpayers a basic right to attack an
assessment when the amount did not bear a fair and just relation to the
assessment of other lands was not altered by s. 4(1) of the 1980 Act. A legislature
must, in order to affect or reduce a taxpayer's right, do so expressly. Here,
although the 1980 Act made certain reference to The City of Winnipeg
Act, there was no relationship between s. 4(1) of the 1980 Act and
s. 159(3) and there was no expressed intention—nor even one implied—by the
Legislature in the enactment of the 1980 Act to reduce the limits open
to the taxpayer in opposing on legal grounds an assessment established under The
City of Winnipeg Act, at least as far as the rights arising under s. 159(3)
are concerned. The 1980 Act did not purport to repeal or amend any
provision of The City of Winnipeg Act. Rather, certain specific
directives relating to the preparation of assessments for specified future
years have been superimposed upon pre-existing assessment statutes. The amount
of the assessed value was not in terms frozen; the new legislative program was
aimed at the technique to be applied in determining the assessment. In short,
the yardstick, but not the assessment, was frozen. [page 495] Partington v. Attorney-General, (1869) L.R. 4 H.L. 100; Tennant v. Smith, [1892] A.C. 150; Canadian Northern Ry. Co. v. The King (1922), 64 S.C.R. 264; Nicholls and Robinson v. Cumming (1877), 1 S.C.R. 395; Eastman Photographic
Materials Co. v. Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs, and Trade-Marks, [1898] A.C. 571; Assam Railways and Trading
Co. v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue, [1935] A.C. 445 applied; Lumsden v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue, [1914]
A.C. 877; The King v. Crabbs, [1934] S.C.R.
523, considered; Re
Anti-Inflation Act, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 373; The King v. Fraser Companies Ltd., [1931] S.C.R. 490, distinguished. APPEAL from a judgment of the Manitoba Court
of Appeal, [1982] 5 W.W.R. 149, 137 D.L.R. (3d) 753, 19 M.P.L.R. 110, 17 Man.
R. (2d) 148, dismissing appellants' appeal from a judgment of Wilson J., 16
M.P.L.R. 62, 17 Man. R. (2d) 156, prohibiting the Board of Review of the City
of Winnipeg from hearing appellants' applications for a review of assessments.
Appeal allowed. R. A. L. Nugent, Q.C., and M. J. Mercury, Q.C., for the appellants. M. S. Samphir, for the respondent. The judgment of the
Court was delivered by ESTEY J.—The issue in this appeal is the scope of the Manitoba
legislation which purports to limit assessments in the City of Winnipeg (and
elsewhere in the Province of Manitoba but not here in issue) under The City of Winnipeg Act, 1971 (Man.), c. 105 and An Act Respecting the Assessment of
Property for Taxation in Municipalities in 1981 and 1982, 1980 (Man.), c. 71 (hereinafter referred to as the "1980 Act"). The relevant facts are limited. In 1979 the Province of Manitoba
established by order in council a Commission of Enquiry into the real property
assessment in the Province with particular direction to: inquire into and report on all aspects of
real property assessment in Manitoba, including: (a) the level at which real property should
be assessed in Manitoba. [page 496] In its Interim Report
on February 15, 1980 the Commission recommended: That legislation be
introduced at the 1980 Session of the Manitoba
Legislature to maintain existing levels of assessment until December 31st, 1982
in order to provide an opportunity for the Committee to carry out its mandate
and report the results of its research and deliberations. By a statute enacted by
the Legislature and assented to on July 29, 1980, the Province of Manitoba in
the 1980 Act, supra, provided
as follows: 1980 levels to apply in Winnipeg assessments. 4(1) Notwithstanding The City of Winnipeg Act
or any other Act of the Legislature, but subject as herein provided, in making assessments for assessment
rolls for The City of Winnipeg for the
year 1981 and for the year 1982, the assessor shall assess lands,
buildings and personal property at the same level of values as were used in
assessing lands, buildings and personal property in preparing the assessment
roll for The City of Winnipeg for the year 1980. Pursuant to s. 187(6)
of The City of Winnipeg
Act, the appellants made
application to the Board of Revision of the City of Winnipeg (hereinafter
referred to as "the Board") for a lowering of the assessment of the
properties of the appellants in Winnipeg. The application for revision of assessments was presented upon the ground that: the assessed
value of the land in the assessment does not bear a
fair and just relation to the amounts at which other lands in the City of
Winnipeg are assessed and that there is not a fair and equitable relation
between the said assessed value and the fair market value of the land, having
regard to those other lands. It is understood by
both parties to this appeal that the application to the Board was made pursuant
to s. 159(3) of The City
of Winnipeg Act, supra, which
provides as follows: Presumption as to validity of assessments. 159 (3) Notwithstanding any other provision
herein, an assessment of any land shall not be deemed to have been improperly made or to be fixed at an
unreasonable, unjust, or improper amount if the amount at which the [page 497] land is assessed bears a fair and just
relation to the amounts at which other lands in the city are assessed. The City thereupon
made application in the Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench for an order
prohibiting the Board from considering the application of the appellants
concerning the valuations of their respective properties as entered in the
assessment roll of the City. The learned justice of first instance, after
analysing the provisions of the two statutes mentioned above, stated: The "level of values" adopted by
the City's assessor for 1980, then, is so carried forward. And however wrong
they may have been, and however that "level of values" may have been
adopted by the assessor, taxpayer and City alike must accept the same
"level of values" for 1981 and 1982. His Lordship, in
construing s. 4(1) in the context of the 1980 Act and its relationship to
the functioning of The City of Winnipeg Act, went on to state: "Level"
refers to horizontality, the Concise Oxford English
Dictionary tells us, and where—as respondents would be the first to claim—"horizontality"
in the sense here does not mean evenness,
absolute similarity, it is to be read, I think, as referring to the
comparable position of one to another, the
position on the plane, or standard, vis-à-vis
others properly comparable. To take the example quoted in the O.E.D.,
" 'to find one's own or its level', said of persons or things arriving at
their proper place with regard to those around or connected with them".
The level of valuation of property "A", i.e. vis-à-vis that
for property "B". It might be
thought, on the contrary, that the expression "level of values" under
examination actually incorporated the test of s. 159(3), that is to say
the relationship in value as between like properties. However, the Court
continued: "Level of values" as I read that
phrase, incorporates not only the absolute valuation of any individual property
but also the rank of that property in the "level of values" presented
by the assessment, the ranking of the property vis-à-vis other subject to tax. The learned judge
concluded that the effect of the 1980 Act was to freeze the assessment of
property [page 498] for the years 1981 and 1982 to the assessment
established for the year 1980. The Court of Appeal unanimously confirmed the
conclusion reached below. After quoting extensively from the Interim Report of
the Commission of Enquiry and the interim recommendations, set out, supra, the Court stated through Matas
J.A.: In my view, the Legislature, sharing the concerns of the committee, agreed to present wide ranging
changes under the Winnipeg Act until the review committee had had an opportunity to report the
results of its research and
deliberations. The words used in Bill 100 supersede the provisions
of the Winnipeg Act, including the provision of s. 159(3). No provision is made in Bill 100 to give
the board jurisdiction to embark on the kind of reconsideration claimed by the
appellants. With great respect to the learned justices in
the courts below I have, upon an examination of the above-mentioned statutes,
come to the opposite conclusion, namely that the Board had jurisdiction to
proceed under those statutes with the application made by the appellants for
the review of the 1981 assessments with respect to their lands. First of all, in order to clear aside some
subordinate issues before dealing with the main issue of interpretation of the
relevant statutes, reference should be made to the use made below of the
Interim Report of the Commission of Enquiry. Counsel for both the appellants
and respondent have drawn freely upon the Interim Report and its conclusions,
and no objection was taken by one or the other to this practice. It has, of
course, been long settled that, in the interpretation of a statute (and here I
do not concern myself with the constitutional process as, for example, in the Re Anti-Inflation Act judgment ([1976] 2 S.C.R. 373)), the report of a commission of
enquiry such as a Royal Commission may be used in order to expose and examine
the mischief, evil or condition to which the Legislature was directing its
attention. However, in the interpretation of a statute, the court, according to
our judicial philosophy, may not draw upon such reports and commentaries, but
must confine itself to an examination of the words employed by the Legislature
in the statutory provision [page 499] in question and the context of that provision
within the statute. In the words of Lord Wright: ... on principle no such evidence for the
purpose of showing the intention, that is the purpose or object, of an Act is
admissible; the intention of the Legislature must be ascertained from the words
of the statute with such extraneous assistance as is legitimate:.. . (Assam Railways and Trading Co. v.
Commissioners of Inland Revenue, [1935] A.C. 445 at p. 458.) The logic is, of course, inexorable that the
Legislature may well have determined not to follow the recommendations set out
in the report of the Commission which had earlier been placed before the House.
On the other hand, as we have seen in Eastman Photographic Materials Co. v.
Comptroller-General of Patents, Designs, and Trade-Marks, [1898] A.C. 571
at p. 575, Lord Halsbury stated: ... no more accurate source of information as
to what was the evil or defect which the Act of Parliament now under
construction was intended to remedy could be imagined than the report of that
commission. The Interim Report of the Commission of Enquiry
was a response to the plan of the City Assessors to replace the 1957 data
base year with a 1975 data base year. The Report indicated that such a plan "would
not be a problem were it not for the manner in which inflation has affected
different classes of property to varying degrees", and went on to state
that the failure to implement more frequent reassessment programs in the past
had resulted in some significant inequities between classes of properties,
individual properties, and taxing jurisdictions. It is clear from the Report
that these taxation shifts and resulting inequities were matters of some
concern, and this factual context may then be seen as evidence of the evil or
defect subsequently addressed by the Legislature. As such, the Report falls
within the principle expressed above in Eastman Photographic, supra, and
is admissible for this limited purpose. I prefer, however, to resolve the issue raised
in this appeal by directly examining the language [page 500] employed by the Legislature, first in The City of Winnipeg Act, and second, in
the 1980
Act. The establishment of the assessment roll, upon
the basis of which revenues are derived, commences in s. 158(1) of The City of Winnipeg Act which states in
part: At least once in each three consecutive
years, the assessor shall, after enquiry,
and aided by such information as may be furnished to him, make a
valuation of every parcel of rateable
property in the city according to his best judgment, and enter such
valuations in an assessment roll to be prepared by him annually in an
appropriate form approved by council. It is common ground that the assessor for the
City has, in the process under the assessment statute, determined the
assessment on the basis of the value of land in the City of Winnipeg in 1957.
Accordingly, an assessment roll is produced annually as the basis of municipal
taxation and is based on at least a triennial re-evaluation employing for that
purpose 1957 land values. It is the scheme of the statute that the assessment
roll shall be prepared in advance of the taxation year, for example, in the
year 1970, for the collection of taxes in the year 1971. It is the application
of the mill rate, as struck by the municipal council, to the assessment values
that produces the tax liability and hence the revenue for the municipal
government. The statute has extensive appeal procedures
including procedures for the exemption from assessment, and other procedures
including the assessment of new construction completed in the year for which
taxation is computed. Section 159(1) requires the assessment of land
(as distinguished from the buildings thereon) "at its value at the time of
the assessment". The combined assessment of land with buildings thereon is
also provided for in the section, and the assessment of the latter includes an
amount equal to only two-thirds of the value of the buildings in question.
Section 159(3) (which I have already set forth) then deems the assessments to
be valid and regular and not to include unreasonable, unjust or improper
amounts providing "the amount at which the land is assessed bears a fair
and just relation to [page 501] the amounts at
which other lands in the city are assessed". This is the seed from which
this appeal has sprung. The 1980 Act makes no reference to ss. 158 or 159, although it
does make frequent reference to The City of Winnipeg Act. For example, s. 2(b) provides: 2 Subject to section 1, […] (b) in applying this Act to The City of
Winnipeg or to an assessment or proceeding
relating to assessment in The City of Winnipeg, words and expressions
used in this Act have the same meaning as they have in The City of Winnipeg
Act. Unhappily, the
expression "level of values" as employed in s. 4(1), supra, is not defined in either the 1980 Act or The City of Winnipeg Act. The 1980 Act, consisting as it does of only seven
sections, does not purport to repeal or amend any provision of The City of Winnipeg Act. It certainly does not purport to do so
with reference to s. 159(3), supra, which
invites the review of an assessment when that assessment does not relate fairly
and justly to the assessment in respect of like lands. Section 3 makes the 1980 Act applicable to all assessment proceedings before a
Court of Revision when "dealing with an application by way of a complaint
or in any proceeding respecting the revision of an assessment roll".
Section 5 provides for changes in assessments based on change in circumstances.
The section states in part: 5 Where after
the assessment of any land, building or personal
property was made for the assessment roll for a municipality for 1980,
the value of the land or building is altered because (a) a local improvement benefiting the land,
building or personal property is installed or constructed; or […]  (d) the land, building or personal property
is improved or altered in a manner not reflected in the assessment thereof for the assessment roll for the
previous year; or (e) a building is erected, constructed or
completed on land and the erection,
construction or completion of [page 502] the building is not reflected in the
assessment of the property for the
assessment roll for the previous year; These sections also
provide for changes when the land or building has been altered because of the
registration of a new plan of subdivision, zoning variations, or because the
use of a building has been changed, after the assessment for the year 1980 had
been made. Section 5 in this manner provides a mechanism for the reassessment
of property, or a form of property which was not existent in 1980, but which
must be taken into account for the assessment in the year 1981 or 1982. The
section then goes on to provide that the assessor shall assess the land and
building as though such changes had been made "prior to the assessment of
the land or building for the assessment roll for the year 1980 ... ".
Sections 6 and 7 provide for the correction of errors or omissions and for the
coming into force on royal assent. Thus the issue
squarely arises as to whether the passage of s. 4(1) in the 1980 Act has the effect of suspending the operation of s.
159(3) of The City of Winnipeg Act during the so-called freeze of
assessments or values. Section 4 does not,
of course, deal directly with the assessment produced under The City of Winnipeg Act. It simply provides that "the same
level of values as were used in assessing lands . . . for the year 1980"
shall apply when making assessments for the years 1981 and 1982. Nothing is
mentioned about applying and using the assessments of 1980 for the years 1981
and 1982, and nothing is said of the continuance or otherwise of other
proceedings or elements in the assessment process such as s. 159. When governments
elsewhere were faced with the need to provide a plateau or a maintenance of the
status quo pending a revision or remodelling of the
assessment procedures, more precise provisions were enacted which clearly froze
the actual assessments. In the Province of Ontario a somewhat similar
"freeze" program was instituted by legislation: [page 503] The Assessment Amendment Act 1971, 1971 Ont., vol. 2, c. 79, s. 13. The Legislature on that
occasion expressly amended The Assessment Act by adding s. 85 which
provides in part: ... the assessment roll of every municipality
prepared for the year 1970 for taxation in 1971
shall be the assessment
roll of the municipality in the years 1971 to and
including 1974 and the assessments of all real property
as set forth on the 1970
assessment roll shall be the assessments of the real property ... In British Columbia a similar program was
instituted by legislation in 1974, the Assessment Amendment Act 1974, 1974
(B.C.), c. 105, s. 1, which expressly amended the Assessment Act and
which provided in part: ... land and improvements shall be assessed
at the same value and on the same basis at which the land and improvements were
assessed for the calendar year 1974. The amending statute went on to provide for the
additional assessment of changes in the physical condition of land or in its
zoning, and again provided in those instances for an assessment on the same
basis as if those changes had occurred and been taken into account "in the
preparation of the assessment roll for the calendar year 1974". In both
provinces, therefore, the legislation set out to freeze the assessment at a
previously determined amount, and to continue that amount as the assessment for
the years covered by the amending legislation. The assessment process was not
altered, but rather the assessed value of the property was pre-determined by
reference to a prior assessment year. Even more significant for the purposes of this
appeal is the fact that both Legislatures considered it necessary to
specifically reinstate or assure the right of the taxpayer to seek relief when
the assessment is "inequitable". The Ontario provision is found in
the amending act as s. 90: ... the amount of any assessment of real
property shall not be altered unless the Assessment Review Court, judge, Board
or court is satisfied that the assessment is inequitable
with respect to the assessment of similar real property in the vicinity, and in that event the assessment of
the real property shall not be altered to any greater [page 504] extent than is necessary to make the
assessment equitable with the assessment of such similar property. The inclusion of this provision in the amending
statute was, no doubt, considered necessary in order to relieve against the
otherwise clear finality of the freeze imposed by s. 85, which had been newly
added to The Assessment Act by the same amending legislation. In British
Columbia, similar power is given to the assessor in the amending legislation
itself in which subs. (7) (added to the Assessment Act by the amending
legislation) provides that: ... the commissioner may, for the purpose of
correcting disparities in assessment that may exist within a class of land and
improvements, reduce the assessment of any land and improvements. The amending technique applied by the Manitoba
Legislature stands in stark contrast to that adopted in the other two
provinces. As we have seen, the Manitoba legislation does not amend, by express
or by necessary inference, the pre-existing assessment legislation, either by
the deletion from or the addition to such legislation of any specified
provisions. Rather, certain specific directives relating to the preparation of
assessments for specified future years have been superimposed upon the existing
statutes. The amount of the assessed value is not in terms frozen; the new
legislative program is aimed at the technique to be applied in determining the
assessment. In short, the yardstick and not the assessment is frozen. Reduced
to its bare essentials, s. 4(1), with respect to this appeal, simply specifies
that the assessor shall, in preparing the new assessment of property in the
City of Winnipeg, do so "at the same level of values as were used in
assessing lands . . . for the year 1980". Some meaning must be attributed
to the word "level" as otherwise it is mere surplusage, and courts in
the application of the principles of statutory construction endeavour, where
possible, to attribute meaning to each word employed by the Legislature in the
statute. Were the object of the statute merely to require assessments for the
years 1981 and 1982 to be identical in amount with the assessment for the year 1980,
the legislation could have simply done so, as was most clearly done in [page 505] the Ontario
legislation. Instead of adopting that direct course, the Legislature, and a
court must consider that it did so deliberately, adopted the expression
"level of values". Such a term does, of course, call to mind the
whole process of determining the resultant amount of assessment, and not merely
a process of copying in numbers from the earlier assessment. It is not without
significance that the Legislature and the Executive of the Province of
Manitoba, in preparing and enacting the 1980 Act, had before them the legislation of the other two
provinces. What then is the
impact, if any, of the 1980
Act upon the
application, and indeed the continued existence in The City of Winnipeg Act, of s. 159(3)? In determining the answer to this question the entire s.
159 should be examined. Subsection (1) thereof provides: Land, as distinguished from the buildings
thereon, shall be assessed at its value at the time of the assessment. The word "value"
in that subsection must be included in the expression "values" in s.
4(1) of the 1980 Act, and indeed this was conceded by counsel
for the City of Winnipeg. That being so, s. 159(1) is perhaps necessarily
affected and revised by the edict of s. 4(1), at least to the extent that the
expression "at the time of the assessment" in s. 159(1) must, for the
duration of the 1980
Act, refer to the year
1980 and not the years 1981 and 1982 for the purpose of determining assessments
for those years. Subsection (2)
relates to the same process with regard to the assessment of buildings. There
would appear to be no impact upon the technique adopted for the combining of
the values of land and buildings in the ultimate assessment as established in
s. 159(2), by reason of the introduction of s. 4(1) in 1980, except that the
term "value" where it appears in s. 159(2) must again refer to value
in the year 1980, and not in the subsequent years of assessment. We come then to
subs. (3) which is the core problem raised in this appeal, and for convenience
I repeat it here: [page 506] Notwithstanding any other provision herein,
an assessment of any land shall not be
deemed to have been improperly made or to be fixed at an unreasonable, unjust, or improper amount if the amount at which
the land is assessed bears a fair and just relation to the amounts at which other lands in the city are
assessed. There is no dispute that the process of
assessment of land and buildings in the City of Winnipeg is undertaken by the
appropriate authorities acting under the authorization of The City of Winnipeg Act. It is only to
the extent that the 1980 Act affects
The City of Winnipeg Act that
the assessment procedures are in any way altered. There would appear to be no
relationship between s. 4(1) of the 1980
Act and s. 159(3) above. There is neither an express
interrelationship nor a necessary interpretative involvement of the latter
enactment with the pre-existing enactment. Subsection (3) gives the taxpayer a
basic right to attack an assessment when the amount does not bear a fair and
just relation to the assessment of other lands. It is obvious that this
subsection creates a right to relief against discrimination or improper
preferential treatment in the taxation process. It is not necessary for the
Court in this proceeding to determine the precise meaning of the subsection. It
is sufficient to observe in this appeal that the comparison is between like
lands, and the taxpayers' rights arise only where an unfair or unjust
relationship arises between the amounts of assessment of the taxpayers' land
and the assessment of like lands. This provision of The City of Winnipeg Act is of fundamental importance in the
assessment scheme adopted by the Legislature for the City. It has been a part of
the legislative program for the raising of municipal revenues for many years.
It is of importance not only to the taxpayer, but to the government of the City
of Winnipeg, because it ensures uniformity of treatment and justice in taxation
to the entire land and building owning population, and through them to the
occupiers of all the buildings in the City of Winnipeg. Naturally, one would
expect to find in any amending legislation an express reference to this right
in the [page 507] taxpayer if the
Legislature had the intention of altering or revising this right in any way. It has been said in
argument that an interpretation along the lines indicated above of the
relationship between the two statutes would create a declining revenue base for
the municipality. To this submission there are two answers. First of all, the
determination of the levels of municipal revenues is up to the Province of
Manitoba and not up to this Court. If the statutes, when construed in
accordance with the proper canons of construction, produce an unsatisfactory
revenue conclusion, the political process and not the courts must seek a
solution. The second answer is that, in any case, it is the mill rate, under
the control of the municipality within the limits of its parent statutes, which
determines the level of municipal revenues. When the assessment roll is
diminished by the revision process, the municipality has its remedy in the mill
rate. There may be a time lag discrepancy, but again this is a problem for
resolution by the political process and is of no concern to the judicial
process when properly acting within its proper limits in the community's scheme
of law. For centuries,
statutes levying taxes and like imposts on the citizen have been read strictly
in the sense that the Legislature must, in order to reduce a right in the
taxpayer, say so in unmistakably clear terms. Certainly the
leading case on this point is Partington v. Attorney-General, (1869) L.R. 4 H.L.
100, in which Lord Cairns stated the guiding principle at p. 122 as follows: If the person sought to be taxed comes within
the letter of the law he must be taxed, however great the hardship may appear to the judicial mind to be. On the
other hand, if the Crown, seeking to recover the tax, cannot bring
the subject within the letter of the law, the subject is
free, however apparently within the spirit of the law the case might otherwise appear to be. A few years later in
Tennant v. Smith, [1892] A.C. 150 at p. 154, Lord Halsbury stated: [page 508] This is an Income Tax Act, and what is
intended to be taxed is income. And when I say "what is intended to be
taxed," I mean what is the intention of the Act as expressed in its
provisions, because in a taxing act it is impossible, I believe, to assume any
intention, any governing purpose in the Act, to do more than take such tax as
the statute imposes. In a Canadian case,
Canadian Northern Ry. Co. v. The King (1922), 64
S.C.R. 264 at p. 275, Brodeur
J. reiterated the principle and provided an explanation for it: A law imposing taxation should always be
construed strictly against the taxing authorities, since it restricts the
public in the enjoyment of its property. The leading
Canadian case on this point is The King v. Crabbs, [1934] S.C.R. 523, in
which this Court dismissed the appellant's claim to recover $499.48 due
under the Special War Revenue Act for stamp tax on sale or transfer of
stocks and shares. The sections in question enacted a prohibition and imposed a
penalty upon the person acting in contravention. After reviewing the leading
English cases on the interpretation of taxing statutes, Hughes J., speaking for
the Court, wrote at p. 527: It does not follow, however, that the statute
creates a civil obligation on the part of such persons to pay the value of the necessary stamps, or indeed, any sum,
to the Crown. These sections do not profess to create such an obligation
... The settled principles . . . do not permit us to read these sections as
constituting such an obligation. The provisions of
the 1980 Act presently
before the Court are said by the respondent not only to impose a freeze but
also to remove an important appeal recourse from the taxpayers. The principles
enunciated above in Partington v. Attorney-General,
Tennant v. Smith and Canadian Northern Ry. Co. v. The King, supra, are even more strongly adhered to when
rights of the citizen are affected. In Nicholls and
Robinson v. Cumming (1877),
1 S.C.R. 395, Ritchie J. made the following statement at p. 422: When a statute derogates from a common law
right and divests a party of his property, or imposes a burthen on him, every
provision of the statute beneficial to the party [page 509] must be observed. Therefore it has been often
held, that acts which impose a charge or a duty upon the subject must be construed strictly and . . . it is
equally clear that no provisions for
the benefit or protection of the subject can
be ignored or rejected. In more modern
terminology the courts require that, in order to adversely affect a citizen's
right, whether as a taxpayer or otherwise, the Legislature must do so
expressly. Truncation of such rights may be legislatively unintended or even
accidental, but the courts must look for express language in the statute before
concluding that these rights have been reduced. This principle of construction
becomes even more important and more generally operative in modern times
because the Legislature is guided and assisted by a well-staffed and ordinarily
very articulate Executive. The resources at hand in the preparation and
enactment of legislation are such that a court must be slow to presume
oversight or inarticulate intentions when the rights of the citizen are
involved. The Legislature has complete control of the process of legislation,
and when it has not for any reason clearly expressed itself, it has all the
resources available to correct that inadequacy of expression. This is more true
today than ever before in our history of parliamentary rule. The impact of the
version of the amending statute contended for by the respondent is even more
far-reaching when it is realised that the effect of the 1980 Act, whatever it may be properly found to be,
has been extended by Bill 33, 1982 (Man.), c. 29, which renders the 1980 Act applicable indefinitely to all years
after 1980, and not only to the years 1981 and 1982. The loss of taxpayers'
rights (if there is any such loss on a proper construction of the statute, as I
believe there has been), is thus legislatively permitted. This would seem to
render less likely the prospect that the Legislature adopted and proceeded with
the intent attributed to it by the respondent in its submissions. Interim
legislation with temporary effect might lend itself to a construction which
would be repellent, when considered on the basis of a permanent enactment with
consequences unlimited in time. Technically, the focus of a court in [page 510] construing the statute is on the statute itself,
with some permitted reference to statutory antecedents but without reference to
conduct in the political arena thereafter. In the unusual task presented to the
courts on this appeal, a consideration of post-legislative activity is made
relevant by the submissions made on behalf of the taxpayers with reference to
what was said to be a temporary freeze pending a realignment of the level of assessment.
In any event, having concluded, as I have, that the meaning of s. 159(3) is not
that attributed to it by the respondent, reference to Bill 33, which was submitted to us by
the appellants on the hearing of this appeal, simply buttresses the result. It should be remembered, however, that the
construction difficulty does not arise unless there is some ambiguity to start
with. As Lord Cairns stated in Partington v. Attorney-General, supra, if
the subject comes within the letter of the law, he must be taxed. If he does
not, the Court will not second guess the Legislature in order to impose
liability on the subject. The only qualification of this approach lies in the
principle that the statute must be read as a whole. The application of this
principle in The King v. Fraser Companies Ltd., [1931] S.C.R. 490
resulted in an interpretation unfavourable to the taxpayer. Smith J., speaking
for the Court at p. 492, wrote: ... I am unable to take this view of the
meaning and effect of these provisions of the Act. To so construe them is to
put a narrow and technical construction upon the precise words used in clause
(d), without taking into consideration the
meaning and intent of the statute as a whole.
It seems to me clear that the real intention was to levy a consumption or sales tax of four per cent
on the sale price of all goods produced or manufactured in Canada, whether the goods so produced should be
sold by the manufacturer or consumed
by himself for his own purposes. The role of the statutory context was also
discussed by Viscount Haldane, Lord Chancellor, in Lumsden v. Commissioners
of Inland Revenue, [1914] A.C. 877 at pp. 896-97: My Lords, I said at the beginning that the
duty of judges in construing statutes is to adhere to the literal construction
unless the context renders it plain that such a construction cannot be put on the words. This rule is [page 511] especially important in cases of statutes
which impose taxation. The courts,
therefore, must approach a provision such as s. 4(1) of the 1980 Act on
the basis that it operates in the reduction of the rights of the taxpayer in The City
of Winnipeg Act only to the extent that it expressly so
provides. With all due respect to those who have expressed views to the
contrary, I can find no expressed intention by the Legislature in the enactment
of the 1980 Act to reduce the limits open to the taxpayer in
opposing on legal grounds an assessment established under The City
of Winnipeg Act, at least as far as the rights arising
under s. 159(3) are concerned. There is neither an express nor a necessarily
implied relationship between the two statutes. It may well be that a taxing
statute can, by necessary implication falling short of an express provision,
gather in a citizen and impose upon him or her a new tax burden. It need not
always be bald and express. In the provisions now before the courts in these
proceedings, no such necessary implication is present, and consequently I would
invoke one of the oldest canons of interpretation employed by the courts in the
application of the statutes of the land, namely that a statute imposing a tax
burden must clearly do so, otherwise the complaining citizen remains outside
the operation of the taxing program. In this case it is not the assessment
which directly imposes the tax burden, for the role of the assessment is simply
as a multiplicand, with the multiplier being the mill rate and the product
being the realty taxes; but the distinction is without practical significance
as it is the assessment which starts the process and which inevitably increases
the burden on the taxpayer if the assessment is improperly enlarged. It is not, of
course, the role of the Court to determine whether an assessment is unduly high
or unduly low, or indeed if it need be revised at all. That is the role of the
tax tribunal, here the Board of Revision of the City of Winnipeg. It is to that
Board that the appellants took their complaint. In my view, again with the
utmost respect to those expressing different opinions, it is to that Board
which the parties must now return for the proper [page 512] application of s. 159(3) and s. 4(1) to the
assessments prepared in respect of the appellants' holdings by the authorities
of the City of Winnipeg. I would therefore allow the appeal and set aside the
order of prohibition as issued by the Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench, with
costs to the appellants. Appeal allowed with costs. Solicitors for the appellants: Thompson,
Dorfman, Sweatman, Winnipeg. Solicitor for the respondent: F. N.
Steele, Winnipeg.  