 Johns-Manville Canada v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 46   and  Her Majesty The Queen     Respondent.  File No.: 16940.  1984: May 15, 16; 1985: July 31.  Present: Dickson C.J. and Ritchie, Beetz, Estey, McIntyre, Chouinard
and Wilson JJ.  *Ritchie J. took no part in the judgment.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal                      Appellant, in the course of operating its open pit
mine, was forced to buy peripheral land in order to continue the necessary wall
slope and angle of repose of the overburden. The land did not overlay any of
the ore body and would gradually disappear as the mine deepened and the mouth
of the mine became wider. At issue was whether or not appellant had the right
to charge the purchase cost of this land to expense rather than to capital.                     Held: The appeal should
be allowed.   Cases cited                     Denison Mines Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1976] 1 S.C.R. 245; B.P. Australia Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia, [1966] A.C. 224, considered; Knight
v. Calder Grove Estates (1954), 35 T.C. 447; British Salmson Aero
Engines, Ltd. v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1937), 22 T.C 29; Minister
of National Revenue v. Algoma Central Railway, [1968] S.C.R. 447; Hallstroms
Pty. Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1946), 72 C.L.R. 634; Sun
Newspapers Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1938), 61 C.L.R. 337; Commissioner
of Taxes v. Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd., [1964] A.C. 948; Mitchell
v. B.W. Noble, Ltd., [1927] 1 K.B. 719; British Insulated and Helsby
Cables, Ltd. v. Atherton, [1926] A.C. 205; Vallambrosa Rubber Co. v.
Farmer, [1910] S.C. 519; Ounsworth v. Vickers, Ltd., [1915] 3 K.B.
267; Regent Oil Co. v. Strick, [1966] A.C. 295; Golden Horse Shoe
(New), Ltd. v. Thurgood, [1934] 1 K.B. 548; Kennecott Copper Corp. v.
United States, 347 F.2d 275 (1965); Welch v. Helvering, 290 U.S. 111
(1933); Commissioner of Internal Revenue v. Lincoln Savings & Loan Assn.,
403 U.S. 345 (1971); Tucker v. Granada Motorway Services Ltd., [1979] 2
All E.R. 801, referred to.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, ss. 4, 11(1)(a), 12(1)(a), (b).  Income Tax Regulations, s. 1100(1).   Authors Cited  Bittker, Boris I. Federal
Taxation of Income, Estates and Gifts, vol. 1, Boston, Warren,
Gorham & Lamont, 1981.  Mertens Law of Fed Income
Tax §25.20 (1979 Rev., vol. 4A), Wilmette, Illinois,
Callaghan & Co.  Pinson, Barry. Pinson
on Revenue Law, 15 ed., London, Sweet & Maxwell, 1982.  Tiley, John. Revenue
Law, London, Butterworths, 1981.                      APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of
Appeal, [1982] CTC 56, 82 DTC 6054, allowing an appeal from a judgment of
Gibson J. Appeal allowed.                     Donald G. H. Bowman, Q.C., and William I. Innes, for the appellant.                     Alban Garon, Q.C.,
and Roger Roy, for the respondent.                     The judgment of the Court was delivered by   2.                There is no problem of credibility, the
facts are few and are largely agreed upon by the parties in their pleadings.
The following are the relevant extracts from the statements of claim and
defence on which there is no disagreement.  Statement of Claim                                                                      ...  3. The Plaintiff
[appellant] is in the business of mining and processing asbestos ore from an
open pit mine located within the municipal limits of the town of Asbestos,
Quebec and of selling asbestos produced thereby. The mine has been in operation
since 1881.  4. The open pit from which
the ore is mined measures approximately 5700 feet at major axis, 3500 feet at
minor axis and 950 feet in depth. The ore body is cylindrical with east and
west bulges in shape and plunges to the southwest, away from the Town, at an
angle of approximately 55d<s. It measures approximately 2000 feet in
diameter.  5. In order to achieve
both safe and economic mining of the ore it is, at all times and for each
segment of the wall of the pit, necessary to determine the wall slope and the
angle of repose of the overburden.                                                                      ...  12. No part of the ore
body is located subjacent to the properties purchased by the Plaintiff during
its 1969 and 1970 taxation years, so that the Plaintiff did not by acquiring
the said properties add to or augment the reserves available to it from which ore
could be extracted.  Statement of Defence     Statement of Claim  9. In January 1971, at a
time when the Plaintiff [appellant] was seeking means to prevent the collapse
of the easterly wall, there occurred a serious landslide stimulated by a large
inflow of water under the easterly slope which came about when the ground
pressure caused a water and sewer main to break. The slide damaged seven
commercial buildings and resulted in the evacuation and relocation of a
substantial number of families.                                                                      ...  13. In 1974 it became
increasingly evident that some movement of overburden on the easterly slope was
again taking place and after consultation with its advisers on this question
the Plaintiff decided upon a buffer zone of 150 feet as a safety measure. This
decision resulted in an accelerated schedule of property purchases and related
relocations which continued into 1975. In spite of these precautions, in
January of 1975 a serious slide occurred on the east side of the pit with the
result that some 3,000,000 tons of material was suddenly dislodged and together
with four residences dropped into the pit, fortunately without loss of life.  The learned trial judge discussing this program said:                     According
to the evidence, it is the eastern wall which is adjacent to the town which is
subject to instability. It is in this area that land was acquired for the
purpose of using it for slope stability so that the operation of the mine could
continue.  He also found:     His Lordship concluded:                     Therefore,
after considering the whole of the evidence, and as stated, looking at the
character or quality of the expenditures based upon business or commercial
practice rather than the character of the asset acquired by the expenditures,
the conclusion is that the subject expenditures in the taxation years 1969 and
1970 were not on capital account within the meaning of section 12(1) (b) of the Income
Tax Act .  The Court of Appeal, Ryan J. writing on behalf of the court, reversed
the trial court and concluded that these expenditures were of a capital nature
and could not be charged as an expense in the computation of profit from the
appellant's mining operations. In the course of his judgment, His Lordship
acknowledged:   Later in the judgment it was stated: "It may even be, as he [the
trial judge] concluded, that the lots in question are in a way consumed."
Indeed the Court of Appeal stated: "...I accept the Trial judge's basic
findings of fact."  6.                However, in reaching the conclusion that
these expenditures were capital in nature, it was stated:  As I see it, the lots were
bought because they were adjacent to the pit and thus could be used to extend
its slope, an extension that resulted in the lots becoming part of the pit. The
lots, as part of the pit, serve as land on which the operation is in part
carried on; for example, roads (the location of which may shift as the wall
extends), spiralling up the side of the pit, are used to carry ore out of the
pit.  And further, it was stated that the expenditures were:  ... for purchases of lots
of land which were incorporated in the operating structure of the enterprise
... [This] dominates the consideration that the lots are purchased annually in
anticipation of the lowering of the level of the ore deposit. And it dominates
the consideration that the lots may only remain as portions of a virtual
wasteland when the mine ceases to operate.   8.                The fact that the expenditures here
involved were made for the purchase of land is perhaps an important if not
vital part of the reasoning which led the court below to its conclusion that
they were capital expenditures. After concluding, as the quotations above
reveal, that the dominant consideration was that the lots were purchased for
incorporation into the operating structure of the enterprise, the court found
support for that conclusion in Knight v. Calder Grove Estates (1954), 35
T.C. 447. That case concerned open pit mining, as does this appeal, and there
the taxpayer, already possessing mineral rights, purchased the surface rights
in lands lying above the mineral deposit. It was not possible to gain access to
the minerals without passing through the acquired lands and of course, had a
single owner owned both the fee and the minerals, there would have been but one
purchase. It is not surprising therefore that Lord Upjohn, at p. 453, concluded
on those facts that "[i]t is a purchase of land for the
adventure...." The acquisition of the surface and minerals were both
essential and known to be essential at the outset of the mining venture, in
order to open the mine.   The lots, on being absorbed,
become part of a combined structure consisting of the ore body and the sloping
pit without which the enterprise could not be carried on because, otherwise,
there would be danger of slides.   10.              The simple question which must here be
decided, therefore, is this: can the taxpayer, when purchasing the additional
surface area needed for the enlargement of the cone, charge the purchase price
of the land as a production expense or must the taxpayer capitalize the land
cost? The taxpayer's expense incurred in removing the overburden from these
lands is not in issue. It should be noted that at one stage the Minister
allowed a depletion allowance for part of the lands so acquired. This was
acknowledged by both parties to be a conciliatory gesture rather than a
supportable interpretation of the Income Tax Act depletion allowance
provisions. These lands were not ore bearing and were not part of the surface
overlaying the mineral deposit. The classification of these expenditures as
capital would leave the taxpayer, of course, without any deductions from income
in respect thereto. This of course is not decisive but may be of relevance in
assessing the interaction of the "expense" and "capital"
provisions in the overall pattern of the statute.  11.              This proceeding concerns only s. 12(1) of
the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, which provided as follows:                     12. (1) In computing income, no deduction shall be made in respect of  (a)  an outlay
or expense except to the extent that it was made or incurred by the taxpayer
for the purpose of gaining or producing income from property or a business of
the taxpayer,  (b)  an
outlay, loss or replacement of capital, a payment on account of capital or an
allowance in respect of depreciation, obsolescence or depletion except as
expressly permitted by this Part,  12.              Section 4 of the Act may also be of some
relevance:                     4. Subject to the other provisions of this Part, income for a taxation
year from a business or property is the profit therefrom for the year.  13.              When one turns to the appropriate
principles of law to apply to the determination of the classification of an
expenditure as being either expense or capital, an unnerving starting place is
the comment of the Master of the Rolls, Sir Wilfred Greene, in British
Salmson Aero Engines, Ltd. v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1937), 22
T.C. 29, at p. 43:  ... there have been ...
many cases where this matter of capital or income has been debated. There have
been many cases which fall upon the borderline: indeed, in many cases it is
almost true to say that the spin of a coin would decide the matter almost as
satisfactorily as an attempt to find reasons....  This Court encountered s. 12(1)(b) in Minister of National
Revenue v. Algoma Central Railway, [1968] S.C.R. 447. Fauteux J., as he
then was, at p. 449, stated:   The Court thereupon expressed agreement with the decision of the Privy
Council in B.P. Australia Ltd. v. Commissioner of Taxation of the
Commonwealth of Australia, [1966] A.C. 224. The Privy Council there
determined that a payment made by the taxpayer as an inducement to a service
station operator to sign an exclusive agency contract was an income expenditure
and not a capital outlay. The contract had a life of five years and thus was an
asset of sorts which amounted to an opportunity by the taxpayer to market its
gasoline exclusively through the operator's outlet. Nonetheless Lord Pearce
concluded, at p. 260:                     B.P.'s
ultimate object was to sell petrol and to maintain or increase its turnover.
There can be no doubt that the only ultimate reason for any lump payment was to
maintain or increase gallonage.                      The
solution to the problem is not to be found by any rigid test or description.
It has to be derived from many aspects of the whole set of circumstances some
of which may point in one direction, some in the other. One consideration may
point so clearly that it dominates other and vaguer indications in the contrary
direction. It is a commonsense appreciation of all the guiding features
which must provide the ultimate answer. Although the categories of capital
and income expenditure are distinct and easily ascertainable in obvious cases
that lie far from the boundary, the line of distinction is often hard to draw
in border line cases; and conflicting considerations may produce a situation
where the answer turns on questions of emphasis and degree. That answer:  "depends on what the
expenditure is calculated to effect from a practical and business point of view
rather than upon the juristic classification of the legal rights, if any,
secured, employed or exhausted in the process":  per Dixon J. in Hallstroms Pty. Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of
Taxation (1946), 72 C.L.R. 634, 648.  (Emphasis added.)  14.              The Privy Council applied another test in
the course of characterizing the expenditures in B.P. Australia Ltd., supra,
at p. 271:    15.              In the Hallstroms case, [Hallstroms
Pty. Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1946), 72 C.L.R. 634], Dixon
J., as he then was, in discussing the difference between capital and income
expenditures, stated, at p. 647, that the difference lay:  ...between the acquisition
of the means of production and the use of them; between establishing or extending
a business organisation and carrying on the business; between the implements
employed in work and the regular performance of the work...; between an
enterprise itself and the sustained effort of those engaged in it.  16.              Other tests have been adopted in other tax
systems. Also in Australia, in the High Court decision in Sun Newspapers
Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (1938), 61 C.L.R. 337, the court,
speaking through Dixon J. enunciated three principles to be applied in determining
the character of an expenditure by a taxpayer for the purposes of applying the
taxation statute. He stated, at p. 363:                     There
are, I think, three matters to be considered, (a) the character of the
advantage sought, and in this its lasting qualities may play a part, (b)
the manner in which it is to be used, relied upon or enjoyed, and in this and
under the former head recurrence may play its part, and (c) the means
adopted to obtain it; that is, by providing a periodical reward or outlay to
cover its use or enjoyment for periods commensurate with the payment or by
making a final provision or payment so as to secure future use or enjoyment.  On the preceding page, His Lordship, in explaining the test from
another aspect, said:  ... the expenditure is to
be considered of a revenue nature if its purpose brings it within the very wide
class of things which in the aggregate form the constant demand which must be
answered out of the returns of a trade or its circulating capital and that
actual recurrence of the specific thing need not take place or be expected as
likely.  The Court on that occasion was concerned with the character to be
ascribed to a payment made by one competitor to another to secure a
discontinuance of a new and threatening adventure. The Court concluded the
payment was capital in nature and should not be charged to revenue.  17.              There is almost an endless rainbow of
expressions used to differentiate between expenditures in the nature of charges
against revenue and expenditures which are capital. It has been said that the
terminology employed is merely an attempt to identify particular factors which
may tilt the scale in a particular case in favour of one or the other
conclusions. At one time it was considered helpful to identify the funds
expended as either "circulating capital" or "fixed
capital". The vocabulary has changed but the same problem of
classification survives.  18.              Another example of these helpful but not
controlling tests, and of the changing taxation law vocabulary, is found in the
decision of the Privy Council in Commissioner of Taxes v. Nchanga
Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd., [1964] A.C. 948, where Viscount Radcliffe
stated, at p. 959:  Nevertheless, it has to be
remembered that all these phrases, as, for instance, "enduring
benefit" or "capital structure" are essentially descriptive
rather than definitive, and, as each new case arises for adjudication and it is
sought to reason by analogy from its facts to those of one previously decided,
a court's primary duty is to inquire how far a description that was both
relevant and significant in one set of circumstances is either significant or
relevant in those which are presently before it.  The judicial committee added, at p. 960, that when defining what was a
capital structure established for "enduring" benefit,
"enduring" did not necessarily mean permanent, nor did it mean
perpetual.  19.              Analogies in this field are infinite. One
which comes to mind is the lump sum payment to an employee in order to
terminate an employment contract or rights on dismissal. This was determined
many years ago to be a payment in the nature of a charge against revenue rather
than capital. In Mitchell v. B. W. Noble, Ltd., [1927] 1 K.B. 719, Lord
Hanworth M.R., at p. 737, stated that the payment was made "not in order
to secure an actual asset to the company but to enable the company to continue
to carry on, as it had done in the past...." The findings in both courts
below in the case at bar are that no intention to acquire a lasting asset is
present and indeed no lasting asset was acquired. Both courts, in slightly
different terminology, found the land to have been consumed in the mining
process. If this analogy is apt, the "expense" classification is to
be preferred in the circumstances here.   ...where an expenditure is
made, not only once and for all, but with a view to bringing into existence an
asset or an advantage for the enduring benefit of a trade, I think that there
is a very good reason (in the absence of special circumstances leading to an
opposite conclusion) for treating such an expenditure as properly attributable
not to revenue but to capital.  In this the Court relied upon the earlier decision of Vallambrosa
Rubber Co. v. Farmer, [1910] S.C. 519, at p. 525. A few years later in Ounsworth
v. Vickers, Ltd., [1915] 3 K.B. 267, at p. 273, Rowlatt J. interpreted
this test as not requiring that expenditures be made on an annual basis in
order to qualify them as a deduction from revenue but rather that the
expenditures be "made to meet a continuous demand".  21.              This discussion of authorities takes one
full circle to the words of Lord Reid in Regent Oil Co. v. Strick,
[1966] A.C. 295, at p. 313:  So it is not surprising
that no one test or principle or rule of thumb is paramount. The question is
ultimately a question of law for the court, but it is a question which must be
answered in the light of all the circumstances which it is reasonable to take
into account, and the weight which must be given to a particular
circumstance in a particular case must depend rather on common sense than on
strict application of any single legal principle.  (Emphasis added.)  22.              It is of little help, in my respectful
opinion, to attempt to classify the character of the expenditure according to
the subject of that expenditure. Here it was land, and expenditure for land may
be classified in good accounting and in good law as capital or, in different
circumstances, as an expenditure chargeable against revenue in the computation
of profit. In the words of Romer L. J.:  It depends in no way upon
what may be the nature of the asset in fact or in law. Land may in certain
circumstances be circulating capital. A chattel or a chose in action may be
fixed capital. The determining factor must be the nature of the trade in which
the asset is employed.  Golden Horse Shoe (New), Ltd. v. Thurgood,
[1934] 1 K.B. 548 (C.A.), at p. 563.  The interest in the land there involved was large piles of tailings,
and the courts found the purchase of that interest was a cost in the nature of
expense and not capital.  23.              Textwriters have made heroic attempts to
reconcile the fluctuating tests and standards applied by the courts in
determining this question. Repeatedly it is said, except for the one authority
already noted, British Insulated and Helsby Cables, supra, that
the question is one of law. No doubt in the predominant sense that is true.
However, the underlying facts upon which the question of law is determined are
so interwoven with the principles of law that it is difficult to say that it is
not at least a mixed question of law and fact. Having explored the earlier
cases under "the once and for all" and "the common sense"
rules, one textwriter concluded:  The courts seem now to
have accepted an "identifiable asset test," making the obtaining of
or the enrichment of some capital asset as the key factor in capital
expenditure. The test is: can a capital asset be identified for which the
payment was made?  Pinson on Revenue Law (15th ed. 1982), at p.
50.  Other textwriters tend to cast their eyes further back into the earlier
cases where the terminology employed was "fixed capital" on the one
hand or "circulating capital" on the other, so that an expenditure with
the former in mind was a capital expenditure while an expenditure from the
latter source was not. The definitions in those cases were, of course, critical
to the sense of the court's reasoning. Fixed capital was taken to be that which
is in the form or shape of assets, either tangible or intangible, but
identifiable as such, and which either produces income directly or can be
employed to earn or produce income, for example, a machine. On the other hand,
circulating capital was said to be that form or part of the wealth of a
taxpayer which is intended to be used, in the sense of being temporarily
expended, dedicated or disposed of by circulation in the business undertaking,
and which comes back to headquarters bringing a profit. Such is the case with
inventory in a sales enterprise. The learned author of Revenue Law,
Butterworths, 1981, John Tiley, at p. 226, declined to bring the older
vocabulary of circulating and fixed capital into the test and he likewise
declined to modernize the "once and for all test", supra. The
latter he rejected because all expenditures which have "an enduring
effect" are not of a capital nature, as we have already seen in the
employment case, supra. He then goes on to criticize the asset test,
particularly where "the asset is not discernible as part of the assets of
the business..." (p. 226); and concludes, on the same page, with reference
to adhering too closely to the use of the acquired asset to determine the
nature of the expenditure, that "the danger is that it [the asset test]
will be applied, as have its predecessors, without regard to the variety of
facts or, again like its predecessors, without regard to the disclaimer of
universality uttered by its formulators".  24.              The federal taxation scene in the United
States does not appear to offer much assistance in the solution of this
problem. The relevant provision in the Internal Revenue Code, § 162(a)
provides in part as follows:                     §162....  (a)...There shall be
allowed as a deduction all the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or
incurred during the taxable year in carrying on any trade or business....  (Emphasis added.)  25.              In determining what is "ordinary and
necessary", the American courts take an approach similar to the
"common sense rule" discussed supra. In Kennecott Copper
Corp. v. United States, 347 F.2d 275 (1965) (Ct. Cls.), the Court stated at
p. 304:    Viewed as a prohibition
against deductions for capital expenditures, however, the phrase "ordinary
and necessary" is a handkerchief thrown over something that is already
covered by a blanket. This is because IRC §263(a), denying any deduction for
amounts paid for the acquisition, improvement, or betterment of property,
explicitly embodies "the basic principle that a capital expenditure may
not be deducted from current income" and takes precedence over IRC §162.      Assuming that the
expenditure is ordinary and necessary in the operation of the taxpayer's
business, the answer to the question as to whether the expenditure is an
allowable deduction as a business expense must be determined from the nature of
the expenditure itself, which in turn depends on the extent and permanency of
the work accomplished by the expenditure. This issue is a factual one.  See Mertens Law of Fed Income Tax §25.20 (1979 Rev., vol. 4A, c.
25, p. 112).  26.              After this review of the authorities it
can be seen that the principles enunciated by the courts and the elucidation on
the application of those principles is of very little guidance when it becomes
necessary, as it is here, to apply those principles to a precise set of
somewhat unusual facts.  27.              The question remains for answer,
therefore, what is the proper application of the relevant provisions of the Income
Tax Act to the facts of this case? Section 12(1)(a) of the Act
provides (which is repeated here for convenience):                     12. (1) In computing income, no deduction shall be made in respect of  (a) an outlay or
expense except to the extent that it was made or incurred by the taxpayer for
the purpose of gaining or producing income from property or a business of the
taxpayer,  It is clear that the expenditures by this taxpayer were made "for
the purpose of gaining or producing income from property". However, the
income did not come from the property acquired by the expenditures here in
issue. The income of the taxpayer came from the business of mining. In order to
better assess the qualification of these expenditures for deduction under the
provisions of the Act, it is necessary to consider the wording in s. 12(1)(b),
in conjunction with s. 12(1)(a), which for convenience I repeat here:                     12. (1) In computing income, no deduction shall be made in respect of                                                                      ...  (b) an outlay,
loss or replacement of capital, a payment on account of capital or an allowance
in respect of depreciation, obsolescence or depletion except as expressly permitted
by this Part,   If, therefore, one must
allocate these payments either wholly to one year's revenue or to capital it
would seem that either course presents difficulties but that an allocation to
revenue is slightly preferable.  28.              In this situation, and in analyzing those
facts, it may be helpful to observe:  1. The purpose of
these expenditures, when viewed from the practical and business outlook, was
the removal of a current obstacle in the operation of the taxpayer's mine and
was not the acquisition of a capital asset;   3. These expenditures
form an easily discernible, more or less constant, element and part of the
daily and annual cost of production;  4. These lands were
not acquired for any intrinsic value but merely by reason of location, and
after the mining operation for the year in question had been completed, the
land had acquired no intrinsic value, and indeed, as was found below, was
"consumed" in the mining process;  5. These expenditures
produced a transitional benefit and one which had no enduring value because
similar expenditures were required in the future if the mining operation was to
be continued at all;  6. The lands acquired
in any given year do not produce a permanent wall or perimeter to the mining
operation but are simply a transitional location of the wall representing the
cone surrounding the mining undertaking; and to the extent that the wall of the
cone is used for haulage of materials from the bottom of the pit on temporary
roads, there may be some transitional asset created, but this asset disappears
as the wall of the cone recedes in ensuing taxation years;  7. The natural of
these expenditures is made clear when it is appreciated that they have been
incurred annually for almost forty years and there is no evidence whatever to
indicate that mining operations can continue in the future without this annual
expenditure;  8. The capitalization
of these expenditures will not produce for the mining operator an asset which
may be made subject to either capital cost or depletion allowances, the former
because no asset recognized in the Income Tax Act is produced, and the
latter because these lands contain no minerals which are being removed by the
mining operations of the taxpayer;  9. These expenditures
did not add to the ore body, nor did they increase the productive capacity of
the mine, nor do they bear any relation to any asset engaged in the mining
operation, but are simply expenditures for the removal of overburden which, if
not removed, would bring the mining operation to a halt;  10. The expenditures
relative to the cost of operating the mine are small and are directly related
to the cost of operation averaging over a long period about 3 per cent per
annum.  29.              The circumstances of this case evoke in
the mind many parallels or analogies. These lands, peripheral to the mouth of
the open pit operation, perform a function not unlike that of a catalyst such
as platinum used in the refinement of petroleum for the production of gasoline.
The purchase of the platinum no doubt produces, in the hands of the refiner, an
identifiable asset of value. At the end of the day, the asset has either
physically disappeared or lost its desired physical characteristics. The
refiner no longer possesses the original platinum asset but he has produced
marketable gasoline by its use in the processing of petroleum. If not for the
explicit addition of Class 26, "Property that is a catalyst", to
Schedule B of the Income Tax Regulations in March 1970, the platinum in
this example was qualified for deduction as an expense. The property at issue
in the case at bar, however, has not been included in Schedule B. The
legislators, therefore, have not precluded it from being treated as an expense
if such treatment is appropriate in all the circumstances. By further analogy,
a mining operator faced with the presence of a body of water above an ore body
is in a somewhat similar position to that of the appellant here. The removal of
the water to lay bare the minerals on the floor of the lake could hardly be
seen as the creation of an asset. The cost of pumping would be an expenditure
which would not create an asset in the hands of the operator. Indeed, as mining
progresses and water, by the forces of nature, returns to the pit on the bottom
of the lake, the water must be removed by successive pumping. The cost of this
pumping would likely be, without further complicating factors, an expense
properly incurred by the taxpayer to gain income and could not be seen as
creating another asset. In the case at bar the land all but disappeared, as did
the catalyst in the refining operation and the water in the mining operation on
the floor of the lake. In none of these situations, at the end of the day, is
an asset produced, nor does an asset remain. Here the taxpayer, at the end of
the mining operations, is the owner of a large hole in the surface of the
earth. The acquired lands represent segments down the wall of the hole, the
older purchases being further down than the last purchases. There is no asset
in the sense of a surface which can, by itself, be sold. The hole once filled
in, at a likely considerable expense, would produce a surface which might have
value in the market. Although the hole itself, and that part of the wall with
which we are here concerned, might conceivably have some value, it can hardly
be described as an asset which by itself has a real value. The evidence
indicates that the life of this mine will end in the 1990's. Both courts below
have concluded that at that time these lands will have disappeared for all
practical purposes.  30.              In applying the law to the above stated
observations, one is thrown back to the pronouncement by Lord Wilberforce in Tucker
v. Granada Motorway Services Ltd., [1979] 2 All E.R. 801, where he said at
p. 804:                     It is
common in cases which raise the question whether a payment is to be treated as
a revenue or as a capital payment for indicia to point different ways. In
the end the courts can do little better than form an opinion which way the
balance lies. There are a number of tests which have been stated in
reported cases which it is useful to apply, but we have been warned more than
once not to seek automatically to apply to one case words or formulae which
have been found useful in another... Nevertheless reported cases are the best
tools that we have, even if they may sometimes be blunt instruments.  (Emphasis added.)  31.              We must also remember the previously cited
words of Lord Pearce in B.P. Australia Ltd., supra, at p. 264:  It is a commonsense
appreciation of all the guiding features which must provide the ultimate
answer.   ... its purpose brings it
within the very wide class of things which in the aggregate form the constant
demand which must be answered out of the returns of a trade or its circulating
capital and that actual recurrence of the specific thing need not take place or
be expected as likely.  The same judge in Hallstroms Pty. Ltd., supra, at p. 648,
reminds us that the classification of such expenditures "...depends on
what the expenditure is calculated to effect from a practical and business
point of view, rather than upon the juristic classification of the legal
rights...." The old rule of "once and for all" as well as the
"common sense" test, supra, lead us to a result favourable to
the taxpayer's contention.  33.              The characterization in taxation law of an
expenditure is, in the final analysis (unless the statute is explicit which
this one is not), one of policy. In the mining industry, where the undertaking
is underground mining with its associated assets such as vertical shafts and
horizontal transportation elements not created directly by the removal of
commercial ore, the tax treatment of capitalization is invoked. On the other
hand, open pit or strip mining requiring none of these fixed facilities leads
to the attribution of the associated expenditures to the revenue account. Strip
mining or open pit mining with conical access (as we have here) and its
associated expenditures falls in between these two rough categories of mining
undertakings. The assessment of the evidence and the conclusions to be derived
therefrom, and the application of the common sense approach to the business of
the taxpayer in relation to the tax provisions, leads, in my respectful view,
to the conclusion that the mining operations here approximate the circumstances
encountered in the traditional open pit mining more than underground mining and
so I conclude, with all respect to those who have otherwise concluded, that the
appropriate taxation treatment is to allocate these expenditures to the revenue
account and not to capital. Such a determination is, furthermore, consistent
with another basic concept in tax law that where the taxing statute is not
explicit, reasonable uncertainty or factual ambiguity resulting from lack of
explicitness in the statute should be resolved in favour of the taxpayer. This
residual principle must be the more readily applicable in this appeal where
otherwise annually recurring expenditures, completely connected to the daily
business operation of the taxpayer, afford the taxpayer no credit against tax
either by way of capital cost or depletion allowance with reference to a
capital expenditure, or an expense deduction against revenue.   35.              The reassessment notices included in the
record make some reference to "additional depletion allowance" being
allowed to the appellant and chargeable against property, the cost of which
had, on reassessment, been charged back to income. Unfortunately, argument in
this Court did not fully explain the net position of the taxpayer after these
reassessments were effected. It obviously would be a misapplication of the
taxing statute to allow the appellant a "notional" or real depletion
allowance on these lands and at the same time to allow the appellant to charge
the cost of the same lands as an operating expense against revenue. It is only
the latter to which the appellant is entitled. Accordingly, I would allow the
appeal and would direct a return of the matter to the Minister for reassessment
on the basis set forth in these reasons; all with costs here and below to the
appellant.  Appeal allowed with costs.                     Solicitors for the appellant: Stikeman, Elliott,
Robarts & Bowman, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the respondent: R. Tassé, Ottawa.   