 The
Queen v. Bronfman, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32  Her
Majesty The Queen                                                                   Appellant  v.  Phyllis
Barbara Bronfman Trust                                                       Respondent  indexed as: bronfman trust v. the queen  File
No.: 17811.  1986:
April 29; 1987: January 29.  Present:
Dickson C.J. and Beetz, McIntyre, Chouinard*, Lamer, Wilson and La Forest JJ.  on
appeal from the federal court of appeal *Chouinard
J. took no part in the judgment.                       Held: The
appeal should be allowed.     Cases
Cited   Statutes
and Regulations Cited                      APPEAL
from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal, [1983] 2 F.C. 797, 83 D.T.C.
5243, [1983] C.T.C. 253, allowing an appeal from a judgment of Marceau J.,
[1980] 2 F.C. 453, 79 D.T.C. 5438, [1979] C.T.C. 524, (disallowing a claimed
deduction) on appeal by way of trial de novo from a judgment of Mr. Guy
Tremblay of the Tax Review Board, 78 D.T.C. 1752, [1978] C.T.C. 3088,
dismissing an appeal from the Minister's decision to disallow a claimed
deduction. Appeal allowed.                     Roger
Roy, for the appellant.                     Michael
Vineberg, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                                                                         I  Facts  3.                By
means of a Deed of Donation registered in Montreal on May 7, 1942 a Trust was
established by the late Samuel Bronfman in favour of his daughter, Phyllis
Barbara Bronfman ("the beneficiary" or, under Quebec law, "the
Institute") and her children. Under the terms of the Deed, the beneficiary
has the right to receive fifty percent of the revenue from the trust property.
In addition, the trustees "in their sole and unrestricted discretion"
are empowered to make an allocation to the beneficiary from the capital of the
Trust if they consider it "desirable for any purpose of any nature
whatsoever". The beneficiary has no children and in the event she dies
without issue, the residue of the Trust accrues for the benefit of her brothers
and sisters.                         ... my reasoning that existed then
[in 1969] still exists today, that precise timing of the sale of investments
ought to be related to the nature of the investment, and not a possible
immediate need for cash on any particular day, that the basic issue [is one] of
managing the assets side separately from the liability and capital side.  In
addition, most of the investments at the time were not readily realizable, in
part because of securities law constraints and in part because the marketable
securities that the Trust did hold had dropped in value. Accordingly, the
Trustees considered it inappropriate to sell them at that point; it appeared to
be more advantageous for the Trust to keep the assets and borrow from the bank.  8.                The
evidence is unclear as to the precise amounts and dates of the loan repayments,
but it is clear that the entire borrowings were repaid by 1972. In 1970 the
Trust realized $1,966,284 and in 1972, $1,026,198, from the sale of shares of
Gulf Oil Canada Ltd. Some of the proceeds from these dispositions were used to
repay the bank loans. Thus the loans postponed but did not obviate the need for
an eventual reduction in the Trust's capital assets. In the meantime, interest
payments of $110,114 in 1970, $9,802 in 1971, and $1,432 in 1972 were incurred
on the debts to the Bank of Montreal. It is the deduction of these interest
payments from the Trust's income which is contested in this appeal.                                                                       II  Legislation  10.              For
the taxation years 1970 and 1971 the relevant legislation is s. 12(1)(a)
and s. 11(1)(c)(i) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148.
The sections read as follows:                     12. (1) In computing
income, no deduction shall be made in respect of  (a) an outlay or expense except to the
extent that it was made or incurred by the taxpayer for the purpose of gaining
or producing income from property or a business of the taxpayer.                     11. (1)
Notwithstanding paragraphs (a), (b) and (h) of subsection
1 of section 12, the following amounts may be deducted in computing the income
of a taxpayer for a taxation year:                                                                      ...  (c) an amount paid in the year or payable in
respect of the year (depending upon the method regularly followed by the
taxpayer in computing his income), pursuant to a legal obligation to pay
interest on  (i) borrowed money used for the purpose of earning
income from a business or property (other than borrowed money used to acquire
property the income from which would be exempt or to acquire an interest in a
life insurance policy) ...                      18. (1) In computing
the income of a taxpayer from a business or property no deduction shall be made
in respect of  (a) an outlay or expense except to the extent
that it was made or incurred by the taxpayer for the purpose of gaining or
producing income from the business or property;                     20. (1)
Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a), (b) and (h), in
computing a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a business or property,
there may be deducted such of the following amounts as are wholly applicable to
that source or such part of the following amounts as may reasonably be regarded
as applicable thereto:                                                                      ...  (c) an amount paid in the year or payable in
respect of the year (depending upon the method regularly followed by the
taxpayer in computing his income), pursuant to a legal obligation to pay
interest on  (i) borrowed money used for the purpose of earning
income from a business or property (other than borrowed money used to acquire
property the income from which would be exempt or to acquire a life insurance
policy) ...  12.              Counsel
have not suggested that the slight change in wording in s. 20(1) has any
bearing on the issues raised in this appeal.                                                                     III  Judgments  13.              (a)
Tax Review Board  14.              Mr.
Guy Tremblay began his reasons for judgment by noting that the burden was on
the Trust to show that the assessments were incorrect. He added:  This burden of proof derives not from one particular
section of the Income Tax Act, but from a number of judicial decisions,
including the judgment delivered by the Supreme Court of Canada in Johnston
v. Minister of National Revenue, 3 DTC 1182, (1948) C.T.C. 195.   Surely, what must have been intended by section 11(1)(c)
was that the interest should be deductible for the years in which the borrowed
capital was employed in the business rather than that it should be deductible
for the life of the loan as long as its first use was in the business.    16.              (b)
Federal Court, Trial Division     18.              In
summary, it appears that the critical factor for Marceau J. was that the
borrowed money was used, directly or indirectly, to fund a reduction in the
taxpayer's capital.  19.              (c)
Federal Court of Appeal    (Emphasis
added.)     Pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Income Tax
Act, the interest here in question was not deductible unless the money
borrowed from the Bank of Montreal had been "used for the purpose of
earning income from a business or property". It was not so used but was,
in fact, used to pay the capital allocations made by the Trustees in favour of
Miss Bronfman. The appellant's argument, in my view, ignores the language of
the Act.  With
respect, I agree.                                                                     IV  Eligible
and Ineligible Uses of Borrowed Money     25.              In
my opinion, the distinction between eligible and ineligible uses of borrowed
funds applies just as much to taxpayers who are corporations or trusts as it
does to taxpayers who are natural persons. While it is true that corporations
or trusts are less likely to be motivated by personal consumption purposes,
there remains nevertheless a variety of ineligible uses for borrowed money
which apply to artificial persons. A trust may, for example, purchase assets
for the purpose of capital gain. Or, as in the present instance, it may
distribute capital to a trust beneficiary. It follows, with respect, that I
cannot accept the suggestion of the majority of the Federal Court of Appeal
that virtually any use of borrowed funds by a trust, rather than by an
individual, will satisfy the requirements of the statutory interest deduction.
Fairness requires that the same legal principles must apply to all taxpayers,
irrespective of their status as natural or artificial persons, unless the Act specifically
provides otherwise.                                                                      V  Original
or Current Use of Borrowed Money    28.              There
is, however, an important natural limitation on this principle. The borrowed
funds must still be in the hands of the taxpayer, as traced through the
proceeds of disposition of the preceding ineligible use, if the taxpayer is to
claim the deduction on the basis of a current eligible use. Where the taxpayer
has expended the borrowings on an ineligible use, and has received no enduring
benefit or saleable property in return, the borrowed money can obviously not be
available to the taxpayer for a subsequent use, whether eligible or ineligible.
A continuing obligation to make interest payments to the creditor therefore
does not conclusively demonstrate that the borrowed money has a continuing use
for the taxpayer.                                                                      VI  Direct
and Indirect Uses of Borrowed Money     33.              It
is not surprising, therefore, that the cases interpreting s. 20(1)(c)(i)
and its predecessor provisions have not favoured the view that a direct
ineligible use of borrowed money ought to be overlooked whenever an indirect
eligible use of funds can be found. See Sternthal and also Garneau
Marine Co. v. Minister of National Revenue, 82 D.T.C. 1171 (T.R.B.)    No doubt there is in fact a causal connection between
the purchase of the stock and the benefits ultimately received; but the
statutory language cannot be extended to such a remote consequence; it could be
carried to any length in a chain of subsidiaries; and to say that such a thing
was envisaged by the ordinary expression used in the statute is to speculate
and not interpret.  Referring
to the interest expense deduction for borrowed money used for the purpose of
earning income from business, Rand J. concluded, at p. 727:  What is aimed at by the section is an employment of the
borrowed funds immediately within the company's business and not one that
effects its purpose in such an indirect and remote manner.  Turning
to borrowings used to generate income from property, he said at p. 728:  There is nothing in this language to extend the
application to an acquisition of "power" annexed to stock, and to the
indirect and remote effects upon the company of action taken in the course of
business of the subsidiary.      40.              This
is, I believe, a laudable trend provided it is consistent with the text and
purposes of the taxation statute. Assessment of taxpayers' transactions with an
eye to commercial and economic realities, rather than juristic classification
of form, may help to avoid the inequity of tax liability being dependent upon
the taxpayer's sophistication at manipulating a sequence of events to achieve a
patina of compliance with the apparent prerequisites for a tax deduction.  41.              This
does not mean, however, that a deduction such as the interest deduction in s.
20(1)(c)(i), which by its very text is made available to the taxpayer in
limited circumstances, is suddenly to lose all its strictures. It is not
lightly to be assumed that an actual and direct use of borrowed money is any
less real than the abstract and remote indirect uses which have, on occasion,
been advanced by taxpayers in an effort to achieve a favourable
characterization. In particular, I believe that despite the fact that it can be
characterized as indirectly preserving income, borrowing money for an
ineligible direct purpose ought not entitle a taxpayer to deduct interest
payments.     45.              It
follows that I would allow the appeal and restore the assessments of the
Minister of National Revenue, with costs in this Court, the Federal Court of
Appeal and the Federal Court Trial Division.                     Appeal
allowed with costs.                     Solicitor
for the appellant: Roger Tassé, Ottawa.                     Solicitors
for the respondent: Phillips & Vineberg, Montréal.   