 Gagnon v. The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 264   and  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent.  File No.: 16851.  1984: December 19; 1986: March 27.  Present: Dickson C.J. and Beetz, Estey, McIntyre, Chouinard, Lamer and
Wilson JJ.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal                      Pursuant to a judgment of divorce, appellant paid
his former wife alimony of $360 a month to repay two hypothecs and the
municipal and school taxes affecting her immovable. However, the deductions
claimed by appellant for this amount in his 1974, 1975 and 1976 tax returns
were disallowed by the Minister of National Revenue. The Federal Court Trial
Division allowed the appeal brought by appellant from this decision but the
Court of Appeal reversed the judgment. This appeal is to determine whether the
amounts paid by appellant to his former wife are deductible under s. 60(b)
of the Income Tax Act, and in particular, whether these amounts are
"allowances" within the meaning of that paragraph.                     Held: The appeal should
be allowed.                     To qualify as an "allowance" within the
meaning of s. 60(b) of the Income Tax Act a sum of money must
meet three conditions: (1) it must be limited and predetermined pursuant to a
decree, order or judgment or a written agreement; (2) it must be paid for the
maintenance of the recipient; and (3) it must be at the complete disposition of
the latter. This third condition, which can be inferred from the case law, does
not mean, as indicated in The Queen v. Pascoe, [1976] 1 F.C. 372, that
the recipient can apply these amounts to certain types of expense at her
discretion and without being required to account for them. This condition will
be met if the recipient is able to dispose of them completely for her own
benefit, regardless of the restrictions imposed as to the way in which she
disposes of them and benefits from them.                     In the case at bar there is no doubt that the
amounts paid by appellant are "allowances" within the meaning of s.
60(b) of the Act. The duty imposed on the former wife to apply these
amounts to particular purposes does not affect the benefit she derived from
them. These amounts are therefore deductible.  Cases Cited                     The Queen v. Pascoe,
[1976] 1 F.C. 372, not followed; Kenneth B.S. Robertson Ltd. v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1944] Ex. C.R. 170, considered; Roper v. Minister of
National Revenue, 77 DTC 5408; The Queen v. Fisch, 78 DTC 6332; Attorney
General of Canada v. Weaver, [1976] 1 F.C. 423; The Queen v. Bryce, [1982]
2 F.C. 581; Sura v. Minister of National Revenue, [1962] S.C.R.
65; Brown v. Helvering, 291 U.S. 193 (1934); Rutkin v. United States,
343 U.S. 130 (1952); James v. United States, 366 U.S. 213 (1961); The
Queen v. Poynton, 72 DTC 6329; Minister of National Revenue v. Hastie,
[1974] 1 F.C. 117, referred to.  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Act to amend the Income
Tax Act and related statutes, 1984 (Can.), c. 45, s.
20.   Authors Cited  Dawe, C. "Section
60(b) of the Income Tax Act: An Analysis and Some Proposals for
Reform" (1979), 5 Queen’s L.J. 153.                      APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of
Appeal, [1982] 2 F.C. 255, [1981] CTC 463, 81 DTC 5377, 141 D.L.R. (3d) 575, 47
N.R. 113, setting aside a judgment of the Trial Division, [1981] 1 F.C. 249,
[1980] CTC 324, 80 DTC 6256. Appeal allowed.                     Claude Blanchard
and Lina Bond, for the appellant.                     Wilfrid Lefebvre, Q.C.,
and Jacques Côté, for the respondent.                     English version of the judgment of the Court
delivered by    2.                The facts are not in dispute. They are
summarized as follows by Walsh J., delivering the judgment of the Federal Court
Trial Division, Gagnon v. The Queen, [1981] 1 F.C. 249, at p. 250:  Plaintiff was married on
December 29, 1948, to Mary Edith Laughlin and of the children of the marriage
only one is still a minor. On March 29, 1972 the marriage was terminated by a
judgment of divorce the pertinent portion of which reads as follows:   [TRADUCTION]  C) As
alimentary pension for herself and for her children petitioner agrees to pay
and respondent accepts   1. A monthly amount
payable in advance on the first day of each month at the residence of
respondent of $300.00 Canadian;   2. For the benefit of
respondent petitioner will pay the monthly payments due or to become due with
respect to the immovable which becomes the property of the respondent, the
obligation with respect to the said monthly payments being more fully described
in the agreement; the amount of the said monthly payments is at present $360.00
and can vary as foreseen in the said contract but represents the repayment in
capital and interest of two hypothecs described therein as well as the
repayment by monthly payments of municipal and school taxes affecting the said
immovable, payable the first of each month, directly to respondent commencing
June 1, 1971.                      In
accordance with this judgment plaintiff paid to his former wife alimony of
$8,190 in 1974, $8,400 in 1975, and $8,400 in 1976. (The Minister claims
documents submitted indicate payments of $7,690 in 1974 and $8,500 in 1975. The
exact amounts can be verified on reassessment.) He claimed credit for these in
his income tax returns for the said years. In his assessments the Minister
reduced the deductions claimed to the sum of $3,600 a year representing the
$300 a month, payable pursuant to Clause C)1 of the aforementioned judgment.                       60. There may be deducted in computing a taxpayer's income for a taxation
year such of the following amounts as are applicable:                                                                      ...   (b) an amount paid
by the taxpayer in the year, pursuant to a decree, order or judgment of a
competent tribunal or pursuant to a written agreement, as alimony or other
allowance payable on a periodic basis for the maintenance of the recipient
thereof, children of the marriage, or both the recipient and children of the
marriage, if he was living apart from, and was separated pursuant to a divorce,
judicial separation or written separation agreement from, his spouse or former
spouse to whom he was required to make the payment at the time the payment was
made and throughout the remainder of the year;  4.                This provision thus makes the deduction
authorized by it subject to four conditions. First, the amount paid by the
taxpayer has to be paid pursuant to a decree, order or judgment of a competent
tribunal or pursuant to a written agreement. Second, the amount paid has to be
paid as alimony or other allowance payable for the maintenance of the
recipient, children of the marriage or both the recipient and children of the
marriage. Third, the amount has to be paid on a periodic basis. Fourth, at the
time the payment was made and throughout the remainder of the year, the
taxpayer had to be living apart from, and be separated pursuant to a divorce,
judicial separation or written separation agreement from, his spouse or former
spouse to whom he was required to make the payment.  5.                The counterpart of the deduction allowed
by this provision is to be found in s. 56(1)(b):                     56. (1) Without restricting the generality of section 3, there shall be
included in computing the income of a taxpayer for a taxation year,                                                                      ...   (b) any amount
received by the taxpayer in the year, pursuant to a decree, order or judgment
of a competent tribunal or pursuant to a written agreement, as alimony or other
allowance payable on a periodic basis for the maintenance of the recipient
thereof, children of the marriage, or both the recipient and children of the
marriage, if the recipient was living apart from, and was separated pursuant to
a divorce, judicial separation or written separation agreement from, the spouse
or former spouse required to make the payment at the time the payment was
received and throughout the remainder of the year;  6.                Thus, the amount deductible by the
taxpayer under s. 60(b) is taxable in the hands of the recipient under
s. 56(1)(b).  7.                The purpose of these provisions, by
allowing income splitting between former spouses or separated spouses, is to
distribute the tax burden between them. As C. Dawe wrote in an article titled
"Section 60(b) of the Income Tax Act: An Analysis and Some
Proposals for Reform" (1979), 5 Queen’s L.J. 153:  This allows the spouses
greater financial resources than when living together, compensating in part for
the lost economics of maintaining a single household.   8.                The issue is whether the payments of
$360 a month made by appellant to his former wife in the taxation years 1974,
1975 and 1976, for the repayment of two hypothecs and municipal and school
taxes on the immovable of his former wife, can be deducted from appellant's
income under s. 60(b) of the Income Tax Act.  9.                Of the four conditions stated in that
section, only the second creates any difficulty: were the amounts in question
paid "as alimony or other allowance payable ... for the maintenance of the
recipient"?  10.              For the reasons given below, I have
concluded that these amounts were paid "as ... [an] allowance payable ...
for the maintenance of the recipient". It therefore does not seem
necessary to discuss the other issue which was also fully argued by the
parties, namely: were these amounts paid as alimony?      An allowance is, in our
view, a limited predetermined sum of money paid to enable the recipient to
provide for certain kinds of expense; its amount is determined in advance and,
once paid, it is at the complete disposition of the recipient who is not
required to account for it. A payment in satisfaction of an obligation to
indemnify or reimburse someone or to defray his or her actual expenses is not
an allowance; it is not a sum allowed to the recipient to be applied in his or
her discretion to certain kinds of expense.  12.              Walsh J. distinguished the circumstances
of the case at bar from those of Pascoe and concluded that the amounts
involved here were predetermined and at the complete disposition of the
recipient, without the latter having to account for them to anyone.  13.              On the first point, which is not in
dispute, he properly held that the fact that these amounts were subject to
slight variations did not mean that they were not predetermined. At page 256,
he wrote:      15.              The Federal Court of Appeal judgment was
published sub nom. The Queen v. Gagnon, [1982] 2 F.C. 255. It was
a unanimous judgment reversing the judgment of the Trial Division and
disallowing the deductions claimed by the taxpayer on the ground, inter alia,
that the amounts in question were not allowances within the meaning of s. 60(b)
of the Income Tax Act, as defined in Pascoe, supra. At
page 257, the judgment cited the definition of "allowance" given in Pascoe;
it went on:                      In the
case at bar the Trial Judge held that payment of the sums in question
constituted payment of an allowance within the meaning of Pascoe,
because he was of the view that the sums were at the complete disposition of
respondent's former spouse, who was not required to account for them. I cannot
share this view. In my opinion respondent's former spouse was entitled to these
payments of $360 only if she paid the sums owing under the deeds of hypothec
registered against her property. This was consequently not an allowance within
the meaning of Pascoe.  16.              Pascoe has been applied and
followed, but not without misgivings.  17.              In Roper v. Minister of National
Revenue, 77 DTC 5408, the appellant was claiming to deduct payments made
pursuant to a judgment which ordered him to provide for the maintenance of a
temporary residence and for the school fees of his children. Marceau J.
referred to Pascoe, and wrote at p. 5411:   18.              A similar problem arose in The Queen v.
Fisch, 78 DTC 6332. At page 6335, Collier J. wrote:                      The
educational costs paid by the defendant in this suit were a limited
predetermined sum of money to enable the mother to meet the school fees. The
monies paid were channelled and restricted to that particular purpose. But the
sum was not at the former wife's complete discretion as to how the money was to
be applied by her. It was, in substance, a reimbursement of expenses incurred
by the wife in the educating of the children. The payment is not within the Pascoe
guidelines.   19.              See also Attorney General of Canada v.
Weaver, [1976] 1 F.C. 423, and The Queen v. Bryce, [1982] 2 F.C.
581, at p. 587.  20.              Appellant submitted that the definition of
"allowance" in Pascoe is unduly limiting and should be
revised. I think he is right.   21.              According to the definition in Pascoe,
for a sum of money to be regarded as an "allowance" it must meet
three conditions: (1) the amount must be limited and predetermined; (2) the
amount must be paid to enable the recipient to discharge a certain type of
expense; (3) the amount must be at the complete disposition of the recipient,
who is not required to account for it to anyone.  22.              The first two conditions may be understood
by inference from s. 60(b) of the Income Tax Act. The amount must
be limited and predetermined in accordance with the judgment, order or written
agreement setting it. It must be paid to enable the recipient to discharge a
certain type of expense, namely an expense incurred for the maintenance of the
recipient.  23.              But what is the reason for the Pascoe
judgment imposing the third condition, which clearly cannot be inferred from s.
60(b)?   25.              It may thus be assumed that by adding this
third condition to the definition of an allowance, the Federal Court of Appeal
sought to avoid an anomaly which would result from an amount being deductible
for the person paying it, pursuant to s. 60(b) of the Income Tax Act,
and not being taxable to the recipient pursuant to s. 56(1)(b), in view
of the rule applied in Robertson, to which I will return.  26.              It is important to specify what is meant
in requiring that, to be an allowance, an amount must be "at the complete
disposition of the recipient".  27.              According to Pascoe, this condition
means that the recipient must be able to apply this amount to certain types of
expense, but at her discretion and without being required to account for it.  28.              However, the condition could also mean
that the recipient must be able to dispose of the amount completely, and that,
provided she benefits from it, it is not relevant that she has to account for
it and that she cannot apply it to certain types of expense at her complete
discretion.  29.              It seems to me, with respect, that the
second interpretation is the correct one, in light of the earlier decisions
which Pascoe appears to have misinterpreted.  30.              What matters is not the way in which a
taxpayer may dispose of, or be required to dispose of, the amounts he receives,
but rather the fact of whether he can dispose of them or not.   . . . the
question remains whether all of the amounts received by the appellant during
any year were received as income or became such during the year. Did such
amounts have, at the time of their receipt, or acquire, during the year of the
receipt, the quality of income, to use the phrase of Mr. Justice Brandeis in Brown
v. Helvering (1934), 291 U.S. 193. In my judgment, the language used by
him, to which I have already referred, lays down an important test as to
whether an amount received by a taxpayer has the quality of income. Is his
right to it absolute and under no restriction, contractual or otherwise, as to
its disposition, use or enjoyment?  32.              The Federal Court of Appeal apparently
found in Robertson the third aspect of what in its opinion constitutes
an allowance; but if that is so, I consider that it misinterpreted the judgment
in that case. What Thorson P. meant by "restriction" in the rule
which he adopted was not a restriction as to the way in which an amount is
disposed of, but a restriction as to the very right to dispose of it, a
restriction which has the result that a taxpayer derives no benefit from it at
all. This is indicated by what he wrote at p. 183:  To put it in another way,
can an amount in a taxpayer's hands be regarded as an item of profit or gain
from his business, as long as he holds it subject to specific and unfulfilled
conditions and his right to retain it and apply it to his own use has
not yet accrued, and may never accrue?  (Emphasis added.)  33.              See also Sura v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1962] S.C.R. 65.  34.              In Brown v. Helvering, 291 U.S. 193
(1934), Brandeis J. had to decide whether commissions, which were potentially
subject to partial reimbursement if insurance policies were cancelled,
constituted income for the agent in the year in which he received them. At page
199 he wrote:  But the mere fact that
some portion of it might have to be refunded in some future year in the event
of cancellation or reinsurance did not affect its quality as income. Compare American
National Co. v. United States, 274 U.S. 99. When received, the general
agent's right to it was absolute. It was under no restriction, contractual or
otherwise, as to its disposition, use or enjoyment.  35.              Here again, in view of the facts in Brown
v. Helvering, it seems clear that in formulating a rule to determine what
is in the nature of income, Brandeis J. referred to restrictions on the very
right to dispose of an amount, not to restrictions on the way in which it is
used.  36.              What confirms my view is the restatement
of this rule in Rutkin v. United States, 343 U.S. 130 (1952), affirmed
in James v. United States, 366 U.S. 213 (1961), in which Warren C.J., at
p. 219, cites the restatement in Rutkin, at p. 137:  A gain "constitutes
taxable income when its recipient has such control over it that, as a practical
matter, he derives readily realizable economic value from it."  This restatement of the rule for determining what constitutes taxable
income emphasizes the benefit the taxpayer derives from income, whatever the
way in which it is derived.  37.              In The Queen v. Poynton, 72 DTC
6329, Evans J.A., rendering the unanimous judgment of the Ontario Court of
Appeal, specifically adopted the ratio in James, and at p. 6335
suggested additional guidelines for determining whether an amount received by a
taxpayer is in the nature of income:  ... the manner of receipt,
the control over it, the liabilities and restrictions attaching to it, the use
made of it by the holder, the person to whom the benefits accrue. These are but
some of the circumstances to be weighed.  38.              Seen in this context, the third condition
imposed by Pascoe must be corrected: for an amount to be an allowance
within the meaning of s. 60(b) of the Income Tax Act, the
recipient must be able to dispose of it completely for his own benefit,
regardless of the restrictions imposed on him as to the way in which he
disposes of it and benefits from it.  39.              To return to the circumstances of the case
at bar, there is no doubt that the recipient of the amounts in question,
appellant's former wife, could dispose of them completely, and that she derived
from them what Burton J. called in Rutkin, at p. 137, a "readily
realizable economic value". The duty which she had to apply these amounts
to particular purposes does not affect the benefit she derived from them. These
amounts are in the nature of income for her, and qualify as
"allowances" within the meaning of both ss. 60(b) and 56(1)(b)
of the Income Tax Act.  40.              This conclusion has the advantage of
avoiding the artificial distinction referred to by Collier J. in Fisch,
at p. 6335:    ... strictly incidental to
the fact that by making these payments ... he was maintaining a home for his
wife and children commensurate with their standard of living.   42.              Before concluding, it should be noted that
after this appeal was heard by this Court the Income Tax Act was amended
by 1984 (Can.), c. 45, s. 20. As a result of these amendments, amounts like the
ones at issue in the case at bar are, on certain conditions and up to certain
maximum figures, deemed to be paid and received as allowances payable on a
periodic basis.   43.              The appeal is allowed, the judgment of the
Federal Court of Appeal is set aside and the judgment of the Federal Court
Trial Division is restored, with costs in all courts.                     Appeal allowed with costs.                     Solicitors for the appellant: Sirois, Blanchard,
Beaudet, Watters & Lamontagne, Québec.                     Solicitor for the respondent: Roger Tassé, Ottawa.   