Editor’s Note:
Addendum released on September 24, 2001. Original judgment has been corrected
with text of addendum appended.  Spire Freezers Ltd. v. Canada,
[2001] 1 S.C.R. 391, 2001 SCC 11  Spire Freezers Ltd., Patrick Gouveia,                                              Appellants John O’Neill,
Edward Butcher, John Dobrei and Maroje Miloslavic  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Spire Freezers
Ltd. v. Canada  Neutral citation:  2001 SCC
11.  File No.:  27415.  2000:  November 10; 2001: March
1.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Income tax --
Calculation of income -- Partnership -- Losses -- Original U.S. partners
assigning partnership interest to Canadian assignees -- Assignees immediately
selling main asset of partnership back to original partners at fair market
value incurring substantial loss -- Assignees carrying on ancillary business of
partnership -- Whether valid partnership established for income tax purposes --
Whether assignees entitled to deduct partnership loss.   A U.S. partnership, which
was involved in the development of luxury residential condominiums and a
low-rent apartment building ancillary to the main project, incurred potential
losses which the appellants, through taking assignments of partnership
interests, sought to acquire for use as an income tax deduction in Canada.
Negotiations resulted in several transactions occurring on the same day.  The
corporate appellant acquired 75 percent of the partnership interest and for a
brief moment was a de jure partner with a U.S. partner.  The individual
appellants acquired the remaining partnership interest a short time later. 
After the Americans left the partnership, the Canadians who had been assigned
their interests sold the condominium project to them at fair market value
incurring a substantial loss which was later claimed on their 1987 Canadian
income tax. The Canadians also paid for the low-rent apartment building which
they managed profitably for several years.  Revenue Canada disallowed the
losses claimed by the appellants and both the Tax Court of Canada and the
Federal Court of Appeal upheld that decision.  Held:  The appeal should be allowed.   The appellants are
entitled to deduct the business losses.  The fact that they entered into the
transactions mainly to reduce their  income tax liability by gaining access to
the losses does not prevent a finding of partnership where, as in this case,
the three essential ingredients of a valid partnership are present.  First, the
partnership was “carrying on business”.  The partnership held the entire interest in an apartment building
and the property management business that was associated with that asset was
pre-existing and continued by the appellants.  Although the original American
partners and the corporate appellant held the property management business
jointly for only a brief period of time, the duration of the carrying on of
business is not determinative.  A partnership may be  created for a single
transaction.  Second, the business was carried on “in common”.  The parties having entered into a valid partnership agreement
setting out their rights and obligations as partners established the common
purpose element and some indicia of partnership were also present during
the brief period the Americans and the corporate appellant were combined. 
Finally,  the business was carried on with a view to profit.  The original
partnership had been conceded to be valid and running a business with a view to
a profit when the appellants were added.  During the time that the corporate
appellant and the Americans were partners, and up until the latter withdrew
from the partnership, they continued to carry on business with a view to
profit.  Further, the appellants had been apprised during negotiations
of the potential to make a profit from the apartment building and they clearly
intended to continue that business.  Since the determination
of the existence of a view to a profit is not a matter of strictly quantitative
analysis, the quantum of the initial loss compared to the anticipated profit
does not negate the holding of partnership. The law of partnership does not
require a net gain over a determined period in order to establish that an
activity is with a view to profit.  The parties’ intention
to make a profit can be revisited on appeal in this case because the trial
judge equated intention with predominant motive and did not consider whether an
ancillary intention to profit existed.  Cases Cited  Applied:  Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R.
298, rev’g [1996] 3 F.C. 713; distinguished:  Backman v. Canada,
[2001] 1 S.C.R. 367, 2001 SCC 10; referred to:  Hickman Motors Ltd.
v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited   APPEAL from a judgment of
the Federal Court of Appeal, [1999] 4 F.C. 381, 242 N.R. 358, 99 D.T.C. 5297,
[1999] 3 C.T.C. 476, 46 B.L.R. (2d) 153, [1999] F.C.J. No. 796 (QL), dismissing
the appellants’ appeal from a judgment of the Tax Court of Canada, 98 D.T.C. 1287,
[1998] 2 C.T.C. 2764, [1997] T.C.J. No. 1271 (QL), which found that the
appellants were not entitled to deduct partnership losses under s. 96 of the Income
Tax Act.  Appeal allowed.  Warren J. A. Mitchell, Q.C., and John R. Owen, for the appellants.  J. S. Gill and Marilyn Vardy, for the respondent.  The judgment of the Court
was delivered by  1                               
Iacobucci  and Bastarache JJ.
-- This appeal was heard with Backman v. Canada, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 367,
2001 SCC 10, released concurrently.  Both appeals raise the basic question of
whether a valid partnership has been established for income tax purposes.  I.  Facts  2                               
In 1978, a partnership named the Hamilton Cove Partnership (“HCP”) was formed in California to develop a luxury
residential condominium project on Santa Catalina Island off the coast of
California.  By late 1980, two equal partners remained, both American
corporations: BCE Development Inc. (“BDI”), and its wholly owned
subsidiary, Peninsula Cove Corporation (“Peninsula”).  3                               
In order to obtain government approvals, the partnership was required to
build a low-rent  apartment project known as the Tremont Apartments (“Tremont”) in Avalon on Santa
Catalina Island.  Tremont was owned by a corporation called the Tremont Street
Apartments Corporation (“TSAC”), which was in turn fully
owned by HCP.  4                               
By the end of 1986, the development costs of the HCP condominium project
exceeded the fair market value of the project by approximately US$10 million. 
In the spring of 1987, several Canadian parties, of whom the appellant Spire
Freezers Ltd. was the largest, were apprised of the opportunity to purchase the
tax losses of the HCP project at 20 cents on the dollar.  5                               
After detailed negotiations, the parties came to an agreement.  On
November 30, 1987, the following transactions occurred:  (a)                           
BDI and Peninsula amended their partnership agreement to keep the
partnership operative regardless of the withdrawal of any of its partners.  (b)                          
TSAC sold Tremont to HCP for approximately US$2.9 million.  HCP borrowed
these funds from BDI.   (d)                          
Peninsula sold its 50 percent interest in the partnership to the
appellant Spire Freezers Ltd., and BDI sold a 25 percent interest in the
partnership to the appellant Spire Freezers Ltd.  For a brief instant, the de
jure partners were BDI and Spire Freezers Ltd.  BDI’s remaining 25 percent interest in the
partnership was then sold to the Spire Group, a group made up of the individual
Canadian parties other than the appellant Spire Freezers Ltd. The total
purchase price was US$34,530,253.  (e)                           
HCP immediately sold the condominium project to BDI for US$33.3 million.
The sale of the condominium project at this price gave rise to an operational
loss of approximately US$10.4 million.  (f)                            
HCP changed its name to the Tremont Street Partnership.  6                               
In effect, Spire Freezers Ltd. and the Spire Group (together the
Canadians) paid approximately US$1.2 million to acquire Tremont and the losses
totaling about US$10.4 million that were incurred by the sale of the HCP
project.  The Canadians have managed Tremont profitably since its acquisition. 
In the fiscal year ending December 31, 1987, the partnership claimed a loss of
US$10 million in respect of the HCP project sale and a capital loss of
US$367,000 in respect of the sale of TSAC shares. Revenue Canada disallowed the
losses. The appellants appealed to the Tax Court of Canada which ruled against
them, as did the majority in the Federal Court of Appeal.   II.  Judgments Below  1.   Tax Court of Canada, 98 D.T.C. 1287   8                               
The Tax Court judge reviewed the formal admissions of fact made by the
appellants in respect of their intention to acquire a tax loss.  He also noted
that they were aware that the continued existence of the partnership and the
ownership of the Tremont apartment building were necessary for their objective
to succeed.  He concluded that the appellants’
sole motivation in entering into the transactions with BDI and Peninsula was to
acquire a tax loss and that the thought of the transaction being profitable was
never in the minds of the appellants.  9                               
The Tax Court judge then applied the decision of the Federal Court of
Appeal in Canada v. Continental Bank Leasing Corp., [1996] 3 F.C. 713,
which has since been overturned.  He held that since none of the appellants
intended anything other than to obtain a tax loss, the Canadians were not
partners with respect to the ownership of the HCP condominium complex and Tremont.  2.      The Federal
Court of Appeal, [1999] 4 F.C. 381  10         
The majority of the Federal Court of Appeal (Linden J.A., Strayer J.A.
concurring) affirmed the result reached in the Tax Court.  The majority
considered this Court’s
decision in Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R.
298.  They recognized that even an ancillary purpose of profit making may form
the basis of partnership.  However, in the majority’s view,  the Tax Court judge in this case 
made an unambiguous finding of fact that the Canadians, when they purported to
become partners, had absolutely no intention to carry on business with a view
to profit.  Rather, their sole intention was to obtain a tax loss.  Because the
law that an ancillary profit intention is sufficient in creating a partnership
was known to the Tax Court judge, and because in their view there was no
persuasive evidence to demonstrate an intention to earn a profit, ancillary or
otherwise, the majority held that there was no basis upon which it could
reverse a finding of fact as to the intention of the parties at the time of
entering into a partnership contract.  Hence, the conclusion of the Tax Court
judge that there was no business being carried on with a view to profit could
not be challenged.  11         
In his dissenting opinion, Robertson J.A. held that the reasons of the
Tax Court judge should be interpreted as finding that the appellants’ predominant motive was to
gain access to a tax loss.  At the time of his decision, the Tax Court judge’s conclusion that a valid
partnership could not be formed in such a situation was fully supported by the
Federal Court of Appeal decision in Continental Bank, supra,
which he quoted extensively.  However, in the meantime that decision had been
reversed by this Court.  In Robertson J.A.’s
view, it was obvious that the taxpayers’
primary intention was to acquire a substantial non-capital loss.  But it is
equally obvious that their secondary intention was to acquire and retain an
income producing asset, Tremont, by which they could continue to carry on
business in common.  Hence, he concluded that this Court’s decision in Continental Bank,
supra, was dispositive of the issue before the Court of Appeal and that the
appellants had established a sufficient basis for a finding that a partnership
existed at the material time.  III.    Analysis  1.           
Introduction  12         
In this appeal, we are asked to consider whether the appellants, Spire
Freezers Ltd. and the Spire Group, are entitled to deduct the business losses
they claim to have accumulated as partners in the Californian partnership HCP.
The Canada Customs and Revenue Agency, on behalf of the respondent in this
appeal,  reassessed the appellants on the ground that they were not true
partners and therefore could not claim the business losses.  As already noted,
this case was heard at the same time as Backman, supra, reasons
in which are being released concurrently herewith, and which applied the
principles enunciated by this Court in Continental Bank, supra. 
Like Backman, the principal issue to be decided in this appeal is:  were
the appellants members of a partnership at the time the losses were incurred?  13         
With respect to the majority in the Federal Court of Appeal, we would
allow the appeal for substantially the same reasons as expressed in the dissent
of Robertson J.A. but wish to elaborate some points.  2.           
Were the Appellants Members of a Partnership?  14         
The essential ingredients of partnerships and the proper approach to
determining whether a partnership exists are discussed in Backman.   We
summarize those principles below.  (a)  The Essential Ingredients of
Partnership  15         
The three essential ingredients of a valid partnership in Canada were
recently described by this Court in Continental Bank, supra, at
para. 22.   At the time the alleged partnership is formed, the evidence must
disclose that the alleged partners were (1) carrying on a business, (2) in
common, (3) with a view to profit.  16         
In Backman, supra, we discuss the concepts of “carrying on a business”, “business”,
“in common”, and “view to profit” as applied to partnership
law and as described in Continental Bank.  We need not repeat that
discussion here.  Indeed, most of the reasoning in Backman is applicable
in this case.  17         
As stated in Continental Bank, and reiterated in Backman,
a tax motivation will not derogate from the validity of a partnership where the
essential ingredients of a partnership are otherwise present: Continental
Bank, supra, at paras. 50-52; Backman, supra, at para.
22.  Furthermore, as held in Backman, where a Canadian taxpayer seeks to
deduct partnership losses through s. 96 of the Act, he
or she must satisfy the essential elements of a partnership that exist under
Canadian law.  In other words, for the purposes of s. 96 of the Act, the essential
elements of a partnership must be present, even in respect of foreign
partnerships: Backman, supra, at para. 17.  (b)   The Approach
to Determining Whether a Partnership Exists  18         
As explained in Backman, the determination of the existence of a
partnership will depend on the true contract and intention of the parties as
appearing from the whole of the facts of the case.  Courts must be pragmatic in
their approach to the three essential ingredients of partnership and weigh the
relevant factors in the context of all the surrounding circumstances: Backman,
supra, at paras. 25-26.  (c)   Application to the Facts at Bar  19         
The transactions at issue in this case are similar to those in Backman.   
As in Backman, in this case, two groups of Canadians allege that they
became partners in a valid partnership through a series of transactions that
involved their taking   assignments of partnership interests in a pre-existing
American partnership.  The original American partners withdrew, leaving the
resultant alleged partnership between the Canadians holding two assets.  The
primary asset,  in this case the HCP condominium project, was held briefly and
in effect sold back to the original American partners, generating a large loss
for the alleged partnership.  The subordinate asset,  in this case the Tremont
apartment building, is the vehicle through which the appellants seek to
establish that there was an ancillary purpose in the transactions that rendered
them members of a valid partnership, namely to carry on business in common with
a view to profit.  20         
However, despite the similarities between the transactions in this case
and those in Backman, there are some essential differences.  For
example, in respect of whether there was a carrying on of business, it is
notable that there is a significant difference between the subordinate assets
in Backman and Spire in terms of the degree of effort required of
the appellants and expended by them in management.   In Backman, the
subordinate asset was a one percent interest in an oil and gas property,
purchased for the sum of $5,000 during the transition between American and
Canadian control of the alleged partnership.  The alleged partnership in Backman
had no significant management control over that asset, nor did the acquisition
of that asset represent a continuation of a pre-existing business of one of the
putative partners.  When production was shut down shortly after purchase, no
other investments in oil and gas were made.  Thus, in Backman, the
alleged partnership was “an
empty shell that does not in fact carry on business” (see Backman, supra, at para.
20).  In this case, the subordinate asset held by the partnership was the
entire interest in an apartment building.  The property management business
that was associated with that asset was pre-existing and continued by the
Canadians.  Tremont required a substantial management effort which the
appellants provided, and from which they benefited by generating profit.   As
noted by Robertson J.A., “the
partnership continued to hold title to a profit-generating asset,
namely, the apartment building, for at least a decade after the sale of the
condominium development”
(para. 57 (emphasis in original)).  21         
Although the original American partners and Spire Freezers Ltd. held the
property management business jointly for only a brief period of time, the
duration of the carrying on of business is not determinative.  The fact that a
partnership is created for a single transaction is of no consequence. 
Furthermore, it is not necessary to show that the parties held meetings,
entered into new transactions, or made decisions: Continental Bank,
supra, at paras. 31-33.  And a business may be established even in circumstances
where the sole business activity is the passive receipt of rent, as was noted
by L’Heureux-Dubé J.
in Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336, at para. 46. 
Consequently, while in Backman it could not fairly be said that the
alleged partnership was carrying on business, that is not true of the
appellants in this case.   23         
With respect to the question of whether the business was carried
on with a view to profit, it is conceded that prior to the relevant
transactions, HCP was a valid and existing partnership and that it had
been formed with a view to profit.  It is also clear that the partnership was
running a business with a view to profit when the new Canadian partners were
added.  The fact that the American partners withdrew from the partnership does
not take away from the fact that during the time that they were partners, and
up until their withdrawal from the partnership, they continued to carry on
business with a view to profit.  For their part, the appellants must have
entered into the transactions in this case with a view to profit since they
were apprised during negotiations of the potential to make a profit from the
Tremont apartment building and they clearly intended to continue that
business.   This is in contrast to the appellant in Backman
whose efforts were characterized by the trial judge as “nothing
more than window dressing” and the finding by the Court of Appeal that there was no real
ancillary profit-making purpose behind the appellant’s
involvement in the oil and gas property.  24         
The majority in the Court of Appeal rejected the contention that a valid
partnership with a view to profit was formed when the new Canadian partners
were admitted to the partnership based on the intention of the American
partners to abandon the partnership and their possession of the Tremont asset
immediately thereafter.    This amounts to a conclusion that there was no
carrying on of a business in common between the American and Canadian
partners.  However, the fact is that during the short time the American and
Spire Freezers Ltd. were involved, they ran the HCP condominium project and
Tremont as a business in common.  The partnership subsisted and continued to
carry on a business  after the withdrawal of the Americans. At all relevant
times, then, there were partners managing assets.  At some point, all partners
were associated in the management of the Tremont apartment building.   In other
words, at all times there was a carrying on of business in common.  25         
As noted above, the duration of the partnership is not determinative. 
It is settled law that a partnership may be formed for a single transaction. 
As a general matter, internal arrangements with regard to liability between
partners are not of prime importance in determining the existence of a
partnership.  Consequently, the liability sharing arrangement in respect of the
condominium project and Tremont is not of great significance on the partnership
question.  Furthermore, as noted above, the fact that the appellants admitted
that they principally entered into the transactions to reduce their Canadian
income tax liability by gaining access to the losses does not prevent a finding
of partnership.  26         
The majority of the Court of Appeal also rejected the notion that there
was a view to profit because the parties did not contemplate recouping the
initial loss.  However, the determination of the existence of a view to profit
is not a matter of strictly quantitative analysis.  The quantum of the initial
loss compared to the anticipated profit does not negate the holding of
partnership in this case.  The law of partnership does not require a net gain
over a determined period in order to establish that an activity is with a view
to profit.  For example, a partnership may incur initial losses during the
start-up phase of its enterprise.  That does not mean that the relationship is
not one of partnership, so long as the enterprise is carried on with a view to
profit in the future.  Here, the transactions at issue necessarily involved a
transfer of both the condominium project and Tremont.  Despite the fact that a
loss was incurred by the subsequent sale of the condominium project, the fact
that the Canadian partners were aware of the potential for profit from the
Tremont apartment building before entering the partnership and the fact that
Tremont consistently turned a profit after the entry of the Canadian partners
clearly establish the business was carried on with a view to profit,
notwithstanding that the aggregate profits may never exceed the tax loss
incurred in the year of the transactions at issue.  27         
We reject the conclusion of the majority of the Federal Court of
Appeal that the question of whether the parties’
intention to make a profit is a purely factual one that cannot be revisited in
the instant case.  The intention to make a profit cannot only be judged merely
subjectively, it must also be based on objective evidence.  We place little
weight on the finding  that the appellants’
only intent was to obtain a tax benefit.  The trial judge erred with respect to
this issue by failing to give proper attention to the ancillary purpose
described above. As mentioned earlier, the trial judge did not have the benefit
of this Court’s ruling
in Continental Bank and made his findings while under the impression
that the predominant motive of the taxpayer was determinative and that profit
had to consist of a net gain over and above the initial loss sought to be
deducted (see Rip T.C.C.J.’s
reasons at pp. 1298-99).  28         
In summary, although there are similarities between the transactions at
issue in Backman and in this case, there are also several essential
differences, including the continuity of the business of the partnership, the
management effort required to sustain it, and the objective evidence of an
anticipation of profit. Considering all the facts and circumstances, we believe
it is clear that the formal requirements necessary for partnership are present
in Spire, while in Backman they were not.  IV.  Disposition  29         
We would allow the appeal with costs  in this Court and in the courts
below, set aside the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal, and order that
the appellants are entitled to deduct the loss in question under s. 96 of the Income
Tax Act.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the
appellants:  Thorsteinssons, Vancouver.  Solicitor for the
respondent:  The Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto.  Rehearing  Spire
Freezers Ltd. v. Canada, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 391, 2001 SCC 11 The judgment of the Court
was amended on September 24, 2001 by adding in para. 29 the words "in
this Court and in the courts below" after the word "costs".   