 mattabi mines ltd. v.
ont. (min. of revenue), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 175  Mattabi Mines
Limited                                                                     Appellant  v.  The Minister of
Revenue (Ontario)                                                  Respondent  indexed as: mattabi mines ltd. v. ontario (minister of revenue)    File No.: 18871.  1988: February 1;
1988: October 20.    on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                       Held: The appeal should
be dismissed.                       The
retroactive abolition of the tax exemption by the province could not per se
constitute a reason for interpreting the Regulation so as to compel the
respondent to accept the amendment. It was irrelevant to the issue of interpretation.
The province's repeal of the tax exemption in no way changed the law applicable
to the filing of amended returns and the question of whether, on the true
interpretation of the provincial legislation, the respondent was obliged to
accept them.                      Appellant
contended also that the payment of $50 in capital tax in 1971, included by
mistake in exploration and development expenses for 1972, constituted an error
sufficiently egregious that it be required to alter its 1972 return by making
this payment a deductible loss in 1972 pursuant to s. 60(1)(c) of the
Act. Again, there was no statutory provision that required the respondent to
accede to this request. The error was a minor one accepted by the respondent
and the time for amending returns without authority was long past.                     Finally,
appellant was not entitled to reopen its 1974 return to deduct additional
capital cost allowance given the disallowance of the investment tax credit.
There was no statutory provision by which the respondent was required to accept
this amendment.  Cases Cited   Statutes and
Regulations Cited  Corporations Tax Act, 1972, S.O. 1972, c.
143, ss. 1(1)(48), 12, 22(1)(a), 25, 60(1)(c), 75(2)(a),
99(7)(b), 106(1), (4), (5)(b), 157(1), 159.     Regulation made under The Corporations Tax Act, 1972, O. Reg. 350/73,
s. 301(1).  Authors Cited                       APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal, [1984] C.T.C. 566, 3 O.A.C. 69,
setting aside a judgment of Keith J., [1982] C.T.C. 382. Appeal dismissed.                     Murray
A. Mogan, Q.C., and John R. Sproat, for the appellant.                     Gerald
W. Sholtack and Augustine J. Arrigo, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by   I The Facts     Although this credit
was normally only available for the fiscal year in which the machinery and
equipment was "acquired and used", s. 106(4) permitted it to be
carried forward if the taxpayer had incurred a "net loss" in previous
taxation years. Section 106(5)(b) of the Act defined "net
loss":   4.                       Along
with its 1974 return claiming the tax credit ($736,962) Mattabi also filed an
amended return for the fiscal year ending December 31, 1971. This amended
return claimed a loss of $100 for 1971 by adding a capital cost allowance claim
of that amount to the previously reported income of "nil". Given that
Mattabi's reported taxable income for the fiscal year 1972 was also
"nil", it claimed a "net loss" of $100 for all fiscal years
ending between April 26, 1971 and April 1, 1973 which brought it within the
terms of the s. 106 carry forward provisions. The Minister refused to accept
the amended return and consequently disallowed the claim for a tax credit. The
Minister also refused to accept two further amendments to the 1971 and 1972
returns which would also have created a "net loss" for Mattabi.
Mattabi successfully appealed the Minister's decision on the capital cost
allowance to the Supreme Court of Ontario, [1982] C.T.C. 382, but the Court of
Appeal for Ontario allowed an appeal from that decision by the Minister: [1984]
C.T.C. 566.  II The
Judgments Below  (a) Supreme
Court of Ontario   The practice of this Court has always been to permit amendments to
pleadings that are required to form the foundation of a just judgment of the
Court, at any stage of the proceedings, even extending to the end of a trial.
On occasion it may be necessary to refuse an application to amend at a late
time; on other occasions, it may be right and proper in the discretion of the
judge, to impose terms on the applicant. The essential point however, is that
no application for leave to amend a pleading is to be rejected on the sole
ground that it is made at a late time in the proceedings. In any event, while
the decisions of members of the Tax Appeal Board are always entitled to the
greatest respect and in many cases have persuasive force, they are not binding
on this Court.                      When the Province belatedly took action, the
appellant ... knew that its mining income for 1974 would be subject to
provincial tax ... instead of being totally exempt for 1974 and the first 7
months of 1975, but it could hardly have expected to be deprived at the same
time of the benefit of the incentive tax deduction contained in section 106 of
the Statute.                                                                      ...                       Thus in the case before me, there is a long standing
departmental practice of the federal authorities, to permit and accept amended
corporate income tax returns, to claim a revision of capital cost allowance in
accordance with the Interpretation Bulletins I have quoted.                     I am firmly of the opinion that the federal
authorities having accepted such an amendment for the appellant's 1971 fiscal
year, the respondent was obliged by the applicable Ontario regulations to do
likewise.                     That this amendment caused the appellant to qualify
for an investment tax credit in 1974, provides no basis in law or logic for the
respondent to refuse to accept such amendment.  8.                       Thereafter,
without addressing the interpretation of the section, Keith J. found that
Mattabi had incurred a "net loss" for purposes of s. 106(5)(b)
and could claim the tax credit. Although he did not need to do so, Keith J.
noted briefly that he would not have permitted Mattabi's alternative claim to
create a net loss in 1972 by altering its characterization of certain interest
expenditures from capital expense to interest expense. He made no comment on
Mattabi's further alternative claim to the same end which was based on a $50
capital tax payment in 1971 allegedly erroneously recorded as part of
exploration and development expenses. Because of his decision on the tax
credit, Keith J. also did not discuss the merits of the alternative general
claim for relief based on a reopening of the 1974 tax return.  (b) Ontario
Court of Appeal  9.                       The
Court of Appeal (Brooke, Weatherston and Robins JJ.A.) took a rather different
approach to the issues before them. Robins J.A., for the Court, began by noting
that it was irrelevant whether or not Mattabi could amend its 1971 return.
Since in his view it did not affect the result, he was prepared to accept that
it could do so, although he disagreed with Keith J. that the retroactive nature
of the abolition was significant (at p. 570):  That section was repealed by a valid enactment of the provincial legislature.
Its repeal in no way affects the law applicable to the filing of amended tax
returns and is irrelevant to a determination of whether the Minister is obliged
to accept an amended return.  10.                     Robins
J.A. concentrated on the interpretation of s. 106(5)(b), the definition
of "net loss". He noted the Company's argument that income exempt
from tax was not to be included in the calculation of whether such a loss had
occurred but rejected it. In his view the definition of "net loss"
did not exclude income exempt from tax from the calculations. He noted that the
section "speaks of "incomes" in the plural". In addition
the tax credit provision itself, s. 106(1), required that the machinery be used
"for the purpose of earning income", which the Company claimed was
the case here. Robins J.A. thought the Company's position inconsistent and
untenable (at p. 571):                       Either way, the Company cannot succeed.  Robins J.A. found
support for this interpretation in the policy of the Act and in principles of
statutory interpretation. The result he had reached (at p. 572):   11.                     This
conclusion meant also that, even if permitted, the alternative attempts to
create a net loss would not do so. Robins J.A. therefore did not discuss them.
He did, however, specifically reject the Company's alternative claim for relief
based on amendments to the 1974 return. He said at p. 572:   III The
Interpretation of s. 106  12.                     Leaving
aside for the moment questions relating to the specific grounds on which
Mattabi claims that it can create a "net loss" for the qualifying
period, the threshold issue in this appeal concerns the interpretation of s.
106. In particular, it is necessary to decide the meaning of "for the
purpose of earning income" in s. 106(1) and "incomes" in s.
106(5)(b). The requirements for claiming the tax credit set out in s.
106(1) are that, inter alia, the machinery and equipment must be used
"for the purpose of earning income". What does this phrase mean? The
Court of Appeal held that "income" must mean taxable income under
Division B of the Act, not tax exempt income. In other words, there must be a
direct connection between expenditures eligible for the investment tax credit
and the earning of taxable income.    (a)               an outlay or expense
except to the extent that it was made or incurred by the corporation for the
purpose of gaining or producing income from the business or property;                     18. (1) In computing the income
of a taxpayer from a business or property no deduction shall be made in respect
of  (a) an outlay or expense except to the extent that it was
made or incurred by the taxpayer for the purpose of gaining or producing income
from the business or property;                      It is not necessary that the outlay or expense
should have resulted in income. In Consolidated Textiles Limited v. M.N.R.,
[1947] Ex. C.R. 77 at 81; [1947] C.T.C. 63, I expressed the opinion that it was
not a condition of the deductibility of a disbursement or expense that it
should result in any particular income or that any income should be traceable
to it and that it was never necessary to show a causal connection between an
expenditure and a receipt. And I referred to Vallambrosa Rubber Co. v. C.I.R.
(1910), 47 S.C.L.R. 488 as authority for saying that an item of expenditure
may be deductible in the year in which it is made although no profit results
from it in such year and to C.I.R. v. The Falkirk Iron Co. Ltd. (1933),
17 T.C. 625, as authority for saying that it may be deductible even if it is
not productive of any profit at all . . . .                     The essential limitation in the exception expressed
in Section 12(1)(a) is that the outlay or expense should have been made by the
taxpayer "for the purpose" of gaining or producing income "from
the business". It is the purpose of the outlay or expense that is
emphasized but the purpose must be that of gaining or producing income
"from the business" in which the taxpayer is engaged. If these
conditions are met the fact that there may be no resulting income does not
prevent the deductibility of the amount of the outlay or expense. Thus, in a
case under the Income Tax Act  if an outlay or expense is made or
incurred by a taxpayer in accordance with the principles of commercial trading
or accepted business practice and it is made or incurred for the purpose of gaining
or producing income from his business its amount is deductible for income tax
purposes. [Emphasis added.]  Similar views were
expressed by this Court in Premium Iron Ores Ltd. v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1966] S.C.R. 685. A majority of the Court found that the
limitation in the federal Act permitted the taxpayer to deduct legal expenses
incurred in successfully resisting a tax demand by the United States Internal
Revenue Service. In separate opinions, Martland, Abbott and Hall JJ., all noted
that the current s. 18(1)(a), which dates from 1948, liberalized claims
for deductible expenses. The previous provision, s. 6(a) of the Income
War Tax Act, R.S.C. 1927, c. 97, had read:                     6. In computing the amount of the profits
or gains to be assessed, a deduction shall not be allowed in respect of  (a) disbursements or expenses not wholly, exclusively
and necessarily laid out or expended for the purpose of earning the income;
[Emphasis added by Martland J.]  In addition, the old
Act had defined "income" as "the annual net profit or
gain . . . ." According to Martland J. "the
present wording of para. (a)...was intended to broaden the definition of
deductible expenses...[a]s now worded, [it] permits the deduction of any
expense made for the purpose of producing income from a property or
business" (p. 702). He then went on to take a broad approach to the
meaning of "purpose" (at p. 703):                     Clearly these expenses were not made solely for the
purpose of earning income in the year in which they were incurred. They did not
directly result in the earning of income at all. But they were made with a view
to protecting the income earning capacity of the
company . . . .  Hall J. adopted a
similarly broad view of income when used in the phrase "gaining or
producing income". He said at p. 711:  The limitation, spelled out in s. 12(1)(a), does not, in
referring to `producing income from the property or business of a taxpayer',
limit the words quoted solely to the taxation year in which the deduction is
being claimed. It is a clear indication to me that the income thus referred to
may be the income of the taxation year under review or of a succeeding year.                     A company such as the appellant exists to make a
profit. All its operations are directed to that end. The operations must be
viewed as one whole and not segregated into revenue producing as distinct from
revenue retaining functions, otherwise a condition of chaos would obtain.    2. The Department's views may be helpful in the interpretation of
certain phrases used in the opening words of subsection 18(1) and in paragraph
18(1)(a), but it should be remembered that these phrases must also be
considered in relation to the wording of the paragraph as a whole.                                                                      ...    As I have indicated,
this Bulletin is in accord with the interpretation the courts have put on
phrases such as "gaining or producing income" and "earning
income". I conclude that Mattabi meets the qualifying provisions in s.
106(1) of the Act.  16.                     My
conclusion to this point only assists Mattabi to qualify for the tax credit in
the year in which the expenditures were made, i.e., 1971. But the Company was
exempt from tax in that year and thus for the credit to be of any practical use
the Company must be able to carry it forward. The conditions under which that
may be done are set out in s. 106(2) to (4):                     (2) For the purposes of this section, where the
machinery and equipment in respect of which the provisions of subsection 1
would otherwise apply, is not used by the corporation in the fiscal year in
which it is acquired, such machinery and equipment shall be deemed to have been
acquired and used by the corporation in the fiscal year in which it is first
used.                     (3) Any amount which may be deducted under
subsection 1 may be deducted in subsequent fiscal years to the extent that the
deduction allowed under subsection 1 exceeds the tax otherwise payable by the
corporation in the previous fiscal years and, except as herein provided, no
deduction shall be allowed in any fiscal year of the corporation ending after
the 31st day of March, 1973, except that with respect to the first fiscal year
of the corporation ending after the 31st day of March, 1973, the amount which
may be deducted from the tax otherwise payable for that fiscal year shall not
exceed that portion of the tax otherwise payable for that fiscal year that the
number of days in that fiscal year prior to the 1st day of April, 1973, bears
to 365.                     (4) Notwithstanding subsection 3, where a
corporation has a net loss, any amount which may be deducted under subsection 1
may be deducted in subsequent fiscal years to the extent that the deduction
allowed under subsection 1 exceeds the tax otherwise payable by the corporation
in the previous fiscal years and, except as herein provided, no deduction shall
be allowed in any fiscal year of the corporation ending after the 31st day of
March, 1974 . . . .  The crucial phrase
here is "net loss", which is defined in s. 106(5)(b):                     (5) In this section,                                                                      ...    18.                     Income
is dealt with in Part II of the Act which covers ss. 8 to 122 and therefore
includes s. 106. Division B of Part II entitled "Computation of
Income" begins with the formula for determining the income of a
corporation in any fiscal year (s. 12). The section begins:                     12. The income of a corporation for a
fiscal year for purposes of this Part is its income for the year
determined by the following rules...[Emphasis added.]  "This Part"
is, as noted above, Part II and includes s. 106. The rules laid out in s. 12
are followed by a large number of sections dealing with what must be included,
what may be deducted, and so on. Subdivision F of Division B headed "Amounts
Not Included in Computing Income" contains s. 75(2)(a):   19.                     Two
possible ways of interpreting the relationship between s. 75(2)(a) and
s. 106 were advanced by the parties. The Company's argument was simply that the
plain meaning of the Act resulted in Mattabi having no income for the purposes
of Part II (including s. 106) during this period. The Minister implicitly
accepted that this correctly represented the plain meaning but urged this Court
to hold that the carry forward provisions "could not have been intended to
apply to corporations which earned large incomes but which were exempted under
other provisions of the Act from paying taxes on those incomes during the
qualifying period". To qualify, he submitted, a taxpayer must have incurred
a "true net loss". The Minister supported this interpretation by
noting that the credit was designed to provide an incentive to purchase
equipment and that such incentive would only be effective in the case of a
company that actually paid tax. Therefore, it could not in his submission have
been intended to apply in the present case.  20.                     The
Minister, in effect, asks the Court to find, in the absence of a separate
definition for the section, that "income" has a different meaning in
s. 106 from its meaning "for the purposes of" Part II of the Act in
which the section appears. Robins J.A. in the Court of Appeal seems to have
accepted this submission. He concludes that "income" in s. 106 is, in
effect, a synonym for profit. Accordingly, it does not matter whether the
profit is tax exempt or not. The difficulty with this position, as I see it, is
that a taxing statute is a highly technical piece of legislation which requires
an interpretation that will ensure certainty for the taxpayer. Many of the
words used carry a very specific and technical meaning because they identify
the fundamental concepts underpinning the legislation. "Income" is
one of those fundamental concepts.    3.                Moreover, the formal validity of the transaction
may also be insufficient where:                                                                      ...  (c) `the object and spirit' of the allowance or benefit provision
is defeated by the procedures blatantly adopted by the taxpayer to synthesize a
loss, delay or other tax saving device, although these actions may not attain
the heights of `artificiality' in s. 137. This may be illustrated where the
taxpayer, in order to qualify for an `allowance' or a `benefit', takes steps
which the terms of the allowance provisions of the Act may, when taken in
isolation and read narrowly, be stretched to support. However, when the
allowance provision is read in the context of the whole statute, and with the
`object and spirit' and purpose of the allowance provision in mind, the
accounting result produced by the taxpayer's actions would not, by itself, avail
him of the benefit of the allowance.    23.                     The
submission of the Minister is that a reading of the whole statute according to
its plain meaning can defeat a narrow, technical interpretation of a particular
provision. However, in the present case consideration of the whole statute reveals,
if anything, support for the Company's position. "Income" is a
defined term in Part II of the Act and the failure to define income differently
for purposes of s. 106 which is contained in Part II has to be treated as
significant. Interpretation according to the "object and spirit" of
the legislation cannot, in my view, overcome a clear statutory definition. This
is not a case in which the Court has a choice of the interpretations it may put
upon the language used by the legislature. The legislature has specifically
addressed the subject. I would therefore conclude that in assessing whether
Mattabi had a "net loss" one must start with the finding that for
purposes of s. 106(5)(b) its "incomes" were "nil".   IV Revision of
the 1971 Return   9. Where a taxpayer requests a revision of capital cost allowance
claimed in a year which was assessable to a "nil" income tax (because
of a loss in that year, the application of a loss of another year, or the fact
that income was exempt from tax in that year), such requests will be allowed
only if there is no resulting change in the tax assessed for the year or any
other year of the taxpayer for which the time has expired for filing a notice
of objection. [Emphasis added.]  Mattabi had submitted
such a revision for 1971 to the federal government in 1975 along with its 1974
return and the federal government accepted it. We were referred to Ontario
Regulation 350/73, s. 301(1), which states:                           allowances
in respect of capital cost   26.                     Combining
the federal Interpretation Bulletin (to which the provincial government admits
that it adheres) and the provincial Regulation, the appellant submitted that it
was entitled by the Bulletin to revise the capital cost allowance in 1971 if it
met the necessary conditions and that it was required by the Regulation to
submit a similar revision to the Ontario government. The appellant further
submitted that the Regulation requires Ontario to accept the revision when the
federal authorities have done so. This latter submission is strongly resisted
by the Minister.                       Once again, I am not saying that the
administrative interpretation could contradict a clear legislative text; but in
a situation such as I have just outlined, this interpretation has real weight
and, in case of doubt about the meaning of the legislation, becomes an
important factor. [Emphasis added.]  28.                     Harel
was affirmed recently in Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R.
29. Dickson J., as he then was, stated at p. 37:                     Administrative policy and interpretation are not
determinative but are entitled to weight and can be an "important
factor" in case of doubt about the meaning of legislation: per de
Grandpré J., Harel v. Deputy Minister of Revenue of Quebec....    ...if the interpretation of a taxation statute is unclear, and one
reasonable interpretation leads to a deduction to the credit of a taxpayer and
the other leaves the taxpayer with no relief from clearly bona fide expenditures
in the course of his business activities, the general rules of interpretation
of taxing statutes would direct the tribunal to the former interpretation.  Later in his judgment
at p. 72 he referred to:  ...another basic concept in tax law that where the taxing statute is
not explicit, reasonable uncertainty or factual ambiguity resulting from lack
of explicitness in the statute should be resolved in favour of the taxpayer.  Although Estey J. was
referring to ambiguity within a single statute, I believe these principles are
not inappropriate to a case like the present in which the ambiguity stems from
the interplay of a provincial Regulation and federal administrative practice.  31.                     They
do not, however, assist the appellant here. Mattabi can hardly claim to have
had "no relief from clearly bona fide expenditures". It had
relief in the form of a total exemption from taxation during the qualifying
period. It was in fact enjoying a complete tax holiday. I see no reason
therefore to interpret the provincial Regulation as imposing an obligation on
the Ontario authorities to accept the appellant's revised return when there is
nothing in the Act, the Regulation or any provincial Interpretation Bulletin to
support it. While the federal authorities accepted the revision pursuant to
their own practice, there was no reason for them not to do so since the
amendment was made to the federal return solely for the purpose of making the
same amendment provincially. We do not know whether or not the federal
authorities would have so readily accepted it had it been attended by the same
consequences under the federal legislation as under the provincial.  32.                     It
is my view, moreover, that the retroactive abolition of the tax holiday by the
province cannot per se constitute a reason for interpreting the
Regulation so as to compel the authorities to accept the amendment. The fact
that the tax holiday in the case of the province was abolished retroactively,
thereby depriving the appellant of the opportunity to make out its return in
the manner most advantageous to it, obviously influenced the trial judge. I
agree, however, with Robins J.A. in the Court of Appeal for the reasons he
gives that it is irrelevant to the issue of interpretation. The Province's
repeal of the tax holiday in no way changes the law applicable to the filing of
amended returns and the question whether on the true interpretation of the
provincial legislation the Minister is obliged to accept them. It goes without
saying, of course, that it may be very relevant to the decision the Minister
makes in the exercise of his discretion whether to accept them or not.  33.                     I
would conclude, for the reasons I have indicated, that this Court cannot compel
the Ontario government to accept the appellant's revision to its 1971 tax
return. It may do so if it wishes but it remains, in my opinion, a matter
within the scope of the Minister's discretion.  V Mattabi's
Alternative Claims  34.                     These
claims are threefold: the first two represent alternate methods of creating a
net loss in the 1971 and 1972 taxation years so as to claim the investment tax
credit; the third is a claim that the 1974 return be reopened so that the
Company can readjust its deductions in light of its failure to be allowed that
credit. I will deal with each of them in turn.  (a) Capitalization
of Interest Expense    37.                     I
find no merit in this argument. Keith J. had this to say on it at p. 393:                     I am of the opinion that the Minister is entitled to
waive strict compliance with the Statute and treat the appellant's reporting of
the item in its financial statements and corporations tax return for 1972 as an
election.  I would agree. The
Company made its choice of how to characterize the interest payments in 1972.
The choice may not have turned out to be the best one but that fact plus a
technical oversight cannot be used to demand what is effectively a reopening
and revision of the 1972 return long after the time for assessment, objection
and appeal has passed. There is, of course, no statutory provision to permit
such a reopening. I would reject this ground of appeal.  (b) 1972
Capital Tax Payment  38.                     I
find even less merit in this claim. In 1971 the appellant paid $50 in capital
tax under Part III of the Act. This was erroneously included in exploration and
development expenses for 1972. Again, the appellant asks this Court to hold
that this error, accepted or overlooked by both taxing authorities, was
sufficiently egregious that it be required to alter its 1972 return by making
this $50 payment a deductible loss in 1972 pursuant to s. 60(1)(c) of
the Act. Precisely the same considerations lead me to reject this argument. The
appellant can cite no authority that requires the government to accede to this
request. The error was a minor one accepted by the government and the time for
amending returns without authority is long past. I have no doubt that, if the
government were attempting at this stage to alter these returns, the Company
would be strenuously arguing an estoppel based on the intervening years and the
earlier acceptance of the returns by the authorities. I find no merit in this
claim.  (c) The 1974
Return  39.                     The
appellant's final claim is an alternative pleading to all of its other
contentions. If, for one reason or another, it is denied the 1974 investment
tax credit, then it asks the Court:  ...is the Appellant entitled to deduct in computing its income for 1974
additional capital cost allowance (greater than the amount of capital cost
allowance deducted in the Appellant's 1974 tax return) up to the maximum amount
permitted by the Ontario Act and its regulations?  In support of this
claim Mattabi points out that it did not claim the maximum capital cost
allowance in 1974 because it assumed it would receive the tax credit and did
not wish to reduce the tax against which the credit would be applied. It puts
its claim for relief this way:                     In preparing a tax return under the Ontario Act,
each corporate taxpayer must, of necessity, make a number of assumptions as to
how certain amounts are to be calculated, characterized, claimed and
apportioned. Some of these assumptions will suggest or dictate other
calculations or claims that must, or should reasonably, be made. Thus, in this
case the Appellant, assuming that it was entitled to a substantial investment
tax credit for 1974, did not deduct all of the capital cost allowance which was
available in 1974 because to do so would have reduced the Appellant's income,
taxable income and resulting tax against which the investment tax credit was to
be applied. Conversely, the only prudent decision for the Appellant, if it was
not entitled to the investment tax credit for 1974, was to deduct such amount
of capital cost allowance as would minimize its tax liability for 1974.                     There is no opportunity, in preparing a tax return,
for the taxpayer to claim in the alternative. Thus, an honest and prudent
taxpayer, such as the Appellant, may file a tax return making certain legal or
factual assumptions, only to find later that those assumptions are not well
founded in law or in fact.  40.                     It
should be noted that the issue of capital cost allowances in 1974 was not the
subject of any objection by the Company prior to trial. It arose for the first
time in the form of an amendment to the pleadings at trial, and, indeed, a
large part of Keith J.'s reasons is concerned with whether such an amendment
could be allowed. The view that I take of this matter makes it unnecessary to
go into this question. I will assume that the amendment to the pleadings can be
made, but I do not think the appellant can succeed in its amended claim.  41.                     The
hurdle that the Company must overcome on this issue is, as with the other
claims, that it cannot cite any statutory provision by which the government is
required to accept this amendment. Indeed, these provisions militate against
the claim because Ontario Regulation 350/73, cited above, requires that the
same capital cost allowance be claimed in the provincial return as is claimed
in the federal return. The Company would therefore have to attempt a revision
of its 1974 federal return which I do not think it is entitled to do at this
stage.   43.                     I
am not suggesting here that the Minister could not, if he wished, allow changes
to the 1974 return provided he conformed to the requirements of Ontario
Regulation 350/73. The issue before this Court is whether he can be compelled
to do so. The only cases cited to us by the appellant go to the issue of
whether the amendment could be added to the pleadings at trial and I have
already noted that I am prepared to assume, without deciding, that it can. But
accepting the amendment is not the same as allowing the claim and on the
principal point I would agree with Robins J.A. in the Court of Appeal (at p.
572):  Neither the applicable statutory provisions or the case law to which we
were referred lend support, in my view, to the contention that the Company,
having failed in that course, is now entitled to compel the Minister to
permit it to adopt an approach to its 1974 tax accounting wholly unrelated to
the matters in issue in its appeal from the Minister's reassessment. [Emphasis
added.]  VI Disposition  44.              For
all the foregoing reasons I would dismiss the appeal with costs.                     Appeal
dismissed with costs.                     Solicitors
for the appellant: Miller, Thomson, Sedgewick, Lewis & Healy, Toronto.                     Solicitor
for the respondent: The Minister of Revenue (Ontario), Toronto.      * Estey and Le Dain
JJ. took no part in the judgment.  