 The Queen v. Imperial General Properties Ltd., [1985] 2 S.C.R.
288  Her Majesty The Queen     Appellant;  and  Imperial General Properties Limited (formerly Speedway Realty
Corporation Limited)     Respondent.  File No.: 17627.  1985: April 30; 1985: October 31.  Present: Beetz, Estey, McIntyre, Chouinard, Lamer, Wilson and
La Forest JJ.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal                       Held (McIntyre, Lamer
and Wilson JJ. dissenting): The appeal should be allowed.    Cases cited  By the majority                     Minister of National Revenue v. Dworkin Furs
(Pembroke) Ltd., [1967] S.C.R. 223; Oakfield
Developments (Toronto) Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1971] S.C.R.
1032, considered; Buckerfield’s Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue,
[1965] 1 Ex. C.R. 299; British American Tobacco Co. v. Inland Revenue
Commissioners, [1943] 1 All E.R. 13; Donald Applicators Ltd. v. Minister
of National Revenue, [1971] S.C.R. v, 71 DTC 5202, affirming [1969] 2 Ex.
C.R. 43, 69 DTC 5122; Himley Estates, Ltd. v. Commissioners of Inland
Revenue (1932), 17 T.C. 367, referred to.  By the minority   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income and Corporation
Taxes Act 1970, 1970 (U.K.), c. 10, s. 302(2)(a),
(b), (c).  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, s. 39(4)(a), (b) as amended by
1960 (Can.), c. 43, s. 11(1).                      APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of
Appeal, [1984] 1 F.C. 402, [1983] CTC 27, 83 DTC 5055, dismissing an appeal
from a judgment of the Federal Court Trial Division allowing an appeal from a
decision of the Tax Review Board allowing in part appeals of the Minister's
assessments. Appeal allowed, McIntyre, Lamer and Wilson JJ. dissenting.                     Ian MacGregor
and Harry Erlichman, for the appellant.                     Wolfe D. Goodman, Q.C.,
and Joanne E. Swystun, for the respondent.                     The judgment of Beetz, Estey, Chouinard and La
Forest JJ. was delivered by                      39. ...                     (4)
. . . one corporation is associated with another . . . if
. . .                     (a)
one of the corporations controlled the other,  The issue is simply, what is the applicable rate of taxation of the
respondent? This in turn calls for a determination as to whether the respondent
is associated with another company (Validor Limited) during any of the taxation
years in question.  2.                Immediately prior to the December 1960
reorganization discussed below, the respondent had in its charter but one class
of shares and these shares were issued and outstanding as follows:  The Wingold family group:                                                                    90
shares Meyer Gasner:               10 shares  Gasner was unrelated by blood or marriage to the Wingold family. He was
a friend and business associate of one member of that family. The 100 shares
then outstanding were issued from treasury for the consideration of $1,000 in
total.   Validor (the Wingold family):                                                                 90
common (one vote per share)                                                                              shares  Meyer Gasner:                                                                                      10
common (one vote per share)                                                                              shares  Mr. and Mrs. Gasner:                                                                           80
preference (one vote per share)                                                                              shares  In the result, the Wingold group held common shares according them 90
votes, and the Gasners held 10 common shares and 80 preference shares according
them, in all, 90 votes.  4.                The taxation years in question are 1962,
1963, 1966 and 1967. The shareholdings and voting rights in the respondent
during those years were as set out above. During those years the Board of
Directors of the respondent consisted of four directors. Prior to December 1960
all the directors were members of the Wingold family. From December 1960 to
October 1968 two of the four directors were members of the Wingold family and
the other two were Mr. and Mrs. Gasner. On October 31, 1968, after the fiscal
years in question, all the Gasner shares, common and preference, were
transferred to Validor, the preference shares being transferred for a total
consideration of $88 made up of $80 par value and $8 dividends.  5.                The holders of the preference shares
were entitled to one vote per share and to a fixed cumulative preferential
dividend at the rate of 10 per cent per annum. On the liquidation or winding up
of the company, the holder of a preference share was entitled to recover the
par value of the preference share and any accumulated but unpaid dividends in
priority to the common shares. The preference shareholder, however, was not
entitled to participate in the distribution of any surplus in the corporation.
Perhaps of the greatest significance is the further provision in the corporate
charter of the respondent that the company may be wound up on a resolution for
that purpose supported by 50 per cent of all voting rights in the company. The
effect of this provision is that either the Wingolds (and later, Validor) or
the Gasners could bring about a winding up of the respondent without cause.
Upon the happening of that event, the Gasner family would receive the par value
of their preference shares and any accumulated but unpaid dividends, whereas
the Wingolds, and Meyer Gasner to the extent of his 10 per cent holding in
common shares, would receive all the remaining assets of the respondent. The
significance of this right is emphasized by the fact that the business of the
respondent company was carried on by the Wingold family along with some
seventeen other companies, all of which were amalgamated into the respondent
company in October 1968. Thus the pain normally associated with corporate
liquidation would not be a very significant factor here because the undertaking
carried on by the respondent corporation, less the 10 per cent interest to be
paid out to Meyer Gasner, would remain substantially intact and within the
orbit of the Wingold companies. The Gasners on the other hand, by a liquidation
(apart from the aforementioned 10 per cent common share interest held by Meyer
Gasner), would receive their $80 investment in the preference shares plus any
accrued but unpaid dividends which, in fact, never exceeded $8. It is against
this background of fact that we turn to the law.  6.                The single issue arising on the facts in
this appeal is whether, during the relevant period of time, Validor controlled
the respondent for the purposes of s. 39(4).  7.                It has been long decided that for the
purposes of this section of the Income Tax Act ". . . the
word `controlled' contemplates the right of control that rests in ownership of
such a number of shares as carries with it the right to a majority of the votes
in the election of the Board of Directors"; per Jackett P. in Buckerfield’s
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1965] 1 Ex. C.R. 299, at p. 303,
which was adopted by this Court in Minister of National Revenue v. Dworkin
Furs (Pembroke) Ltd., [1967] S.C.R. 223, at p. 228, per Hall J. Hall
J. at the same time adopted a somewhat broader concept of control from British
American Tobacco Co. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1943] 1 All E.R. 13,
at p. 15, per Viscount Simon L.C.:  The owners of the majority
of the voting power in a company are the persons who are in effective control
of its affairs and fortunes.   9.                In Dworkin, supra, the
Court was required to determine the applicable tax rate for several
corporations, 50 per cent of whose voting shares were held by each of two
groups. In each case neither group had the right to wind up the company or
indeed to do anything else with reference to the affairs of the company or to
its structure without the support of the voting power of the other group. In
some instances there was indeed a casting vote in the president or chairman,
but we are not concerned with that problem here for no person held such a
right. The Court in effect found that, applying the Buckerfield test,
none of these corporations was controlled for the purpose of s. 39(4) because
the governing authority in the corporation was deadlocked as between the two
groups. The Buckerfield test, it should be noted, was applied by Hall J.
at the level of shareholders and not directors (Dworkin, supra,
at p. 236).  10.              In Oakfield Developments (Toronto) Ltd.
v. Minister of National Revenue, [1971] S.C.R. 1032, the Court was faced
with precisely the same issue as in Dworkin. In Oakfield there
were two classes of shares, common and preferred, the voting rights in respect
of which were equal. One group held all the common shares and the other group
held all the preferred shares. The preferred shareholders, as is the case here,
had a priority over common shareholders to the extent of recovery of the
capital represented by the preferred shares on a winding up, together with
accumulated dividends, and a 10 per cent premium. Similarly, either the common
shareholders or the preferred shareholders could, acting by themselves as a
class, bring about the surrender of the corporate charter. On the surrender,
the residual assets, after the prior repayment of capital and premium and
accrued dividends to the preferred shareholders, went to the common
shareholders. There was no question but that the holders of the preferred
shares were unrelated by blood or marriage to the holders of the common shares.
As was the case here, the preferred shareholders received their shares some
years after the corporation was established. Again, in Oakfield, supra,
there was no casting vote in the hands of any officer or shareholder. After
weighing the respective voting and other rights of the common and preferred
shareholders, Judson J., speaking for a unanimous Court, stated at p. 1037:   11.              In determining the proper application of
s. 39(4) to circumstances before a court, the court is not limited to a highly
technical and narrow interpretation of the legal rights attached to the shares
of a corporation. Neither is the court constrained to examine those rights in
the context only of their immediate application in a corporate meeting. It has
long been said that these rights must be assessed in their impact "over
the long run". See Thurlow J. (as he then was) in Donald Applicators
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1969] 2 Ex. C.R. 43, at p. 51,
affirmed by this Court at [1971] S.C.R. v, 71 DTC 5202.  12.              Some comfort was sought by the respondent
here in the judgment in Oakfield, supra, at p. 1037, where Judson
J. stated, in distinguishing the Dworkin case, supra:  ...the voting was split
equally between two groups also, but there was only one class of shares. Each
group had the same de jure rights, and each shareholder was entitled to
share rateably in the profits and assets of the company by dividends or on
winding up. In addition, neither group could itself wind up the company.   13.              As in Oakfield, the continued
existence, after the 1960 reorganization, of the right to terminate the
corporate existence should the presence of the minority common and preference
shareholders become undesirable to the 90 per cent common stockholder, Validor,
is, in my view, the linchpin of the tax plan introduced following the 1960
amendments to the tax statute. Control, in the real sense of the term, was not
surrendered by the Wingolds (and their successor, Validor) in 1960 upon the
issuance to the Gasner group of $80 in preference shares. Accordingly, the
respondent remains controlled by Validor within the meaning of the term as it
is employed by Parliament in s. 39(4).  14.              Counsel for the respondent argued that a
finding on the facts herein that Validor controlled the respondent would amount
to the judicial establishment of a new principle of law which would be
substantially identical to legislation introduced by Parliament in the United
Kingdom, and now found in s. 302(2) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act
1970, 1970 (U.K.), c. 10, as amended. That subsection provides:                     302. ...   (a)  the
greater part of the share capital or issued share capital of the company or of
the voting power in the company; or  (b)  such part
of the issued share capital of the company as would, if the whole of the income
of the company were in fact distributed among the participators (without regard
to any rights which he or any other person has as a loan creditor), entitle him
to receive the greater part of the amount so distributed; or  (c)  such
rights as would, in the event of the winding up of the company or in any other
circumstances, entitle him to receive the greater part of the assets of the
company which would then be available for distribution among the participators.  15.              This provision is much broader in reach
than the principles enunciated with respect to `control' in these reasons.
Furthermore, the respondent submits that this legislation was enacted by the
U.K. Parliament to replace the predecessor provision, in response to the
decision in Himley Estates, Ltd. v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue
(1932), 17 T.C. 367 (C.A.) This may have been the case, although the new
provision first appeared more than thirty years after that judgment. In any
event, no such situation exists in the Canadian context. The approach to
`control' here taken does not involve any departure from prior judicial
pronouncements nor does it involve any `alteration' of the existing statute.
The conclusions reached above merely result from applying existing case law and
existing legislation to the particular facts of the case at bar. The
application of the `control' concept, as earlier enunciated by the courts, to
the circumstances now before the court is, in my view, the ordinary progression
of the judicial process and in no way amounts to a transgression of the
territory of the legislator.  16.              We were also invited by counsel for the
respondent to consider other combinations of share interests and to consider
those combinations in the light of varying economic circumstances of a
taxpayer. We are here concerned only with the corporate structure of the
respondent in the tax years in question. The courts will deal with other
combinations and circumstances if and when those circumstances do indeed come
before the courts in future appeals.  17.              I therefore would allow the appeal and
would restore the order of the Tax Review Board dismissing the appeals of the
respondent from income tax assessments in respect of the taxation years 1962,
1963, 1966 and 1967, with costs in this Court, in the Federal Court of Canada
Trial Division and in the Federal Court of Appeal to the appellant.                      The reasons of McIntyre, Lamer and Wilson JJ. were
delivered by       23.              Both the English cases relied on in Vancouver
Towing dealt with the meaning of the expression "controlling
interest" in the context of the Finance Act of the United Kingdom.
However, it is clear from the judgments that the controlling interest was held
to be the interest of the persons who "controlled" the company's
affairs and that those persons were held in both cases to be the persons who,
having the requisite voting power, could decide how the business of the company
was to be carried on. Viscount Simon in British American Tobacco
concluded at p. 15 that:  The owners of the majority
of the voting power in a company are the persons who are in effective control
of its affairs and fortunes.  Lord Russell of Killowen expressed the same view in Bibby at p.
669:  When the section speaks of
directors having a controlling interest in a company, what it is immediately
concerned with in using the words "controlling interest" is not the
extent to which the individuals are beneficially interested in the profits of
the company as a going concern or in the surplus assets in a winding up, but
the extent to which they have vested in them the power of controlling by votes
the decisions which will bind the company in the shape of resolutions passed by
the shareholders in general meeting. In other words, the test which is to
exclude a company's business from subsect. (9)(a) and include it in (9)(b),
is the voting power of its directors, not their beneficial interest in the
company.   Lord Macmillan agreed with Lord Russell of Killowen, stating at p. 670:                     The
control of a company resides in the voting power of its shareholders. In the
respondent company the ordinary shares alone confer a right to vote at a
general meeting. The directors are the registered proprietors of a majority of
the ordinary shares. It would, therefore, appear to follow that the directors
have a controlling interest in the company.                      What,
my Lords, constitutes a controlling interest in a company? It is the power by
the exercise of voting rights to carry a resolution at a general meeting of the
company. Can the directors of the respondent company by the exercise of their
voting rights carry such a resolution? Yes: for they are the registered holders
of more than half the ordinary shares of the company. Therefore they have a
controlling interest in the company.                     From
this result the Crown seeks an escape by the contention that shares held by a
director as trustee should not be included for the purpose of computing the
controlling interest. In the appellants' argument in this House and in their
formal reasons this absolute veto is qualified by the suggestion that, if the
director has not only the legal ownership of shares but also a predominating
beneficial interest in them, they may be brought into the count.                     My
Lords, in my opinion the Crown's contention cannot be sustained. Those who by
their votes can control the company do not the less control it because they may
themselves be amenable to some external control. Theirs is the control, though
in the exercise of it they may be guilty of some breach of obligation whether
of conscience or of law. It is impossible (an impossibility long recognised in
company law) to enter into an investigation whether the registered holder of a
share is to any and what extent the beneficial owner. A clean cut there must
be.                      Many
approaches might conceivably be adopted in applying the word
"control" in a statute such as the Income Tax Act to a
corporation. It might, for example, refer to control by "management",
where management and the Board of Directors are separate, or it might refer to
control by the Board of Directors. The kind of control exercised by management
officials or the Board of Directors is, however, clearly not intended by
section 39 when it contemplates control of one corporation by another as well
as control of a corporation by individuals (see subsection (6) of section 39).
The word "control" might conceivably refer to de facto
control by one or more shareholders whether or not they hold a majority of
shares. I am of the view, however, that, in section 39 of the Income Tax Act,
the word "controlled" contemplates the right of control that rests in
ownership of such a number of shares as carries with it the right to a majority
of the votes in the election of the Board of Directors. See British American
Tobacco Co. v. I. R. C.... where Viscount Simon L. C., at page 15, says:                     The
owners of the majority of the voting power in a company are the persons who are
in effective control of its affairs and fortunes.  See also Minister of
National Revenue v. Wrights’ Canadian Ropes Ld....per Lord Greene M.R. at
page 118, where it was held that the mere fact that one corporation had less
than 50 per cent of the shares of another was "conclusive" that the
one corporation was not "controlled" by the other within section 6 of
the Income War Tax Act.  25.              In Vineland Quarries and Crushed Stone
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue 66 DTC 5092 (Ex. Ct.), Cattanach J.
considered whether, when making a determination of de jure
control under s. 39(4)(b), the Court could "look through" the
corporate names on the register to find out who actually controlled voting
power. In that case half the shares of the appellant company were owned by one
Sauder and the other half by Bold Investments, all of the shares of which were
owned by one Thornborrow. Half the shares of the Sauder and Thornborrow Company
were owned by Thornborrow and the other half by the McMaster Company, all of
the shares of which were owned by Sauder. The shares of the Verben Company were
held half by Sauder and half by Thornborrow. The Minister assessed the
appellant company, the Sauder and Thornborrow Company and Verben as associated
corporations on the basis that all three companies were controlled by the same
group of persons, namely Sauder and Thornborrow. The appellant's appeal was
dismissed. Cattanach J. noted that in Bibby and British American
Tobacco Ltd. the test of beneficial ownership had been rejected and
concluded at p. 5098:                     In my
view the word "controlled" in section 39(4)(b) contemplates and
includes such a relationship as, in fact, brings about a control by virtue of
majority voting power, no matter how that result is effected, that is, either
directly or indirectly.                                                                      ...                     It
would seem pointless to me to call a halt on finding in the share register of
the appellant company and the share register of Sauder and Thornborrow Limited
that in each instance 50% of the shares are held respectively by Bold
Investments (Hamilton) Limited and McMaster Investments Limited when an
examination of the share register of Bold Investments (Hamilton) Limited and
McMaster Investment Limited reveals that all (or nearly all) the shares in
those companies are held by Vernon Thornborrow and Benjamin Sauder
respectively.                     On the
authority of the British American Tobacco case, I do not think it is
appropriate to end the inquiry after looking at the share registers of the
appellant and Sauder and Thornborrow Limited. It is proper and necessary to look
at the share registers of Bold Investments (Hamilton) Limited and Sauder and
Thornborrow Limited to obtain an answer to the inquiry whether the appellant
and the two other companies are controlled by the same "group of
persons". Where the registered shareholder in the first instance is a body
corporate, you must look beyond the share register.                      The
word controlled as used in this subsection was held by Jackett P. to
mean de jure control and not de facto control and
with this I agree. He said in Buckerfield’s Limited et al v. Minister of
National Revenue...                     Many
approaches might conceivably be adopted in applying the word
"control" in a statute such as the Income Tax Act to a
corporation. It might, for example, refer to control by "management",
where management and the Board of Directors are separate, or it might refer to
control by the Board of Directors. The kind of control exercised by management
officials or the Board of Directors is, however, clearly not intended by
section 39 when it contemplates control of one corporation by another as well
as control of a corporation by individuals (see subsection (6) of section 39).
The word "control" might conceivably refer to de facto
control by one or more shareholders whether or not they hold a majority of
shares. I am of the view, however, that, in section 39 of the Income Tax Act,
the word "controlled" contemplates the right of control that rests in
ownership of such a number of shares as carries with it the right to a majority
of the votes in the election of the Board of Directors. See British American
Tobacco Co. v. I.R.C. (1943) 1 A.E.R. 13 where Viscount Simon L.C., at p.
15, says:  "The owners of the
majority of the voting power in a company are the persons who are in effective
control of its affairs and fortunes."                     See
also Minister of National Revenue v. Wrights’ Canadian Ropes Ld. (1947)
A.C. 109 per Lord Greene M.R. at page 118, where it was held that the mere fact
that one corporation had less than 50 per cent of the shares of another was
"conclusive" that the one corporation was not "controlled"
by the other within section 6 of the Income War Tax Act.                     This
definition of controlled applies to all five appeals.                      It is
clear in the light of Buckerfield that in these circumstances Dworkin
Furs (Pembroke) Limited was not controlled by Dworkin Furs Ltd.  Hall J. noted with respect to one of the corporations that an
arrangement between two 50 per cent shareholders would give one of them de
facto control. As to this he said at p. 229:                     The
arrangement or agreement between Wagenaar and Jager, while it might be said to
give Wagenaar de facto control, did not give him de jure
control, which is the true test....                        I can
deal with the alternative submission by saying that in my opinion de facto
control is not to be taken into account, that de jure control is
what is contemplated by the statute and that in determining association for the
purposes of the statute control itself and not some mere element or fragment of
it is required to support a conclusion that corporations are in fact
associated. This submission, in my opinion, accordingly fails.                                                                      ...                     The
statement of the President of this Court in Buckerfield’s case, (1965) 1
Ex. C.R. 299 at page 303 [64 DTC 5301 at page 5303], when he said "I am of
the view, however, that in section 39 of the Income Tax Act, the word
controlled contemplates the right that rests in ownership of such a number of
shares as carries with it the right to a majority of the votes in the election
of the board of directors" should, I think, be read and understood as
applying to a case where the directors when elected have the usual powers of
directors to guide the destinies of the company.                      I am
not here concerned with the proposition that a corporation is a distinct legal
entity separate from its shareholders, nor with any question of corporate capacity
or power. I readily accept the undisputed proposition that no shareholder, even
though he holds all the shares in a corporation, has any property, legal or
equitable, in the assets of the corporation and the proposition that a
corporation is not, as such, the agent or trustee for its shareholders.                     The
question here is who "controlled" the appellant and Sauder and
Thornborrow Limited. Is it Benjamin Sauder and Vernon Thornborrow, or is it
Benjamin Sauder and Bold Investment (Hamilton) Limited and Vernon Thornborrow
and McMaster Investments Limited.   32.              Quite apart from considerations of equity
and fairness, I believe that the respondent makes a very valid point that a
test of de facto control based on an evaluation of de jure
rights in different corporate contexts and under different economic and
business conditions is fraught with uncertainty. Indeed, it seems perfectly
conceivable to me that, if such a test were adopted, de facto
control could move from one group of shareholders to another depending upon the
condition of the company from time to time.  33.              I would dismiss the appeal with costs.                     Appeal allowed, McIntyre, Lamer and Wilson
JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitor for the appellant: Roger Tassé, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the respondent: Goodman & Carr,
Toronto.   