Supreme Court of Canada Equipements Rocbec Inc. et al. v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 605 Date: 1982-05-10 Les Equipements Rocbec
Inc., Gestion Rocval Inc., Maurice Paiement and Michel Hamel Appellants; and The Minister of
National Revenue Respondent. File No.: 16718. 1982: February 24; 1982: May 10. Present: Laskin C.J. and Ritchie, Dickson,
Beetz, Mclntyre, Chouinard and Lamer JJ. ON APPEAL FROM THE COURT OF APPEAL FOR
QUEBEC Income tax—Authorization of Minister of
National Revenue to enter, search and seize—Approval given by a Superior Court
judge—No right of appeal from approval to Court of Appeal—Income Tax Act,
1970-71-72 (Can.), c. 63, s. 231(4),(5)—Code of Civil Procedure,
art. 26. Goodman v. Rompkey et al., [1982] 1 S.C.R. 589, followed. APPEAL from a judgment of the Court of
Appeal, [1981] C.A. 461, dismissing the appellants’ appeal from a judgment of
the Superior Court, [1980] C.S. 1089, which dismissed a motion to review an
approval given to an authorization to enter and seize pursuant to
s. 231(4) of the Income Tax Act. Appeal dismissed. Bruno Pateras, for the appellants. Jacques Ouellet, Q.C., for the
respondent. English version of the judgment of the Court
delivered by CHOUINARD J.—This appeal raises the same points
of law as Goodman v. Rompkey et al., [1982] 1 S.C.R. 589, judgment which
was rendered concurrently. Aside from the facts, which of course are
different, this appeal only differs from the other in two respects. In the case
at bar, the appellants inscribed in appeal to the Court of Appeal as of right,
rather than with leave of a judge of the Court of Appeal. In addition, the
object of the [Page 606] appeal, instead of being the approval of the
Superior Court judge, is the decision of that judge, who found that he had the
power to review his initial approval and then decided not to review it. The question of whether a judge has the power to
review his own approval is not at issue. There was no cross-appeal. This
question was therefore not before the Court of Appeal, and the latter did not
rule on it. Counsel for the respondent stated that he was not disputing the
power of a judge to review his approval. Rather, to use his own phrase, he made
the best of it. In my opinion, the fact that the appeal relates
to the decision of the judge not to review his initial approval, rather than to
the initial approval itself, in no way alters the points of law to be decided
in disposing of the appeal, as counsel for the appellants admitted at the
hearing in answer to a question from the Court. Whether an approval or, if
applicable, a revised approval is in question, if there is no appeal from the
one there cannot be an appeal from the other. For the reasons given in Goodman, supra, therefore,
I would dismiss this appeal with costs. Appeal dismissed with costs. Solicitors for the appellants: Pateras
& Iezzoni, Montreal. Solicitor for the respondent: Jacques
Ouellet, Montreal.   