  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: Dubé v. Canada, 2011 SCC 39, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 764 Date: 20110722 Docket: 33194  Between: Alexandre
Dubé Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent -
and - Assembly
of Manitoba Chiefs, Grand Council of the
Crees (Eeyou Istchee)/Cree Regional Authority, Assembly
of First Nations, Chiefs of Ontario and Union
of Nova Scotia Indians Interveners  Official
English Translation: Reasons of Deschamps J.  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Deschamps, Fish, Charron, Rothstein
and Cromwell JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 33)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 34 to 41) Cromwell J. (McLachlin C.J. and Binnie,
  Fish and Charron JJ. concurring)  Deschamps J. (Rothstein J. concurring)    Dubé v. Canada, 2011 SCC 39,
[2011] 2 S.C.R. 764 Alexandre
Dubé                                                                                              Appellant v. Her Majesty
The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs, Grand
Council of the Crees (Eeyou Istchee)/Cree Regional
Authority, Assembly of First Nations, Chiefs of
Ontario and Union of
Nova Scotia Indians                                                                      Interveners Indexed as:  Dubé v.
Canada 2011 SCC 39 File No.:  33194. 2010:  May 20; 2011:  July 22. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Deschamps, Fish, Charron,
Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. on
appeal from the federal court of appeal                     Held
(Deschamps and Rothstein JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be
allowed.                     Per
McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Fish, Charron and Cromwell JJ.:  According
to the analytical approach set out in Bastien Estate v. Canada, 2011 SCC
38, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 710, both the substance and the form of the term deposits
provide strong connecting factors between the interest income and a reserve. 
The interest income derives from a contractual obligation entered into on a
reserve with an institution carrying on business on that reserve to pay fixed
sums of money on that reserve.  Focusing on the nature of the taxpayer’s
property, as opposed to the Caisse’s sources of revenue, the generation and
payment of the income is strongly connected to a reserve.  Therefore, the
connecting factors of the place of contracting, the location of the Caisse and
the place of payment should, when considered in light of the type of property,
the nature of the taxation of that property and the purpose of the exemption,
be given considerable weight.                     Per Deschamps and Rothstein JJ.
(dissenting):  The interest accrued under D’s investment
contract cannot be exempt from taxation.  For the exemption provided for in the
Indian Act  to apply, an Indian’s personal property must have concrete
and discernible connections with a reserve.  The
findings of fact of the Tax Court of Canada judge disclose no such connections
in this case.  D did not reside on the reserve, he was unable
to explain where the deposits came from and the judge was unable to establish a
connection between the deposited capital and the transportation company operated
by D.  To grant the exemption in such circumstances
would be tantamount to turning the reserve into a tax haven for Indians engaged
in unspecified for-profit activities off the reserve. Cases Cited By Cromwell J.                     Applied: 
Bastien Estate v. Canada, 2011 SCC 38, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 710, rev’g
2009 FCA 108, 400 N.R. 349; Williams v. Canada, [1992] 1 S.C.R.
877; referred to:  Recalma
v. Canada (1998), 158 D.L.R. (4th) 59, aff’g [1997] 4 C.N.L.R. 272;
Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29; R. v. Lewis, [1996] 1
S.C.R. 921; Union of New Brunswick Indians v. New Brunswick (Minister of
Finance), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 1161; McDiarmid Lumber Ltd. v. God’s Lake
First Nation, 2006 SCC 58, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 846; Mitchell v. Peguis
Indian Band, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 85; Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002
SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235; Lewin v. The Queen, 2001
D.T.C. 479, aff’d 2002 FCA 461, 2003 D.T.C. 5476. By Deschamps J. (dissenting)                     Bastien
Estate v. Canada, 2011 SCC 38, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 710. Statutes and Regulations Cited Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .), s. 12(4) .                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (Nadon, Blais and Pelletier JJ.A.), 2009 FCA 109, 393 N.R. 143, 2009 DTC 5175 (p. 6215),
[2010] 1 C.N.L.R. 249, 315 D.L.R. (4th) 372, [2009] F.C.J. No. 408 (QL), 2009 CarswellNat 2572, affirming a decision of Angers
J., 2007 TCC 393, 2008 D.T.C. 4022, [2007] T.C.J. No. 540 (QL), 2007 CarswellNat 5432.  Appeal allowed, Deschamps and
Rothstein JJ. dissenting.                     François Bouchard, Vassilis Fasfalis and Karine Boies, for the appellant.                     Pierre Cossette and Bernard Letarte, for the respondent.                     Jeffrey D.
Pniowsky and
Sacha R.
Paul, for
the intervener the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs.                     John Hurley and François Dandonneau, for the intervener the Grand
Council of the Crees (Eeyou Istchee)/Cree Regional Authority.                     Maxime Faille and Graham Ragan, for the intervener the
Assembly of First Nations.                     David C.
Nahwegahbow
and James Hopkins, for the intervener the Chiefs
of Ontario.                     Brian A.
Crane, Q.C., and Guy Régimbald, for the intervener the Union
of Nova Scotia Indians.                     The judgment
of McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Fish, Charron and Cromwell JJ. was delivered by                     Cromwell
J. — I.          Overview [1]                             
This appeal was heard at the same time as Bastien
Estate v. Canada, 2011 SCC 38, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 710, the decision in which
is released concurrently.  As in Bastien, the issue here is
whether Mr. Dubé is exempt from income tax otherwise payable on interest which
he earned on term deposits with an on-reserve caisse populaire, a Quebec
savings and credit union. The Tax Court of Canada and the Federal Court of
Appeal held that he was not, and Mr. Dubé challenges that conclusion. [2]                             
Applying the analysis set out in Bastien,
my respectful view is that the Tax Court and the Federal Court of Appeal
erred in both the approach they took and in the result they reached in this
case. I would allow the appeal. II.         Facts, Proceedings and Issue [3]                             
In Bastien, I set out ss. 87(1) (b)
and (2)  of the Indian Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5 , which establish the
exemption from income tax for an Indian with respect to personal property
situated on a reserve. As in Bastien, there is no dispute here that Mr.
Dubé  is an Indian within the meaning of the Indian Act  and that his
interest income is personal property; the only issue is whether it is situated
on a reserve. [4]                             
While the investment vehicles are the same here
as they were in Bastien, there are some factual differences between the
two cases.  In light of the decision in Bastien, the main issue to be
decided in this case is whether these differences result in finding that the
investment income in this case was not situated on a reserve. I will give a
brief overview of the facts and then turn to consider the impact of these
factual differences on the analysis. [5]                             
Mr. Dubé is an Attikamek Indian and has been a
member of the Obedjiwan Reserve since birth. Since the early 1980s, Mr. Dubé
has operated a passenger transport business focusing on transporting persons
from the Obedjiwan Reserve to Roberval for medical treatment.  As there are no
financial institutions on the Obedjiwan Reserve, Mr. Dubé uses the services of
the Caisse populaire Desjardins de Pointe-Bleue (“Caisse”) situated on the
Mashteuiatsh Reserve. [6]                             
During the years under review, Mr. Dubé held
certificates of deposit issued by the Caisse. Interest received was deposited
in a savings account at the Caisse. Mr. Dubé considered this income to be
property exempt from taxation under the Indian Act .  However, the
Minister of National Revenue assessed Mr. Dubé’s income and added his
investment income for each taxation year from 1997 to 2002.  The Minister confirmed
the assessment and Mr. Dubé appealed unsuccessfully to the Tax Court and the
Federal Court of Appeal. [7]                             
There are three potentially relevant factual
differences between this case and Bastien. First, while Mr. Dubé
invested in a caisse populaire that was situated on a reserve, he did
not reside on that reserve and, in fact, the trial judge was not persuaded that
his principal residence was on any reserve. Second, the trial judge was unable
to conclude that a considerable part of the invested capital had been earned on
a reserve. Finally, the trial judge found that Mr. Dubé had not spent his
interest income on a reserve. [8]                             
In the Tax Court (2007 TCC 393, 2008 D.T.C.
4022), Angers J. applied the Federal Court of Appeal’s decision in Recalma
v. Canada (1998), 158 D.L.R. (4th) 59, and upheld the Minister’s
assessment.  He was of the view that the location of investment income should
be analysed by having regard to four factors: its connection to the reserve;
whether it benefited the traditional Native way of life; the risk that taxation
would erode Native property; and the extent to which the investment income was
derived from mainstream economic activity. Angers J. thought that this fourth
factor — whether the income was derived from the economic mainstream — was the
most important. He found that the Caisse earned its income from activities in
the economic mainstream which were not closely connected to the reserve.
Further, Angers J. was not persuaded either that the source of the capital that
was invested in the term deposits or Mr. Dubé’s principal residence was on a
reserve. [9]                             
The Federal Court of Appeal (2009 FCA 109, 393
N.R. 143) dismissed Mr. Dubé’s appeal, essentially for the same reasons given
in Bastien Estate v. Canada, 2009 FCA 108, 400 N.R. 349. [10]                         
The issue, as
noted, is whether Mr. Dubé’s interest income earned on the term deposits with
the Caisse was exempt from income taxation because it was property situated on
a reserve. III.       Analysis [11]                         
In Bastien,
I reviewed the law about how to determine the location of investment income for
the purposes of the s. 87  exemption from taxation. [12]                         
The investment instruments here are of the same
type as in Bastien:  term deposits.  As outlined in more detail in that
decision, both the substance and the form of this investment provide strong
connecting factors between the interest income and a reserve.  The interest
income derives from a contractual obligation entered into on a reserve with an
institution carrying on business on that reserve to pay fixed sums of money on that
reserve.  Focusing on the nature of the taxpayer’s property, as opposed to the
Caisse’s sources of revenue, the generation and payment of the income is
strongly connected to a reserve. As discussed in Bastien, where the
Caisse earns its own revenues is not a factor entitled to much, if any, weight
given the nature of the investment vehicle.  Mr. Dubé, like Mr. Bastien, was a
creditor of the Caisse, not an investor in the wider market beyond the reserve.
In this case, as in Bastien, there is nothing artificial about
this analysis; both the form and the substance of the investment vehicle are
consistent with this approach. Therefore, as in Bastien, the
connecting factors of the place of contracting, the location of the Caisse and
the place of payment, when considered in light of the type of property, the
nature of the taxation of that property and the purpose of the exemption,
suggest that considerable weight should be given to these connecting factors. [13]                         
However, as
discussed in Bastien, all potentially relevant connecting factors
should be weighed.  That brings me to the question of whether the three factual
differences between this case and Bastien, individually or taken
together, lead to a different conclusion concerning the location of the
interest income in this case.  I will discuss each in turn. 1.   Property Situated on a
Reserve [14]                         
As noted, the Caisse issuing the deposit
certificates, while it is located on a reserve, is not located on Mr. Dubé’s
reserve.  Moreover, the trial judge was not persuaded that Mr. Dubé’s principal
residence was on any reserve. In my view, the first fact — that the
Caisse was not on Mr. Dubé’s reserve — does not make the income ineligible for
the exemption and that fact, as well as the fact that his principal residence
was not on a reserve, while potentially relevant, should receive little weight
when considered in light of the type of property, the nature of the taxation in
issue and the purpose of the exemption. The text of the Indian Act  and
the Court’s jurisprudence lead me to this conclusion. [15]                         
The taxation exemption under s. 87(1) (b)
of the Indian Act  refers to an Indian’s personal property situated on
“a” reserve and not to property on his or her “own”  reserve.  The Court has
consistently held that the meaning of the words “on a reserve” should be
approached having regard to their substance and their ordinary, common sense
meaning: Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29, at p. 41; R. v.
Lewis, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 921, at p. 958; Union of New Brunswick Indians v.
New Brunswick (Minister of Finance), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 1161, at paras. 13-14;
McDiarmid Lumber Ltd. v. God’s Lake First Nation, 2006 SCC 58, [2006] 2
S.C.R. 846, at para. 19. The ordinary, common sense meaning of “on a reserve”
does not require that the property be on any particular reserve. As my
colleague Deschamps J. points out, the legislative history of the exemption
provides further support for the view that residence on the reserve where the
property is located is not a requirement. [16]                         
At least two decisions of the Court also support
this interpretation. In Union of New Brunswick Indians, the Court
observed that on-reserve sales to Indians living off-reserve were exempt from
sales tax: para. 43. My reading of this conclusion is that it is not necessary
for an Indian to hold property on his or her own reserve, nor is it necessary
that he or she reside on a reserve, to be eligible for the tax exemption
provided for in s. 87 .  Similarly, in God’s Lake, McLachlin C.J.,
writing for a majority of the Court, noted that a band’s property would be
situated on a reserve and therefore exempt from seizure even if it were on
deposit at a financial institution on a reserve other than the band’s own
reserve: para. 62.  Both of these decisions support the view that the exemption
applies to property on a reserve, not just to property on a particular reserve. [17]                         
In Mitchell v. Peguis Indian Band, [1990]
2 S.C.R. 85, La Forest J. stated at one point in his reasons that the
exemptions in ss. 87  and 89  have “no application” absent “a discernible nexus
between the property concerned and the occupancy of reserve lands by the owner
of that property”: p. 133. In my view, this brief reference cannot be taken as
authority for the view that the Indian claiming the exemption must occupy
reserve lands where the property is situated.  Rather, when read in the context
of the reasons as a whole, the passage in my view was intended simply to
emphasize the need for a strong connection between the property and the
reserve. As noted earlier, imposing a requirement that the Indian claiming the
exemption needs to occupy reserve land where the property is situated would be
inconsistent with the text and legislative history of the provisions as well as
with the subsequent jurisprudence from this Court. [18]                         
I conclude that, having regard to the ordinary
meaning of the words and the Court’s decisions interpreting them, the
expression “situated on a reserve” means any reserve, not just a reserve
where the Indian taxpayer resides or to which community he or she belongs. In
other words, Mr. Dubé’s investment income is not excluded from the exemption
simply because he did not reside on the reserve where the income was paid. [19]                         
That, however, does not end the matter.  We must
still apply the analytical approach set out in Bastien to determine the
location of the property in issue. [20]                         
The residence of the creditor is a potentially
relevant connecting factor and Mr. Dubé does not reside on the reserve where
the term deposits were made and the interest on them was payable. The question
is how much weight this factor should be given, having regard to the type of
property, the nature of the taxation of that property and the purpose of the
exemption.  Taking those factors into account, my view is that Mr. Dubé’s place
of residence should be given little weight in the circumstances of this case. [21]                         
As discussed in Bastien, the type of
property in issue here — income earned on term
deposits — strongly connects it to the Mashteuiatsh Reserve. Also, as in Bastien,
the nature of the taxation of the interest income supports giving considerable
weight to the place of contracting, the place of payment and the location of
the Caisse. As to the purpose of the exemption, the absence of a financial
institution on Mr. Dubé’s own reserve tends to weaken the importance of his own
place of residence as a possible connecting factor:  he would not be able to
invest his capital on his own reserve even if he lived there.  I conclude that
Mr. Dubé’s place of residence should be given little weight in the
circumstances of this case. I note that this view is consistent with the
Federal Court of Appeal’s opinion in Recalma, at para. 12, that, having
regard to the nature of the investment income, less weight is properly accorded
to the residence of the taxpayer. 2.   The Origin of the Capital
Used to Invest in Term Deposits [22]                         
At trial, the appellant was asked about the
source of the funds used to invest in the term deposits. The trial judge found
that the appellant failed to provide a satisfactory answer and held that he was
unable to conclude that the appellant’s business income was the source of the
capital deposited. The trial judge found, at para.
43 :            In addition, the
nature of the appellant’s income is a factor that may create a connection with
the reserve.  In the present case, the income generated by the business is
connected to a reserve because it comes from the activities of his business,
which consists in the provision of a service to Aboriginals by Aboriginals,
with the exception of a few off-reserve services.  Where there is some
difficulty in terms of a connection with the reserve is the fact that the Court
is not able to conclude that the appellant’s business is the source of the
income deposited, which, in turn, generated investment income.  The appellant
was unable to establish the source of a quite considerable sum of money used to
generate the investment income, and consequently I am unable to establish a
connection with a reserve for this part of his investments. [23]                         
This is a finding of fact that will not be
interfered with on appeal, absent a “palpable and overriding error” in the
trial judge’s assessment of the evidence: Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC
33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at para. 10.  I find no such error. [24]                         
The question is whether the absence of a
connection between the bulk of the invested capital and a reserve should be
given significant weight. Williams v. Canada, [1992] 1 S.C.R.
877, could be read as suggesting that it should because, as noted in Bastien,
there are some parallels between the unemployment insurance benefits at issue
in Williams and the interest income in issue here. [25]                         
In Williams, the entitlement to the
benefits in issue was earned through qualifying employment. The Court reasoned
that there was a connection between the receipt of benefits and the place of
the employment which gave rise to those benefits:  pp. 894-95. There is an
analogy between the qualifying employment in Williams and the capital
invested in this case: in Williams, it was the employment that gave rise
to the benefits, and in this case, the capital is what gave rise to the
interest.  On that reasoning, the location where the capital was earned may be
seen as an important connecting factor and one which in this case does not
connect the income to a reserve. [26]                         
The Court in Williams held that the
weight of this factor was strengthened by another consideration: the tax
treatment of premiums and benefits. In general, the benefits are taxable but
the premiums are deductible so that overall, the unemployment insurance scheme
has fairly minimal impact on general tax revenues.  However, in the case of an
Indian who receives tax-exempt employment income, taxing the benefits earned
because of that income does more than merely offset the tax saved by virtue of
the premiums being deductible.  Where the qualifying employment income is tax
exempt, taxing the benefits erodes the entitlements created by the Indian’s
employment on a reserve: pp. 895-96.  Similarly, it could be said in the case
of capital derived from non-taxable sources that to impose tax on the interest
earned by that capital would to some extent erode the entitlement to tax-exempt
capital. [27]                         
These parallels between unemployment insurance
benefits and interest income suggest that some weight should be given to the
absence in this case of a connection between the location where the capital was
accumulated and a reserve.  However,  I am not persuaded that the reasoning
that led the Court in Williams to attach considerable weight to this
factor applies with equal force to the circumstances of this case. There are
three considerations that have led me to this conclusion. [28]                         
First, it is important to take into account the
significant differences between unemployment insurance benefits and interest
income, in other words, to pay careful attention to the type of property. As
Gonthier J. pointed out in Williams, connecting factors may have a
different relevance with regard to unemployment insurance benefits than in
respect of other types of income: p. 892. With respect to unemployment
insurance benefits paid by the federal government, the “traditional test” of
the residence of the debtor was given limited weight because the debtor C the federal Crown C is present throughout Canada, and the purposes behind fixing the situs
of an ordinary person do not apply to the Crown and in particular to the Canada
Employment and Immigration Commission in respect of the receipt of unemployment
insurance benefits: pp. 893-94. In this case, unlike in Williams, the
potentially relevant connecting factors such as the place of contracting, place
of the debtor and place of payment can be applied meaningfully:  the Caisse is
physically present and carries on business on the reserve and the interest
income was payable there.  In short, there is no reason in this case, unlike
the situation in Williams, to discard or give little weight to these
factors which connect the interest income to the Mashteuiatsh Reserve. [29]                         
Second, absent in this case is the symmetry
between the tax implications of premiums and benefits that existed in Williams.
That symmetry was found in Williams to strengthen the connection between
the place of employment and the benefits. The same cannot be said here. The
fact that capital (such as, for example, the aggregation of profits from a
business on the reserve) is accumulated in a way that was exempt from tax bears
no necessary relationship to the tax treatment of investment income arising
from that capital. Moreover, to give determinant weight to this factor in these
circumstances could open the door to tax exemption for investment income
wherever and however earned, provided that the sums invested  had been
accumulated on a tax-exempt basis on a reserve. [30]                         
Finally, in weighing the connecting factors on a
case-by-case basis, it is easy to lose sight of the fact that in particular
categories of cases, one connecting factor may have much more weight than
another: Williams, at p. 892.  Given the strength of the connecting
factors relating to the location where the contract of investment was entered
into, where it was to be performed and the Caisse’s place of business, the fact
that the bulk of the capital invested was not derived from the tax-exempt activities
on a reserve does not in my view appreciably weaken the connection between the
income and the Mashteuiatsh Reserve. 3.         Where the Income Was Spent [31]                         
During the years under assessment, the appellant
lived part time off-reserve and owned real property off-reserve. The trial
judge thus inferred that a portion of the interest income may well have been
spent off a reserve. The location where the investment income is spent was
identified as a potentially relevant factor by the trial judge in Recalma v.
Canada, [1997] 4 C.N.L.R. 272 (T.C.C.), although one entitled to little
weight in determining the location of investment income: pp. 278-79. This
factor has also been considered in subsequent investment income cases:  see,
e.g., Lewin v. The Queen, 2001 D.T.C. 479 (T.C.C.), at paras. 43 and 63,
aff’d 2002 FCA 461, 2003 D.T.C. 5476.  However, in my view, this consideration
is not a relevant connecting factor in determining the location of the income
earned on the term deposits in issue here.  As I see it, the type of property,
the nature of the taxation of that property and the purpose of the exemption do
not support giving any weight to where the money received as interest income is
spent. 4.         Conclusion [32]                         
In this case, as in Bastien, I am of the
view that the relevant factors point to the Mashteuiatsh Reserve as the
location of the interest income, and I would hold that it was situated on a
reserve and entitled to the s. 87  exemption from taxation. IV.       Disposition [33]                         
I would allow the appeal with costs throughout.                     English version
of the reasons of Deschamps and Rothstein JJ. delivered by [35]                         
In the instant case, the findings of fact of the
Tax Court of Canada judge disclose no such concrete connections.  The
connections resulting from the investment contracts that generated the interest
that accrued in the taxation years in issue are of limited weight for the
purposes of the Indian Act .  Under the provision governing the tax
treatment of interest income, the taxpayer must include any accrued interest in
his or her income, even if it has not been paid (Income Tax Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), s. 12(4) ).  For this reason, the
place of payment should be given little weight.  Moreover, any significance of
the place of payment is further reduced by the fact that the taxpayer can have
access to his or her money without going to the reserve. [36]                         
The place at which a contract was signed is a
factor that cannot be considered in isolation for the purposes of the Indian
Act , since the parties would have been free to choose a place
without regard to any objective requirement that it be connected with a
reserve.  The factors established by the Court must not be open to contractual
manipulation in ways that are inconsistent with the purpose of the exemption.  Experience
has shown that it is easy for taxpayers to set up contractual frameworks that
create legal relationships that are not based on real requirements.  This is
why it is necessary to identify concrete and discernible connections with a
reserve. [37]                         
The creditor’s place of residence might be of
some relevance, but it cannot be determinative, since this factor ceased to be
a condition of eligibility for the exemption more than a century ago. [40]                         
To grant the exemption in such circumstances
would be tantamount to turning the reserve into a tax haven for Indians engaged
in unspecified for-profit activities off the reserve. [41]                         
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.                     Appeal
allowed with costs, Deschamps and Rothstein JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors
for the appellant:  Cain Lamarre Casgrain Wells, Chicoutimi.                     Solicitor
for the respondent:  Attorney General of Canada, Montréal.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs:  Thompson Dorfman
Sweatman, Winnipeg.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Grand Council of the Crees (Eeyou Istchee)/Cree Regional
Authority:  Gowling Lafleur Henderson, Montreal.                     Solicitors
for the interveners the Assembly of First Nations and the Union of Nova Scotia
Indians:  Gowling Lafleur Henderson, Ottawa.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Chiefs of Ontario:  Nahwegahbow, Corbiere
Genoodmagejig, Rama.  