SCC Case Information: 35590   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: Canada
  (National Revenue) v. Thompson, 2016 SCC 21, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 381 Appeal
  heard: December 4, 2014 Judgment
  rendered: June 3, 2016 Docket: 35590  Between: Minister
of National Revenue Appellant  and  Duncan
Thompson Respondent  - and -  Federation
of Law Societies of Canada, Canadian
Bar Association and Criminal Lawyers’ Association Interveners   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Rothstein,[*] Cromwell, Karakatsanis,
Wagner and Gascon JJ.  Joint Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 42) Wagner and Gascon JJ. (McLachlin C.J. and
  Abella, Cromwell and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)     Canada
(National Revenue)
v. Thompson,
2016 SCC 21, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 381 Minister of National Revenue                                                                        Appellant v. Duncan Thompson                                                                                      Respondent and Federation of Law Societies of Canada, Canadian Bar Association and Criminal Lawyers’ Association                                                                   Interveners Indexed as: Canada (National
Revenue) v. Thompson 2016 SCC 21 File No.: 35590. 2014: December 4; 2016: June 3. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Rothstein,[†] Cromwell, Karakatsanis,
Wagner and Gascon JJ. on appeal from the federal court of appeal                     Held: The appeal should be allowed solely to set aside
the Federal Court of Appeal’s disposition. The Minister’s application for a
compliance order is dismissed. Cases Cited Statutes and Regulations Cited Act to amend the Income Tax Act, S.C.
1956, c. 39, s. 28. Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 1 , 8 . Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act, S.C. 2000, c. 5, ss. 12  [am. 2010, c. 23,
s. 83], 12.1 [ad. idem]. Authors Cited Canada. House of Commons. House of Commons Debates,
vol. III, 3rd Sess., 26th Parl., June 25, 1965, p. 2875. Driedger, Elmer A. Construction of Statutes, 2nd ed.
Toronto: Butterworths, 1983. Sullivan, Ruth. Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes, 6th
ed. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2014.                     Christopher Rupar and Daniel Bourgeois, for the appellant.                     Michael A. Feder and Emily MacKinnon, for the respondent.                     John B. Laskin and Yael S. Bienenstock, for the intervener the
Federation of Law Societies of Canada.                     Mahmud Jamal, Pooja Mihailovich (née Samtani) and W. David Rankin, for the intervener the
Canadian Bar Association.                     Michal Fairburn and Carlo Di Carlo, for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     Wagner and Gascon JJ. — I.             
Overview [1]                             
In the course of an audit and an enforcement
action pursuant to the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”),
the Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”) has broad powers to require individuals to
provide the appellant, the Minister of National Revenue (“Minister”), with
information and documents relating to a particular taxpayer. Information that
is protected by solicitor-client privilege is normally exempt from disclosure.
For the purposes of the ITA , however, the definition of
“solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  expressly excludes “an accounting
record of a lawyer”. The Minister argues that this specific exclusion exempts a
lawyer’s accounting records from the protection of solicitor-client privilege
and means that the lawyer can be compelled to disclose them. The Minister has
taken action against the respondent, Duncan Thompson, to obtain accounting
records relating to his law practice. Mr. Thompson argues that the records in
question are privileged. [2]                             
The Federal Court concluded that the definition
of “solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  ITA  validly abrogates the
privilege in respect of Mr. Thompson’s accounting records, and ordered him to
comply with the Minister’s request. The Federal Court of Appeal disagreed, finding
that, s. 232(1)  notwithstanding, solicitor-client privilege can attach to
individual documents and to client names contained in those documents. It
therefore sent the matter back to the Federal Court to have it determine
whether that was actually so in this case. [3]                             
In our view, Parliament’s intention to exclude
“an accounting record of a lawyer” from the scope of solicitor-client privilege
in s. 232(1)  is clear and unequivocal. The language used in the exception, the
legislative history of the definition and the context of the scheme in which
this exception appears lead us to conclude that Parliament’s goal in defining
“solicitor-client privilege” as it did in the ITA  was to permit the
disclosure of otherwise confidential information to the Minister. At first
glance, therefore, Mr. Thompson cannot refuse to disclose his accounting
records on the basis that the information contained in them might be
privileged. [4]                             
However, in the companion appeal to this case, Canada
(Attorney General) v. Chambre des notaires du Québec, 2016 SCC 20, [2016]
1 S.C.R. 336, we conclude that this exception is
constitutionally invalid because it violates s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms . The Minister’s request for Mr. Thompson’s documents is
consequently now foreclosed.  In the end, we would allow this appeal solely to
set aside the Federal Court of Appeal’s disposition. Given the circumstances,
we would dismiss the Minister’s application. II.          
Facts [5]                             
Mr. Thompson is a lawyer from a small Alberta
town against whom the Minister took enforcement action under the ITA . [7]                             
The details of the scheme under which the CRA
may request such information from taxpayers and third parties are laid out in
ss. 231.2  and 231.7  ITA . We provide a more thorough description of the
procedure by which the CRA can demand disclosure by sending a person a
“requirement to provide documents or information” in our reasons in Chambre
des notaires. In the instant case, we will focus on the requirement scheme
as a whole and how it accounts for documents and information that are protected
by solicitor-client privilege. [8]                             
When the CRA sends a requirement to a taxpayer
or a third party in order to obtain the disclosure of documents and the
recipient of the requirement does not comply with it, the Minister may, by way
of a summary procedure established in s. 231.7(1)  ITA , apply to a judge
of the Federal Court for an order that the recipient provide the documents in
question. Section 231.7(1) (b) specifies that the judge may make such an order
only if he or she is satisfied that “the information or document is not
protected from disclosure by solicitor-client privilege (within the meaning of
subsection 232(1) )”. [9]                             
Section 232(1)  ITA  is a general
definition provision that states: 232 (1) In this section,  . . .  solicitor-client
privilege means the right, if any, that a
person has in a superior court in the province where the matter arises to
refuse to disclose an oral or documentary communication on the ground that the
communication is one passing between the person and the person’s lawyer in
professional confidence, except that for the purposes of this section an
accounting record of a lawyer, including any supporting voucher or cheque,
shall be deemed not to be such a communication. Thus, where the Minister
applies for a compliance order under s. 231.7(1) , the party against whom the
order is sought must prove to the judge hearing the application that the
requested documents fall within this definition of “solicitor-client privilege”
in order to have them exempted from disclosure. [10]                         
In the course of its enforcement action against
Mr. Thompson, the CRA sent him a requirement pursuant to s. 231.2(1)  ITA ,
requesting various documents pertaining to his personal finances as well as his
current accounts receivable listing. Mr. Thompson provided the CRA with certain
material, but the CRA determined that he had complied with the requirement only
in part, particularly given that he had provided no details about his accounts
receivable aside from a general indication of the balance owing. Mr. Thompson
claimed that further details with respect to his accounts receivable, such as
the names of his clients, were protected by solicitor-client privilege and were
therefore exempt from disclosure. [11]                         
The Minister applied to the Federal Court for a
compliance order pursuant to s. 231.7  ITA . Mr. Thompson objected to the
issuance of this order in regard to his accounts receivable, reiterating that
the information being sought was protected by solicitor-client privilege. Mr.
Thompson filed a notice of constitutional question, asking the Federal Court to
rule on whether the ITA , and in particular s. 231.2(1) , may be
interpreted and applied such that a lawyer on whom the CRA has served a
requirement must divulge privileged information about his or her clients. It
was Mr. Thompson’s position that the definition of “solicitor-client privilege”
in s. 232(1)  could not be interpreted as abrogating this privilege in relation
to a particular class of documents, in this case that of a lawyer’s accounting records.
In addition, Mr. Thompson claimed that the requirement issued by the CRA
constituted an unreasonable search or seizure contrary to s. 8  of the Charter . III.       
Judicial History A.          
Federal Court (Russell J.) [12]                         
Russell J. found that the law does not support a
view that client names and financial information can be shielded from
disclosure to the Minister on the basis of solicitor-client privilege (No.
T-1180-12, October 31, 2012). He explained that the CRA was seeking not
information as to the content of solicitor-client communications but, rather,
financial records that set out Mr. Thompson’s payables and receivables. Such
records are included in the “accounting record[s]” that s. 232(1)  ITA 
excludes from the application of solicitor-client privilege. Although client
names contained within them might be privileged in certain situations, Mr.
Thompson had failed to establish that this was actually the case for any of the
documents being sought such that the client names in question had to be
excluded from disclosure. Nor had he established a breach of s. 8  of the Charter . B.           
Federal Court of Appeal (Pelletier, Trudel and
Mainville JJ.A.) [13]                         
The Federal Court of Appeal allowed Mr.
Thompson’s appeal in part (2013 FCA 197, 448 N.R. 339). It held that although
accounting records generally constitute evidence of a transaction or an act
rather than a privileged communication and are therefore not normally capable
of revealing the history of a file, there may be rare circumstances in which
such records do contain privileged information, possibly with respect to
clients’ names. Where that is the case, it will be incumbent on the court asked
to grant the Minister a compliance order under s. 231.7  ITA  to verify
the records in question before ordering an individual to disclose any information. [14]                         
The Federal Court of Appeal held that although
the Federal Court judge had been right to conclude that there is no blanket
privilege applicable to all accounting records, he had failed to consider
whether solicitor-client privilege might apply to any individual client names
in the accounts receivable listing. If that were the case, the clients whose
names were in fact privileged would be owed the opportunity to assert and
defend this privilege, and Mr. Thompson should be given the opportunity to assert
the privilege on their behalf at the hearing for a compliance order. The
Federal Court of Appeal consequently sent the matter back to the Federal Court
for a new hearing to establish whether any client names in Mr. Thompson’s
accounts receivable listing were protected by solicitor-client privilege.
Moreover, it dismissed Mr. Thompson’s Charter  arguments on the basis
that there was no breach of s. 8 , given that a class privilege does not attach
to accounting records and client names. IV.       
Issues [15]                         
The Minister sought leave to appeal the Federal
Court of Appeal’s decision to this Court. The Minister did not raise the s. 8  Charter 
issue as a ground of appeal, but focused solely on the proper interpretation of
s. 232(1)  ITA . Mr. Thompson filed a motion to state a constitutional
question, but the motion was dismissed. Accordingly, the constitutional
argument that had been raised by Mr. Thompson did not constitute a ground of
appeal in this Court, and the constitutional validity of ss. 231.2 , 231.7  and
232(1)  ITA  is addressed only in the companion appeal, Chambre des
notaires. The sole issue raised in this appeal is the statutory
interpretation of the purported exclusion of lawyers’ accounting records from
the protection of “solicitor-client privilege”, as that term is defined in s.
232(1) . V.          
Analysis A.          
Solicitor-Client Privilege [16]                         
Given that this appeal turns on the
interpretation of a statutory provision purporting to define solicitor-client
privilege in a particular manner for the purposes of the ITA , it will be
important to make some preliminary remarks about the nature of this privilege
as developed by the courts. [17]                         
Solicitor-client privilege has evolved from
being treated as a mere evidentiary rule to being considered a rule of
substance and, now, a principle of fundamental justice (Foster
Wheeler Power Co. v. Société intermunicipale de gestion et d’élimination des
déchets (SIGED) inc., 2004 SCC 18, [2004] 1
S.C.R. 456, at para. 34; Lavallee, Rackel & Heintz v.
Canada (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 61, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 209, at para. 49; Maranda
v. Richer, 2003 SCC 67, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 193, at para. 11; Solosky v. The
Queen, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 821, at p. 839; Descôteaux v. Mierzwinski,
[1982] 1 S.C.R. 860, at p. 875; Canada (Attorney General) v. Federation of
Law Societies of Canada, 2015 SCC 7, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 401, at paras. 8 and
84). The obligation of confidentiality that springs from the right to
solicitor-client privilege is necessary for the preservation of a lawyer-client
relationship that is based on trust, which in turn is indispensable to the continued
existence and effective operation of Canada’s legal system. It ensures that
clients are represented effectively and that the legal information required for
that purpose can be communicated in a full and frank manner (R. v. Gruenke,
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 263, at p. 289 . . .).  (Foster
Wheeler, at para. 34) [18]                         
In Descôteaux, one of the earliest cases in which this Court acknowledged that
solicitor-client privilege involves a substantive right, Lamer J., as he then
was, elaborated on the various aspects of the privilege as follows: 1.   The confidentiality of communications between solicitor and client
may be raised in any circumstances where such communications are likely to be
disclosed without the client’s consent.  2.   Unless the law provides otherwise, when and to the extent that the
legitimate exercise of a right would interfere with another person’s right to
have his communications with his lawyer kept confidential, the resulting
conflict should be resolved in favour of protecting the confidentiality.  3.   When the law gives someone the authority to do something which, in
the circumstances of the case, might interfere with that confidentiality, the
decision to do so and the choice of means of exercising that authority should
be determined with a view to not interfering with it except to the extent
absolutely necessary in order to achieve the ends sought by the enabling
legislation.  4.   Acts providing otherwise in situations under paragraph 2 and
enabling legislation referred to in paragraph 3 must be interpreted
restrictively. [p. 875] The third and fourth
elements of this substantive rule have together been interpreted to support the
proposition that an intrusion on solicitor-client privilege must be permitted
only if doing so is absolutely necessary to achieve the ends of the enabling
legislation (Goodis v. Ontario (Ministry of Correctional Services), 2006
SCC 31, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 32, at para. 24). [19]                         
Although Descôteaux appears to limit the
protection of the privilege to communications between lawyers and their
clients, this Court has since rejected a category-based approach to
solicitor-client privilege that distinguishes between a fact and a
communication for the purpose of establishing what is covered by the privilege
(Maranda, at para. 30). While it is true that not everything that
happens in a solicitor-client relationship will be a privileged communication,
facts connected with that relationship (such as the bills of account at issue
in Maranda) must be presumed to be privileged absent evidence to the
contrary (Maranda, at paras. 33-34; see also Foster Wheeler, at
para. 42). This rule applies regardless of the context in which it is invoked (Foster
Wheeler, at para. 34; R. v. Gruenke, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 263, at p.
289). [20]                         
In the case at bar, therefore, we cannot conclude at the outset that Mr.
Thompson’s communications with his clients are distinct from financial records
that disclose various facts about their relationships in order to determine
whether solicitor-client privilege covers those facts. Absent proof to the
contrary, all of this information is prima facie privileged, and
therefore confidential. [21]                         
With these general principles in mind, we will now turn to the
interpretation of the purported exception to “solicitor-client privilege”
contained in the definition of that term in s. 232(1)  ITA . B.           
Blood Tribe Criteria for Statutory Interpretation [22]                         
The Minister contends that s. 232(1)  ITA ,
particularly when read in conjunction with ss. 231.2  and 231.7 , evinces a clear
and unambiguous parliamentary intent to abrogate solicitor-client privilege
over information found in “accounting record[s] of a lawyer”. Mr. Thompson
disputes this position. The parties’ disagreement turns primarily on whether,
as is required by this Court’s decision in Canada (Privacy Commissioner) v.
Blood Tribe Department of Health, 2008 SCC 44, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 574, an
appropriately restrictive interpretation of the impugned definition can lead to
the conclusion that the legislature intended to define solicitor-client
privilege so as to exclude a class of documents from its protection. [23]                         
Blood Tribe was a
case that involved statutory interpretation. The issue was whether s. 12  of the
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act, S.C. 2000,
c. 5  (“PIPEDA ”), could be read so as to permit the Privacy Commissioner
to have access, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the PIPEDA ,
to information that would otherwise be protected by solicitor-client privilege.
Section 12  (now s. 12.1 ) gave the Privacy Commissioner the authority to compel
a person to produce any records the Commissioner considered necessary for the
investigation of a complaint “in the same manner and to the same extent as a
superior court of record”, and “whether or not [they are] or would be
admissible in a court of law”. The Commissioner argued that this language
should be read as permitting her to have access to documents which would
otherwise be confidential by virtue of being privileged. [24]                         
Binnie J., writing for the Court, held that such
an interpretation of s. 12  was untenable in light of the shift of
solicitor-client privilege from being merely a rule of evidence to becoming one
of substance (Blood Tribe, at para. 2). He explained that legislative language that may (if
broadly construed) allow incursions on solicitor-client privilege must be
interpreted restrictively.  The privilege cannot be abrogated by
inference.  Open-textured language governing production of documents will
be read not to include solicitor-client documents: Lavallee, at para.
18; Pritchard, at para. 33.  This case falls squarely within that
principle. [Emphasis deleted; para. 11.] This conclusion aligned
perfectly with the Court’s earlier pronouncement in Pritchard v. Ontario
(Human Rights Commission), 2004 SCC 31, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 809, that
“[l]egislation purporting to limit or deny solicitor-client privilege will be
interpreted restrictively” and that this privilege may not be abrogated by
inference (para. 33). [25]                         
The parties therefore agree that it is only
where legislative language evinces a clear intent to abrogate solicitor-client
privilege in respect of specific information that a court may find that the
statutory provision in question actually does so. Such an intent cannot simply
be inferred from the nature of the statutory scheme or its legislative history,
although these might provide supporting context where the language of the provision
is already sufficiently clear. If the provision is not clear, however, it must
not be found to be intended to strip solicitor-client privilege from
communications or documents that this privilege would normally protect. [26]                         
In contrast to s. 12  of the PIPEDA , which
did not explicitly grant the Privacy Commissioner the power to obtain and
review documents in respect of which solicitor-client privilege was claimed,
the definition of “solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  ITA  is
unequivocal. It lays out what is protected when the privilege is invoked to
oppose a compliance order under s. 231.7 . The definition includes the words “except
that for the purposes of this section an accounting record of a lawyer,
including any supporting voucher or cheque, shall be deemed not to be . . .  a
communication” covered by solicitor-client privilege, which means that
accounting records are explicitly excluded from the scope of the privilege for
the purpose of the ITA . [27]                         
Consequently, once a court has determined that a
document over which solicitor-client privilege is being asserted is an
accounting record of a lawyer, s. 232(1)  is clearly intended to bypass the
traditional protection associated with solicitor-client privilege, which means
that the document can then be seized and inspected by the Minister. We will
disregard for now the issue of whether this definition of the privilege
corresponds to the broader scope of the right that has been established in the
jurisprudence since s. 232(1)  (then s. 126A(1) of the Income Tax Act,
R.S.C. 1952, c. 148) was amended in 1965 (An Act to amend the Income Tax Act
and the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act, S.C. 1965, c. 18, s.
26). Whether Parliament may define what is privileged generally, in light of
the evolving and expanded understanding of this right, is a different question,
to which we will return below. [28]                         
The legislative history of s. 232(1)  lends
further support to an interpretation to the effect that Parliament intended to
exempt a lawyer’s accounting records from the protection of solicitor-client
privilege. Parliament introduced a general definition of “solicitor-client
privilege” into the ITA  by enacting s. 126A(1)  (now s. 232(1) ) in 1956 (An
Act to amend the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1956, c. 39, s. 28). At that time,
the definition was functionally the same as the one now found in s. 232(1) , but
without the accounting records exception: (e)     “solicitor-client privilege” means the right, if any,
that a person has in a superior court in the province where the matter arises
to refuse to disclose an oral or documentary communication on the ground that
the communication is one passing between him and his lawyer in professional
confidence. [29]                         
However, in the 1962 case In re Income Tax
Act, [1963] C.T.C. 1 (“Brown”), leave to appeal to this Court
refused, [1965] S.C.R. 84, the British Columbia Supreme Court concluded that to
the extent that trust account records and other accounting or bookkeeping
records maintained by lawyers might contain privileged information, the
Minister could not obtain them by means of an order made by a court under what
was then s. 126A(5)(b) (pp. 5-7). Sullivan J. pointed out that “[i]f it
were the intention of Parliament to make all records of a solicitor available
to inspection by taxation people then it would be a simple matter to so provide
by appropriate legislation” (p. 5). [30]                         
Not too long after that, in 1965, Parliament
amended the definition of “solicitor-client privilege” to introduce the current
exemption for accounting records. When asked to explain why the exemption was
being added, the Minister of Finance stated: “. . . it became evident as a
result of a court decision that the definition of solicitor-client privilege
was deficient” (House of Commons Debates, vol. III, 3rd Sess., 26th
Parl., June 25, 1965, at p. 2875). It is thus difficult to consider the
intention behind this amendment to be anything other than to address the
refusal in Brown to require the disclosure of privileged information by
enacting an express legislative provision permitting such a disclosure. [31]                         
We would add that to find that s. 232(1)  ITA 
is not indicative of a clear legislative intent to exempt certain documents
from the protection of solicitor-client privilege would be to deprive the ITA ’s
definition of this privilege of any functional meaning. The ITA creates
a self-assessment system which “depends for its success upon the taxpayers’
honesty and integrity in preparing their returns. While most taxpayers
undoubtedly respect and comply with the system, the facts of life are that
certain persons will attempt to take advantage of the system and avoid their
full tax liability” (R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627,
at p. 648). A system that enables the Minister to have access to books and records
in relation to a taxpayer’s personal and business affairs is thus crucial to
the Minister’s ability to verify the veracity of a taxpayer’s return (Redeemer
Foundation v. Canada (National Revenue), 2008 SCC 46, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 643,
at para. 20). Yet as the Minister points out, excluding some of these records
from the Minister’s scrutiny could enable lawyers and their clients to hide
misreporting and tax evasion behind the veil of solicitor-client privilege.
According to the Minister, access to the records, such as client names, is
necessary to effectively determine their financial liability to the taxpayer
for collection purposes. [32]                         
It is thus clear to us that if Parliament’s
intent in defining “solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  ITA  as it
has were not to exempt accounting records from the protection of this
privilege, that definition and the apparent exemption would essentially serve
no purpose. This would violate the presumption against tautology, according to
which “[i]t is presumed that the legislature avoids superfluous or meaningless
words, that it does not pointlessly repeat itself or speak in vain” (R.
Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes (6th ed. 2014), at p.
211, citing Attorney General of Quebec v. Carrières Ste-Thérèse Ltée, [1985]
1 S.C.R. 831, at p. 838). Instead, every word has “a
specific role to play in advancing the legislative purpose” (Sullivan, at p.
211). Given that legislation must be read in its entire context and having
regard to the legislative purpose and scheme (E. A. Driedger, Construction
of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983), at p. 87; Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The
Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at p. 578), it is at the very least important
to ensure that our characterization of the legislative intent underlying the definition
of solicitor-client privilege in s. 232(1)  is not incompatible with the purpose
of the Minister’s audit and enforcement powers as they are structured in the ITA . [33]                         
If we consider the express language of the
definition of “solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  together with the
provision’s legislative history, Parliament’s intent to define this privilege
so as to exclude a lawyer’s accounting records from its protection could hardly
be clearer. Even the most restrictive interpretation of the provision leads to
this conclusion, as the definition in s. 232(1)  must be read in tandem with the
ITA ’s other provisions relating to the production of documents. In this
regard, we note that, contrary to what the intervener the Canadian Bar
Association suggests, it would be inappropriate to read the definition so
restrictively as to conclude that it can apply only to documents that are
already not protected by solicitor-client privilege. As we explained above,
such an interpretation would disregard the legislative intent behind the
definition and render it functionally meaningless. [34]                         
In short, in contrast to how the statutory
provision at issue in Blood Tribe could be interpreted, the only
interpretation of the definition of “solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1) 
that takes account of the history of the provision and the purpose of the
broader scheme into which it is incorporated is that the provision is intended
to permit the Minister to have access to lawyers’ accounting records even if
they contain otherwise privileged information. C.           
Nature of the Remedy [35]                         
That said, this case arises in unusual
circumstances. Whereas Mr. Thompson’s challenge to the Minister’s power to
require disclosure is based solely on the argument that the definition of
“solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  does not satisfy the Blood Tribe
criteria, in the companion appeal, Chambre des notaires, the validity of
this definition is being challenged on constitutional grounds. As we mentioned
above, Parliament’s intent and its ability, in constitutional terms, to define
solicitor-client privilege in a particular way for the purposes of the
administration of the ITA  are not necessarily equivalent. The question
whether a legislature can, simply by using clear and unambiguous language,
abrogate this privilege over a class of documents in a scheme in which the
seizure of such documents is permitted cannot be answered on the basis of Blood
Tribe alone. When a seizure is involved, s. 8  of the Charter  comes
into play. Thus, in Chambre des notaires, we conclude that the purported
abrogation in s. 232(1)  is constitutionally invalid because it permits the
state to obtain information that would otherwise be privileged to a far greater
extent than is absolutely necessary for the administration of the ITA . [36]                         
It is equally important to note that in Chambre
des notaires we hold that the ITA ’s requirement scheme, insofar as
it applies to lawyers and notaries, infringes s. 8  of the Charter  and
that the infringement cannot be justified under s. 1 . Given that the scheme is
invalid to that extent, the request made to Mr. Thompson under that scheme is
now foreclosed. [37]                         
It is possible that Parliament will amend ss.
231.2  and 231.7  to remedy the constitutional defects of the requirement scheme.
Even if it does not do so, however, there are other situations in which courts
could be asked to determine whether certain information is covered by solicitor-client
privilege and, if they find that the privilege does not apply, to order that
the information be disclosed. As a result, we find that it will be helpful in
the instant case to address the appropriateness of the remedy granted to Mr.
Thompson by the Federal Court of Appeal. [38]                         
In light of our conclusions in Chambre des
notaires that the purported exception in the
definition of “solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  ITA  is
constitutionally invalid and that any court order for the disclosure of documents
cannot be taken to include privileged information, we are of the view that the
Federal Court of Appeal acted appropriately in sending Mr. Thompson’s case back
to the Federal Court to have it determine whether any information in the
accounting records sought by the CRA was privileged and therefore exempt from
disclosure. [39]                         
Still, solicitor-client privilege is a right
that belongs to, and can only be waived by, a client of a legal professional (Lavallee,
at para. 39; Chambre des notaires, at para. 45). In both Lavallee,
at para. 40, and Federation of Law Societies of Canada, at paras. 48-49,
this Court noted that a lawyer is not the alter ego of his or her client, so it
is the client and not the lawyer who must be given an opportunity to assert the
privilege over the information sought by the state. A court must act to
facilitate the client’s ability to do so. [40]                         
The Federal Court of Appeal’s order would
therefore have been insufficient to safeguard the rights of Mr. Thompson’s
clients. In order to properly afford clients the opportunity to raise their
right to solicitor-client privilege, they must be notified when a court
considers making any order requiring the disclosure of what might be privileged
information. They must also be afforded the opportunity to decide whether they
wish to contest the disclosure of the information requested by the state, and
if they do wish to do so, they must be permitted to make submissions in that
regard on their own behalf. Thus, should Parliament choose to modify the
existing ITA  disclosure scheme in order to remedy its constitutional
defects, a court assessing a request for access to presumptively privileged
information will need to ensure that the clients whose information is being
sought can participate in the process of asserting the protections that apply
to them. VI.       
Conclusion [41]                         
Given our holding in Chambre des notaires that
the exception contained in the definition of “solicitor-client privilege” in s.
232(1)  ITA  is constitutionally invalid, the Minister’s request that Mr.
Thompson be compelled to disclose the documents he has been withholding must be
rejected. The information contained in those documents is presumptively
privileged, and its disclosure cannot be required unless a court first
determines whether solicitor-client privilege actually applies. Because we
conclude in Chambre des notaires that the ITA ’s requirement
scheme is unconstitutional insofar as it applies to lawyers like Mr. Thompson,
it is unnecessary to return the matter to the Federal Court. [42]                         
In light of the above, we would allow the appeal
solely to set aside the Federal Court of Appeal’s order, and we would dismiss
the Minister’s application. On the basis of this outcome, we would award costs
to Mr. Thompson throughout.                     Appeal
allowed.                     Solicitor for the
appellant: Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the
respondent: McCarthy Tétrault, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Federation of Law Societies of Canada: Torys, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Canadian Bar Association: Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt,
Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association: Stockwoods, Toronto.  [*] Rothstein J. took no part in the judgment. [†] Rothstein J. took no part in the judgment.  