  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation:
  Canada v. GlaxoSmithKline Inc., 2012 SCC 52, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 3 Date:
  20121018 Docket:
  33874  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant/Respondent
on cross-appeal and GlaxoSmithKline
Inc. Respondent/Appellant
on cross-appeal   Coram:  McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 77) Rothstein J. (McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps, Abella,
  Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)     Canada v. GlaxoSmithKline Inc., 2012 SCC 52,
[2012] 3 S.C.R. 3 v. Indexed as:  Canada v. GlaxoSmithKline Inc. 2012 SCC 52 File No.:  33874. 2012:  January 13; 2012:  October
18. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps, Abella, Rothstein,
Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the federal court of appeal                     Between
1990 and 1993, the respondent, GlaxoSmithKline Inc. (“Glaxo Canada”), purchased
ranitidine, the active pharmaceutical ingredient in the brand name anti-ulcer
drug Zantac, from Adechsa S.A., a related non-resident company, for
between $1,512 and $1,651 per kilogram.  During the same period, two Canadian
generic pharmaceutical companies, Apotex Inc. and Novopharm Ltd., purchased
ranitidine from other sources for use in their generic anti-ulcer drugs for
between $194 and $304 per kilogram from arm’s length suppliers.                     A
Licence Agreement conferred rights and benefits on Glaxo Canada and a Supply Agreement
set the transfer prices of ranitidine.  The combined effect of the Licence and
Supply agreements enabled Glaxo Canada, among other things, to purchase ranitidine,
put it in a delivery mechanism, and market it under the trademark Zantac.                     The
appellant, the Minister of National Revenue, reassessed Glaxo Canada for the
taxation years 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993, pursuant to the then applicable
s. 69(2) of the Act (now s. 247(2)) on the basis that the prices it paid
for ranitidine were greater than an amount that would have been reasonable in
the circumstances had they been dealing at arm’s length.  Glaxo Canada appealed
to the Tax Court of Canada, where, with one minor revision, the reassessment
was upheld on the basis that the Licence and Supply agreements were to be
considered independently.  The Federal Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and remitted
the matter back to the Tax Court for redetermination of the “reasonable amount”
payable for Glaxo Canada’s ranitidine transactions.                     Held:  The appeal and cross-appeal should be
dismissed.                     Section 69(2)
requires the court to determine whether the transfer price was greater than the
amount that would have been reasonable in the circumstances, had the parties
been dealing at arm’s length.  If transactions other than the purchasing
transaction are relevant in determining this question, they must not be
ignored.  Section 69(2) does not, itself, offer guidance as to how to
determine the “reasonable amount” that would have been payable had the parties
been dealing at arm’s length.  The OECD’s 1979 Guidelines and the OECD’s
1995 Guidelines are not controlling as if they were a Canadian statute. 
However, they suggest a number of methods for determining whether transfer
prices are consistent with prices determined between parties dealing at arm’s
length.                     A
proper application of the arm’s length principle requires that regard be had
for the “economically relevant characteristics” of the arm’s length and
non-arm’s length circumstances to ensure they are “sufficiently comparable”. 
Where there are no related transactions or where related transactions are not
relevant to the determination of the reasonableness of the price in issue, a
transaction-by-transaction approach may be appropriate.  However, “economically
relevant characteristics of the situations being compared” may make it
necessary to consider other transactions that impact the transfer price under
consideration.  In each case, it is necessary to address this question by
considering the relevant circumstances and, if required, transactions other
than the purchasing transactions must be taken into account.                     Such
circumstances will include agreements that may confer rights and benefits in
addition to the purchase of property where those agreements are linked to the
purchasing agreement.  The objective is to determine what an arm’s length
purchaser would pay for the property and the rights and benefits together where
the rights and benefits are linked to the price paid for the property.  However, transfer pricing is not an exact
science and it is highly unlikely that any comparisons will yield identical
circumstances and the court will be required to exercise its best informed
judgment in establishing a satisfactory arm’s length price.                     In
this case, Glaxo Canada was paying for at least some of the rights and benefits
under the Licence Agreement as part of the purchase prices for ranitidine from
Adechsa.  As such, the Licence Agreement could not be ignored in determining
the reasonable amount paid to Adechsa under s. 69(2), which applies not
only to payment for goods but also to payment for services.  Considering the
Licence and Supply Agreements together offers a realistic picture of the
profits of Glaxo Canada.  The prices paid by Glaxo Canada to Adechsa were a
payment for a bundle of at least some rights and benefits under the Licence
Agreement and product under the Supply Agreement.  The generic comparators used
by the Tax Court do not reflect the economic and business reality of Glaxo
Canada and, at least without adjustment, do not indicate the price that would
be reasonable in the circumstances, had Glaxo Canada and Adechsa been dealing at
arm’s length.  It is only
after identifying the circumstances arising from the Licence Agreement that are
linked to the Supply Agreement that arm’s length comparisons under any of the
OECD methods or other methods may be determined.                     The
assumption that the prices paid by Glaxo Canada for ranitidine were greater
than the amount that would have been reasonable in the circumstances had Glaxo
Canada and Adechsa been dealing at arm’s length has not been demolished.  As found by the Federal
Court of Appeal, the matter should be remitted to the Tax Court to be
redetermined, having regard to the effect of the Licence Agreement on the
prices paid by Glaxo Canada for the supply of ranitidine from Adechsa.  Whether or not compensation for intellectual
property rights is justified in this particular case is a matter for
determination by the Tax Court. Cases Cited                     Distinguished:
 Singleton v. Canada, 2001 SCC 61, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 1046; Shell Canada
Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 622; referred to:  Gabco Ltd. v.
Minister of National Revenue (1968), 68 D.T.C. 5210; Hickman Motors Ltd.
v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336. Statutes and Regulations Cited Act to amend the Income War Tax Act,
S.C. 1939, c. 46, s. 13. Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .), ss. 20(1) (c)(i), 69(2)  [rep. 1998, c. 19,
s. 107], 212(1)(d), 215(1), 247(2) [ad. idem, s. 238 ]. Income Tax Act, S.C. 1948, c. 52,
s. 17(3). Income Tax Amendments Act, 1997, S.C.
1998, c. 19, ss. 107, 238. Income War Tax Act, R.S.C. 1927,
c. 97, s. 23B [ad. 1939, c. 46, s. 13]. Patent Act Amendment Act, 1992, S.C.
1993, c. 2, s. 11(1). Authors Cited                     Al Meghji, Joseph M.
Steiner, Amanda Heale and Pooja Samtani, for the
respondent/appellant on cross-appeal.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     Rothstein J. — I.          Introduction [1]                             
Transfer pricing issues arise when entities of
multinational corporations resident in different jurisdictions transfer property
or provide services to one another.  These entities do not deal at arm’s length
and, thus, transactions between these entities may not be subject to ordinary
market forces.  Their absence may result in prices being set so as to divert
profits from the appropriate tax jurisdiction.  Since 1939, the Income Tax
Act has included provisions under which a Canadian taxpayer may be
reassessed to include, in Canadian profits, the difference between the prices
for property paid to a non-resident with which it does not deal at arm’s length
and what those prices would have been had they been dealing at arm’s length. [2]                             
The Minister of National Revenue reassessed
GlaxoSmithKline Inc. (“Glaxo Canada”) for the taxation years 1990, 1991,
1992, and 1993, pursuant to the then-applicable s. 69(2)  of the Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (the “Act ”), on the basis that the
prices Glaxo Canada paid to a supplier with which it did not deal at arm’s
length, for ranitidine, the active ingredient in the anti-ulcer drug Zantac,
were greater than an amount that would have been reasonable in the
circumstances had they been dealing at arm’s length. (Section 69(2)  of the Act 
was repealed in 1998 (S.C. 1998, c. 19, s. 107) and has been replaced
by s. 247(2)  of the Act  (ad. idem, s. 238 )).  The reassessment
increased Glaxo Canada’s income by the difference between the highest price
paid by generic pharmaceutical companies and that paid by Glaxo Canada for
ranitidine.  Glaxo Canada appealed to the Tax Court of Canada, where Rip A.C.J.
(as he then was) upheld, with one minor revision, the reassessment.  On Glaxo
Canada’s further appeal, the Federal Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and
remitted the matter to the Tax Court for reconsideration.  The Minister has
appealed that decision to this Court. [3]                             
The issue on appeal is the correct application
of s. 69(2) : in particular, what circumstances are to be taken into account in
determining the reasonable arm’s length price against which to compare the
non-arm’s length transfer price. Glaxo Canada cross-appeals the decision of the
Federal Court of Appeal to remit the matter to the Tax Court for rehearing and
reconsideration.  If this Court denies the Minister’s appeal, Glaxo Canada
argues that the matter should not be remitted because it has successfully
demolished the Minister’s assumptions, thus fully discharging the taxpayer’s
burden in appealing the reassessment.  For the reasons that follow, I would
dismiss both the appeal and the cross-appeal. II.     Facts [4]                             
Between 1990 and 1993, the respondent, Glaxo
Canada, purchased ranitidine, the active pharmaceutical ingredient in the
brand-name anti-ulcer drug Zantac, from Adechsa S.A., a related non-resident
company, for between $1,512 and $1,651 per kilogram.  During the same period,
two Canadian generic pharmaceutical companies, Apotex Inc. and Novopharm Ltd.,
purchased ranitidine from other sources for use in their generic anti-ulcer
drugs for between $194 and $304 per kilogram. [5]                             
At the relevant time Glaxo Canada was a wholly owned
subsidiary of Glaxo Group Ltd., which itself was a wholly owned subsidiary of
Glaxo Holdings plc, a United Kingdom corporation.  In addition to its ownership
of Glaxo Canada, Glaxo Group was the parent of other companies, which
discovered, developed, manufactured and marketed branded pharmaceutical
products.  These products were then placed in a delivery mechanism such as a
tablet, liquid or gel and marketed and sold throughout the world through
subsidiaries such as Glaxo Canada or independent arm’s length distributors. [6]                             
During the taxation years in issue, Glaxo Canada
acted as a secondary manufacturer and marketer which meant that it acquired the
active pharmaceutical ingredient, ranitidine, and put it into a delivery
mechanism and packaged and marketed Zantac, a patented and trademarked drug
used to treat stomach ulcers.  Glaxo Group owned the Zantac trademark and the
patent for its active ingredient, ranitidine, and granted rights under the
patent and trademark to Glaxo Canada under a Licence Agreement.  Glaxo Canada purchased
ranitidine from Adechsa, a Glaxo Group clearing company located in Switzerland,
under a Supply Agreement. [7]                             
At the heart of this appeal are these two
agreements.  The Licence Agreement  conferred the following rights and benefits
on Glaxo Canada: 1.                                
the right under the patents to manufacture, use
and sell Glaxo Group products (s. 3(1)(a)); 2.                                
the exclusive right to the use of the trademarks
owned by Glaxo Group, including Zantac (s. 3(1)(b)); 3.                                
the right to receive technical assistance for
its secondary manufacturing requirements (s. 3(4)); 4.                                
the use of the registration materials prepared
by Glaxo Group, to be adapted to the Canadian environment and submitted to the
Health Protection Branch (s. 4(2)); 5.                                
access to new products, including line
extensions (s. 4(1)); 6.                                
access to any inventions or improvement in
regard to existing drugs (s. 6(1)); 7.                                
the right to have a Glaxo World Group company
sell to the appellant any raw materials or materials in bulk form (s. 7(1)); 8.                                
marketing support in the form of promotional
material, medical papers and literature, market research data, and any other
information that may be useful in the marketing of products (s. 10(1)); 9.                                
indemnification against damages arising from
patent or trademark infringement actions (s. 13(2)); 10.                            
technical assistance for setting up new product
lines at Glaxo Canada’s manufacturing facilities (s. 4(3)); 11.                            
if the original trademark for a new product
cannot be registered or if additional trademarks are necessary, Glaxo Group to take
the necessary steps (s. 4(4)); 12.                            
Glaxo Canada to have an opportunity to sub-license
any new third party product obtained by Glaxo Group (s. 5(1)); 13.                            
in regard to third party products, Glaxo Group
to provide any information pertinent to the approval of the product by the
Canada Health Protection Branch (s. 5(2)); 14.                            
Glaxo Group to arrange that technical
information in regard to third party products will be granted to Glaxo Canada
(s. 5(4)). [8]                             
Under the Supply Agreement, Glaxo Group set the
transfer prices of the active ingredient, ranitidine, using the resale-price
method as described by Rip A.C.J.:                             Glaxo
World used what is referred to as a resale-price method to determine the
transfer price of the API [active pharmaceutical ingredient]. Glaxo World and
its distributors agreed that a gross margin of 60 percent would be retained by
the distributors and the ranitidine was priced accordingly. To use a very
simple example, if the ranitidine product was sold for $10 in Italy, the
transfer price would be $4; if the ranitidine product was sold for $20 in
France, the transfer price would be $8. Appellant’s counsel described the
process as follows:                                     the
starting point for determining the price to the distributor was the in-market
price for the finished ranitidine product;                                     from
that in-market price the parties agreed, assuming specified conditions were
satisfied, a gross profit margin [to] be retained by the distributor
(approximately 60%); and                                     the
remainder would be remitted back to Glaxo Group in the form of transfer price,
royalties, [or both]. Where the distributor was to pay both transfer prices and
royalties, they would be considered together to determine
the distributor’s gross profit margin after payment of the royalty. [para. 47]                            (2008 TCC 325, 2008 D.T.C. 3957) This method resulted in
prices of over $1,500 per kilogram for ranitidine paid by Glaxo Canada to
Adechsa.  The combined effect of the Licence and Supply agreements enabled
Glaxo Canada, among other things, to purchase the active ingredient ranitidine,
put it in a delivery mechanism, and market it under the trademark Zantac. [9]                             
During the taxation years in issue, two Canadian
generic pharmaceutical companies, Apotex and Novopharm, sold generic anti-ulcer
pharmaceutical products in Canada.  These companies purchased ranitidine at
lower prices than Glaxo Canada, between $194 and $304 per kilogram, from arm’s
length suppliers.  There was no evidence that the supply contracts of Apotex or
Novopharm conferred anything beyond the supply of ranitidine. [10]                         
These generic companies were able to market
generic versions of drugs whose patent was still in effect by reason of the
compulsory licensing scheme that existed for pharmaceutical products in Canada
up to February 1993 (Patent Act Amendment Act, 1992, S.C. 1993, c. 2). 
This scheme allowed generic versions of patented pharmaceutical products to be
marketed and sold in Canada in exchange for a royalty payment to the patent
owner.  The licences granted to Apotex and Novopharm predated December 20,
1991, and therefore continued to subsist, notwithstanding repeal of the
compulsory licensing scheme in February 1993 (ad. idem, s. 11(1)). [11]                         
The Minister reassessed Glaxo Canada for its
1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993 taxation years, increasing its income by some $51
million under s. 69(2)  of the Act  on the basis that it had paid Adechsa more
than a reasonable amount for the purchase of ranitidine. III.       Tax Court of Canada, 2008 TCC 324, 2008 D.T.C. 3957
(Rip A.C.J.) [12]                         
Rip A.C.J. affirmed the Minister’s
reassessment.  He found that Singleton v. Canada, 2001 SCC 61, [2001] 2
S.C.R. 1046, required the Licence and Supply agreements to be considered
independently.  As a result, he did not consider whether the rights and
benefits under the Licence Agreement were a relevant circumstance in
determining the appropriate arm’s length price for the supply of ranitidine. [13]                         
Rip A.C.J. employed the comparable uncontrolled price
(“CUP”) method, referred to in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (“OECD”) Transfer
Pricing and Multinational Enterprises: Report of the OECD Committee on Fiscal
Affairs (1979) (the “1979 Guidelines”) and
the OECD’s revised 1995 Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises and Tax Administrations (1995) (the “1995 Guidelines”), to test the reasonableness of Glaxo Canada’s ranitidine
transactions.  He found that the appropriate comparator transaction was the
highest price paid by the generic pharmaceutical companies for ranitidine from
arm’s length suppliers.  Under this approach, he found the prices Glaxo Canada
paid to Adechsa for ranitidine were greater than the reasonable amount had they
been dealing at arm’s length.  Aside from allowing a $25 per kilogram increment
for granulation, he upheld the reassessment of the Minister. IV.       Federal Court of Appeal, 2010 FCA 201, 405 N.R. 307
(Nadon, Layden-Stevenson and Stratas JJ.A.) [14]                         
Nadon J.A., writing for a unanimous panel, found
that the Tax Court had erred in not considering the Licence Agreement when
determining whether the prices paid by Glaxo Canada for ranitidine were
reasonable under s. 69(2) .  He said that Singleton was not relevant and
that the test of “reasonable in the circumstances” included all circumstances
that an arm’s length purchaser would have to consider.  Based on Gabco Ltd.
v. Minister of National Revenue (1968), 68 D.T.C. 5210 (Ex. Ct.), Nadon
J.A. adopted the “reasonable business person” test, which required an inquiry
into the circumstances that an arm’s length purchaser would consider relevant
when deciding what price to pay (para. 69).  He found that Rip A.C.J. had
erred when he assessed the “fair market value” of ranitidine based on the
amounts paid by the generic pharmaceutical companies to arm’s length suppliers. [15]                         
Having determined that Singleton did not
preclude looking at both the Supply and Licence agreements and applying the
“reasonable business person” test, Justice Nadon found that the Licence
Agreement was central to Glaxo Canada’s business reality, and that it would be
so even if the relationship with Adechsa was at arm’s length.  Therefore, it
was a “circumstance” that had to be taken into account when determining whether
the prices paid by Glaxo Canada for ranitidine were reasonable.  In his view,
the Tax Court erred in using the purchase prices of ranitidine of the generic
pharmaceutical companies to determine whether the Glaxo Canada prices were
reasonable, as the Licence Agreement created fundamentally different
circumstances for Glaxo Canada’s transactions. [16]                         
However, Nadon J.A. found that the burden on the
taxpayer had not been fully discharged as the “reasonable amount” remained to
be determined for Glaxo Canada’s ranitidine transactions.  He remitted the
matter to the Tax Court for redetermination. V.        Analysis A.        Transfer Pricing in the Income Tax Act [17]                         
The first transfer pricing provision in the
Canadian Income Tax Act was enacted as s. 23B of the Income War Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1927, c. 97, by An Act to amend the Income War Tax Act,
S.C. 1939, c. 46, s. 13.  The provision was re-enacted as s. 17(3) of The
Income Tax Act, S.C. 1948, c. 52, and again as s. 17(3) of the Income
Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148.  Section 17(3) of the 1952 Act  is almost identical
to s. 69(2)  first enacted in 1971 (S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, s. 1),
with immaterial modifications in 1985 (R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)). [18]                         
The 1985 version of s. 69(2)  applicable to the
years 1990-1993 reads:                                                                                           (2) Where a
taxpayer has paid or agreed to pay to a non-resident person with whom the taxpayer was not
dealing at arm’s length as price, rental, royalty or other payment for or for
the use or reproduction of any property, or as consideration for the
carriage of goods or passengers or for other services, an amount greater
than the amount (in this subsection referred to as “the reasonable amount”)
that would have been reasonable in the circumstances if the non-resident
person and the taxpayer had been dealing at arm’s length, the reasonable amount
shall, for the purpose of computing the taxpayer’s income under this Part, be
deemed to have been the amount that was paid or is payable therefor. [19]                         
On the facts of this case, the section asks
whether the prices Glaxo Canada paid Adechsa for ranitidine were greater than
what would have been reasonable if Adechsa and Glaxo Canada had been dealing at
arm’s length.  The challenge is to find an arm’s length proxy that replicates
the circumstances of Glaxo Canada as closely as possible in respect of its
acquisition of ranitidine. B.        The OECD Methods of Determining Reasonable Transfer
Prices [20]          
In the courts below and in this Court, there has
been reference to the 1979 Guidelines and the 1995 Guidelines
(the “Guidelines”).  The Guidelines contain commentary and
methodology pertaining to the issue of transfer pricing.  However, the Guidelines
are not controlling as if they were a Canadian statute and the test of any set
of transactions or prices ultimately must be determined according to s. 69(2) 
rather than any particular methodology or commentary set out in the Guidelines. [21]                         
Section 69(2)  does not, itself, offer guidance
as to how to determine the “reasonable amount” that would have been payable had
the parties been dealing at arm’s length.  However, the Guidelines
suggest a number of methods for determining whether transfer prices are
consistent with prices determined between parties dealing at arm’s length. [22]                         
In the Tax Court, the parties relied on four
methods from the Guidelines to assess the reasonableness of the prices
Glaxo Canada paid Adechsa.  The Minister relied on the CUP method and the cost
plus method (see 1979 Guidelines, at paras. 48 and 63). The CUP method
compares the prices in comparable transactions between parties dealing at arm’s
length with the transfer prices paid by the taxpayer being reassessed.  The Guidelines
say this is the most direct way of determining the arm’s length price.  This is
the method under which the Minister compared the Glaxo Canada transfer prices
with the prices paid by Apotex and Novopharm. [23]                         
However, the 1995 Guidelines also say
that the arm’s length transactions must be carefully considered for
comparability with the transfer price transactions.  Transactions are only
comparable if: 1.         None
of the differences (if any) between the transactions being compared or between
the enterprises undertaking those transactions could materially affect the
price in the open market; or 2.         Reasonably
accurate adjustments can be made to eliminate the material effects of such
differences.  (See 1995 Guidelines, at para. 1.15.) [24]                         
The cost plus method is based upon the foreign
suppliers’ costs, plus an appropriate mark-up.  However, the 1979 Guidelines
say that the method “raise[d] problems both as regards assessing costs
. . . and the appropriate mark-up for profit” (para. 63).  They
suggest its usefulness may be as a means of verifying prices after other
methods have been applied.  The Minister used the cost plus method to verify
the arm’s length prices he determined under the CUP method. [25]                         
Glaxo Canada relied on the resale price, the
transactional net margin and the CUP methods, using a set of European comparators. 
As described above, the resale-price method starts with the price charged by
the reseller (Glaxo Canada) in the market for the product (Zantac).  The price
is then reduced by the proportion representing the reseller’s cost and
appropriate profit, i.e. the reseller’s gross profit margin.  The balance is
the transfer price for the product purchased from the related non-resident
supplier (Adechsa).  This gross profit margin is then compared to the gross profit
margin earned by independent arm’s length resellers.  The 1979 Guidelines
observe that this method is the most useful when applied to marketing
operations.  Glaxo Canada compared its gross profit margin with those of
independent European distributors of Zantac. [26]                         
The transactional net margin method looks at the
net profit relative to a base such as costs, sales or assets in a controlled
transaction as compared to the net profit ratio earned by the same taxpayer in
comparable uncontrolled transactions.  If this is not possible, consideration
may be given to the net profit relative to costs, sales or assets of an
independent enterprise, provided the circumstances are comparable and
adjustments may be made to obtain reliable results. [27]                         
Glaxo Canada’s CUP approach utilized the prices
paid by European independent distributors of Zantac which Glaxo Canada
submitted approximated the prices paid by Glaxo Canada to Adechsa. C.        The Transactional Approach Adopted by the Tax Court [28]                         
Rip A.C.J. rejected Glaxo Canada’s evidence and
submissions. Utilizing the CUP method, Rip A.C.J. compared the prices paid by
Glaxo Canada with those paid by the Canadian generic companies for ranitidine
and found that the highest generic prices paid were in the range of $300 per
kilogram, while Glaxo Canada was paying over $1,500 per kilogram. [29]                         
Glaxo Canada had argued that the comparison with
generic companies was inappropriate.  It said that the Licence Agreement must
be taken into account, as it conferred certain rights and benefits related to
the purpose for which its ranitidine was purchased. [30]                         
However, Rip A.C.J. found that Singleton
precluded him from considering the Licence Agreement.  Absent the Licence
Agreement, the prices paid under the Supply Agreement had to be considered as
being only for ranitidine.  There could thus be no compensation for other
rights or benefits under the Supply Agreement. Because the prices paid by Glaxo
Canada and the generic companies were both solely for ranitidine, there were no
differences between the transactions that might justify higher transfer prices
than the prices paid by Apotex and Novopharm (aside from a $25 per kilogram charge
for granulation that Glaxo Canada was allowed). [31]                         
The question before Rip A.C.J. was the
determination of the reasonable price under s. 69(2) .  Critical to that
determination was whether the Licence Agreement was a circumstance to be taken
into account. [32]                         
 The Minister argues that this Court’s decisions
in Singleton and Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999]
3 S.C.R. 622, along with the Guidelines, require a transactional,
sometimes called a transaction-by-transaction, approach when determining the
reasonable transfer price under s. 69(2) .  In the Tax Court, the Minister
explained that the transaction-by-transaction approach is one in which the
transaction in issue must be considered independently from surrounding
circumstances, other transactions, or other realities.  In this Court, the
Minister submitted that “each transfer is to be treated as a separate
transaction” (A.F., at para. 46).  Accordingly, the Licence Agreement
would be irrelevant. (1)        Singleton [33]                         
The Minister submits that Singleton and Shell,
decided under s. 20(1) (c)(i) of the Act , are authority for the
proposition that a transaction-by-transaction approach must be followed under
s. 69(2) . Singleton involved the deductibility from income of interest
paid and payable on borrowed money under s. 20(1) (c)(i), of the Income
Tax Act .  In Singleton, the taxpayer used funds from his capital
account at his law firm to assist in financing the purchase of a home.  He then
used borrowed funds to replace the funds he was withdrawing from his capital
account.  The sole issue was whether borrowed money was “used for the purpose
of earning income”.  This Court found that the borrowed funds were used to
invest in the law firm for the purpose of earning income and, therefore, the
interest payable thereon was deductible for income tax purposes.  The fact that
the borrowing occurred because the taxpayer wanted to use his equity in the
firm to buy a house was irrelevant for determining the use of the borrowed
funds.  For purposes of s. 20(1) (c)(i), it would be wrong to
collapse the transaction withdrawing funds from the firm to purchase the house
and the borrowing transaction to replenish the capital account at the firm.  It
was the requirement to treat the two transactions separately that caused Rip
A.C.J., at para. 78, to say that s. 69(2)  required the Supply and Licence agreements
to be treated separately. [34]                         
 With respect, the approach of the Tax Court judge
and the argument of the Minister ignore the difference between s. 20(1) (c)(i)
and s. 69(2) .  Nothing in s. 20(1) (c)(i) entitles a court to search for
anything other than the use to which the borrowed funds are put.  The factual
determination is simply whether the use of borrowed funds was for the purpose
of earning income. [35]                         
Section 20(1) (c)(i) does not ask whether
it is unreasonable to claim the interest deduction; nor does it require a
comparison of transactions to determine if the deduction is reasonable.  By
contrast, s. 69(2)  requires the court to determine whether the transfer price
was greater than the amount that would have been reasonable in the
circumstances, had the parties been dealing at arm’s length.  If transactions
other than the purchasing transaction are relevant in determining this
question, they must not be ignored. (2)        Shell [36]                         
The issue in Shell similarly involved s.
20(1) (c)(i).  Again the issue involved whether borrowed funds were used
for the purpose of earning income. In Shell, the taxpayer had entered into an agreement to borrow $150
million in New Zealand currency at an interest rate of 15.4 percent.  The
taxpayer converted these funds into U.S. currency, which was then used for
business purposes.  Through a series of foreign currency transactions relating
to the devaluation of the New Zealand currency over the course of the loan,
Shell was able to reduce its effective rate of interest to 9.1 percent, while
still claiming an income tax deduction based on the 15.4 percent interest rate
on the initial transaction. [37]                         
The issue in Shell, as in Singleton,
turned on whether the borrowed funds, once converted into U.S. currency, could
properly be considered to be used for the purpose of earning income.  The Court
found that it was irrelevant that the funds had been converted into U.S.
currency as part of a sophisticated tax scheme.  The Minister was not entitled
to re-characterize the taxpayer’s bona fide legal relationships. [38]                         
This differs significantly from s. 69(2) .  The
requirement of s. 69(2)  is that the price established in a non-arm’s length
transfer pricing transaction is to be redetermined as if it were between
parties dealing at arm’s length.  If the circumstances require, transactions
other than the purchasing transactions must be taken into account to determine
whether the actual price was or was not greater than the amount that would have
been reasonable had the parties been dealing at arm’s length.  Shell is
therefore also inapplicable to a determination under s. 69(2) . (3)        Guidelines
Do Not Require a Transaction-by-Transaction Approach [39]                         
The Minister also relied on para. 1.42 of the
1995 Guidelines to justify the transaction-by-transaction requirement.  Paragraph
1.42  provides:                             Ideally,
in order to arrive at the most precise approximation of fair market value, the
arm’s length principle should be applied on a transaction-by-transaction basis. The Minister submits that
para. 1.42 requires the court to focus only on the particular transaction at
issue and, thus, does not permit the Licence Agreement to inform the
determination of the reasonableness of the prices paid for ranitidine under the
Supply Agreement. [40]                         
However, para. 1.42 is not as restrictive as the
Minister submits.  It also provides:                     . . . there
are often situations where separate transactions are so closely linked or
continuous that they cannot be evaluated adequately on a separate basis. Thus, while a transaction-by-transaction
approach may be ideal, the 1995 Guidelines themselves recognize that it
is not appropriate in all cases. [41]                         
Further, the general statement in the 1995 Guidelines
regarding the arm’s length principle at para. 1.15 also provides guidance as to
when related transactions should be taken into account:      Application of the arm’s length
principle is generally based on a comparison of the conditions in a controlled
transaction with the conditions in transactions between independent
enterprises. In order for such comparisons to be useful, the economically
relevant characteristics of the situations being compared must be sufficiently
comparable. To be comparable means that none of the differences (if any)
between the situations being compared could materially affect the condition
being examined in the methodology (e.g. price or margin), or that reasonably
accurate adjustments can be made to eliminate the effect of any such
differences. [Emphasis added.] [42]                         
Thus, according to the 1995 Guidelines, a
proper application of the arm’s length principle requires that regard be had
for the “economically relevant characteristics” of the arm’s length and
non-arm’s length circumstances to ensure they are “sufficiently comparable”. 
Where there are no related transactions or where related transactions are not
relevant to the determination of the reasonableness of the price in issue, a
transaction-by-transaction approach may be appropriate.  However, “economically
relevant characteristics of the situations being compared” may make it
necessary to consider other transactions that impact the transfer price under
consideration.  In each case, it is necessary to address this question by
considering the relevant circumstances. D.        The Licence Agreement Is Relevant in the Circumstances [43]                         
For the above reasons, in my respectful opinion,
Rip A.C.J. was in error when he found that he was precluded from considering
the Licence Agreement.  Nonetheless, while consideration of the Licence
Agreement was not precluded, the question still remains as to whether he should
have considered it. [44]                         
Because s. 69(2) requires an inquiry into the
price that would be reasonable in the circumstances had the non-resident
supplier and the Canadian taxpayer been dealing at arm’s length, it necessarily
involves consideration of all the circumstances of the Canadian taxpayer
relevant to the price paid to the non-resident supplier.  Such circumstances
will include agreements that may confer rights and benefits in addition to the
purchase of property where those agreements are linked to the purchasing
agreement. The objective is to determine what an arm’s length purchaser would
pay for the property and the rights and benefits together where the rights and
benefits are linked to the price paid for the property. [45]                         
The business of Glaxo Canada was the secondary
manufacturing and marketing of brand-name pharmaceuticals, including Zantac. 
Glaxo Canada also engaged in research and development although there is no
indication that its research and development work pertained to Zantac. Glaxo
Canada’s purchase of ranitidine must be understood, having regard to this
business reality. [46]                         
Rip A.C.J. found, at para. 86, that “it was by
virtue of the Licence Agreement that the appellant was required to purchase its
ranitidine from Glaxo approved sources”.  The parties have not disputed this
finding. [47]                         
There were only two approved sources, one of
which was Adechsa.  Thus, in order to avail itself of the benefits of the
Licence Agreement, Glaxo Canada was required to purchase the active ingredient
from one of these sources.  This requirement was not the product of the
non-arm’s length relationship between Glaxo Canada and Glaxo Group or Adechsa. 
Rather, it arose because Glaxo Group controlled the trademark and patent of the
brand-name pharmaceutical product Glaxo Canada wished to market. An arm’s
length distributor wishing to market Zantac might well be faced with the same
requirement. [48]                         
The effect of the link between the Licence and
Supply agreements was that an entity that wished to market Zantac was subject
to contractual terms affecting the price of ranitidine that generic marketers
of ranitidine products were not. [49]                         
As such, the rights and benefits of the Licence
Agreement were contingent on Glaxo Canada entering into a Supply Agreement with
suppliers to be designated by Glaxo Group.  The result of the price paid was to
allocate to Glaxo Canada what Glaxo Group considered to be appropriate
compensation for its secondary manufacturing and marketing function in respect
of ranitidine and Zantac. [50]                         
Rip A.C.J. appears to have been concerned that a
multinational organization, by requiring a Canadian subsidiary to acquire a
product from a specified supplier, would escape the requirement to have its
prices measured against arm’s length prices (para. 89).  However, whatever
price was determined by Glaxo Group would be subject to s. 69(2) and the
requirement that the transfer pricing transactions be measured against
transactions between parties dealing with each other at arm’s length. [51]                         
Thus, it appears that Glaxo Canada was paying
for at least some of the rights and benefits under the Licence Agreement as
part of the purchase prices for ranitidine from Adechsa.  Because the prices
paid to Adechsa were set, in part, as compensation to Glaxo Group for the
rights and benefits conferred on Glaxo Canada under the Licence Agreement, the
Licence Agreement could not be ignored in determining the reasonable amount
paid to Adechsa under s. 69(2), which applies not only to payment for goods but
also to payment for services. [52]                         
Considering the Licence and Supply agreements
together offers a realistic picture of the profits of Glaxo Canada.  It cannot
be irrelevant that Glaxo Canada’s function was primarily as a secondary
manufacturer and marketer.  It did not originate new products and the
intellectual property rights associated with them.  Nor did it undertake the
investment and risk involved with originating new products.  Nor did it have
the other risks and investment costs which Glaxo Group undertook under the Licence
Agreement.  The prices paid by Glaxo Canada to Adechsa were a payment for a
bundle of at least some rights and benefits under the Licence Agreement and
product under the Supply Agreement. [53]                         
I agree with the Federal Court of Appeal that
Rip A.C.J. erred in refusing to take account of the Licence Agreement.  It was
that refusal which led him to find that the prices the generic pharmaceutical
companies paid for ranitidine were comparable under the CUP method.  However,
the generic comparators do not reflect the economic and business reality of
Glaxo Canada and, at least without adjustment, do not indicate the price that
would be reasonable in the circumstances, had Glaxo Canada and Adechsa been
dealing at arm’s length. [54]                         
I agree with Justice Nadon that “the amount that would have been reasonable
in the circumstances” if Glaxo Canada and Adechsa had been dealing at arm’s
length has yet to be determined (para. 79).  This will require a close
examination of the terms of the Licence Agreement and the rights and benefits
granted to Glaxo Canada under that Agreement. [55]                         
However, with respect
to royalties, I would observe that the Licence Agreement expressly provides
under clause 11(1)(b):                     (ii)      in
the event that Glaxo Canada
purchases raw materials or bulk or finished Product from GROUP or an Associate
it is the parties’ express intention that no royalties be payable by Glaxo Canada on the importation of such
raw materials or bulk or finished Product but only on GLAXO CANADA’s Net Sales
of Product in the Territory;                     (iii)     Glaxo Canada shall not be required to
pay any royalty or license fee as a condition of the sale by Group or its Associates to Glaxo Canada of merchandise for export
to the Territory and such merchandise shall be priced in accordance with a
separate agreement between the parties without regard to royalties payable
hereunder [as contemplated in sub-clause 7(1) hereof]                     (iv)     no royalty shall be payable by Glaxo Canada on its manufacture or use
of the Products but only on its sales of the Products; [Text in brackets in
original.] [56]                         
Glaxo Canada’s
pleadings in the Tax Court did not rely on s. 212(1) (d) or s. 215(1)  of
the Act , which provide for tax payable by non-residents on royalties or similar
payments for the right to use any patent or trademark in Canada and for
withholding tax on behalf of the non-resident.  There is no evidence that Glaxo
Canada withheld any amounts of the prices it paid to Adechsa in respect of
royalties for the use or the right to use the ranitidine patent or Zantac trademark. [57]                         
Although I said above
that the purchase price appeared to be linked to some of the rights and
benefits conferred under the Licence Agreement, I make no determination in
these reasons as to whether the rights under the ranitidine patent granted to
Glaxo Canada to manufacture and sell Zantac and the exclusive right to use the
Zantac trademark are linked to the purchase price paid by Glaxo Canada to
Adechsa.  However, arguably, if the purchase price includes compensation for
intellectual property rights granted to Glaxo Canada, there would have to be
consistency between that and Glaxo Canada’s position with respect to Part XIII
withholding tax.  This issue was not specifically argued in this Court and may
be addressed by the parties in the Tax Court and considered by the Tax Court judge
when considering whether any specific rights and benefits conferred on Glaxo
Canada under the Licence Agreement are linked to the price for ranitidine paid
to Adechsa. [58]                         
In any event, there are
rights and benefits under the Licence Agreement referred to in para. 7 above,
other than the patent and trademark rights granted to Glaxo Canada.  For
example, guaranteed access to new products, the right to the supply of raw
materials and materials in bulk, marketing support, and technical assistance
for setting up new product lines all appear to have some value. [59]                         
In addition, while, as
Rip A.C.J. found, Glaxo Canada’s ranitidine and generic ranitidine are
chemically equivalent and bio-equivalent, he also found that there was value in
the fact that Adechsa’s ranitidine manufactured under Glaxo Group’s “good
manufacturing practices” “may confer a certain degree of comfort that the good
has minimal impurities and is manufactured in a responsible manner” (para. 118). 
Zantac is priced higher than the generic products, presumably, at least in
part, because of that “degree of comfort” that Rip A.C.J. acknowledged. [60]                         
These are all features
of the Licence Agreement and the requirement to purchase from a Glaxo-approved
source that add value to the ranitidine that Glaxo Canada purchased from
Adechsa over and above the value of generic ranitidine without these rights and
benefits.  They should justify some recognition in determining what an
arm’s length purchaser would be prepared to pay for the same rights and
benefits conveyed with ranitidine purchased from a Glaxo Group source.  It is only after
identifying the circumstances arising from the Licence Agreement that are
linked to the Supply Agreement that arm’s length comparisons under any of the OECD
methods or other methods may be determined. [61]                         
I would offer the
following additional guidance with respect to the redetermination.  First, s.
69(2) uses the term “reasonable amount”.  This reflects the fact that, to use
the words of the 1995 Guidelines, “transfer pricing is not an exact
science” (para. 1.45).  It is doubtful that comparators will be identical in
all material respects in almost any case.  Therefore, some leeway must be
allowed in the determination of the reasonable amount.  As long as a transfer
price is within what the court determines is a reasonable range, the
requirements of the section should be satisfied.  If it is not, the court might
select a point within a range it considers reasonable in the circumstances
based on an average, median, mode, or other appropriate statistical measure,
having regard to the evidence that the court found to be relevant.  I repeat
for emphasis that it is highly unlikely that any comparisons will yield
identical circumstances and the Tax Court judge will be required to exercise
his best informed judgment in establishing a satisfactory arm’s length price. [62]                         
Second, while
assessment of the evidence is a matter for the trial judge, I would observe
that the respective roles and functions of Glaxo Canada and the Glaxo Group
should be kept in mind.  Glaxo Canada engaged in the secondary manufacturing
and marketing of Zantac.  Glaxo Group is the owner of the intellectual property
and provided other rights and benefits to Glaxo Canada.  Transfer pricing
should not result in a misallocation of earnings that fails to take account of
these different functions and the resources and risks inherent in each.  As
discussed above, whether or not compensation for intellectual property rights
is justified in this particular case is a matter for determination by the Tax
Court judge. [63]                         
Third, prices between
parties dealing at arm’s length will be established having regard to the
independent interests of each party to the transaction.  That means that the
interests of Glaxo Group and Glaxo Canada must both be considered.  An
appropriate determination under the arm’s length test of s. 69(2) should
reflect these realities. [64]                         
Fourth, in this case,
there is some evidence that indicates that arm’s length distributors have found
it in their interest to acquire ranitidine from a Glaxo Group supplier, rather
than from generic sources.  This suggests that higher-than-generic transfer
prices are justified and are not necessarily greater than a reasonable amount
under s. 69(2). [65]                         
I would dismiss the appeal,
and for the reasons below, dismiss the cross-appeal and remit the matter to Rip
A.C.J. (now Chief Justice) for redetermination. VI.       Cross-Appeal [66]                         
Glaxo Canada cross-appeals, arguing that the
decision of the Federal Court of Appeal to remit the matter to the Tax Court
for redetermination should be overturned.  It asks this Court to set aside the
reassessment on the basis that it has satisfied its burden as a taxpayer
because it has “demolished” the assumptions of the Minister. [67]                         
The Federal Court of Appeal remitted the matter
to the Tax Court on the basis that Glaxo Canada had not discharged its burden
of demonstrating that the prices it paid Adechsa for ranitidine were reasonable
under s. 69(2):                             As
a result, I conclude that the Judge erred in law in failing to apply the proper
test in determining “the amount that would have been reasonable in the
circumstances” if the appellant and Adechsa had been dealing at arm’s length.
Counsel for the appellant argued that in the event that we agreed with him that
the Judge erred in not considering the License Agreement, we should then
determine “the reasonable amount”. In my view, that determination ought to be
made by the Judge, who heard the parties for well over forty days, and not by
this Court. [para. 82] The Federal Court of
Appeal declined to make such a determination on the basis that it could not
properly assess the adequacy of the record on this point and remitted the
matter to the Tax Court judge to
consider whether a decision can be made on the basis of the existing record or
whether additional evidence is necessary. [68]                         
Glaxo Canada argues that the choice of the
generic comparator transactions by the Minister constitutes the basis of the
Minister’s assessment.  Therefore, the burden on Glaxo Canada was only to
demonstrate that the transactions of the generic pharmaceutical companies were
not the proper comparator.  In Glaxo Canada’s view, such a finding would
demolish the basis of the assessment, thus, discharging its burden. [69]                         
The Minister argues that the basis of the
assessment was the determination that the prices Glaxo Canada paid for
ranitidine were not reasonable.  The selection of the generic comparators was
only a means which the Minister had chosen to demonstrate the unreasonableness. [70]                         
The basis of the assessment is found in the
assumptions in the Minister’s Amended Reply to Glaxo Canada’s Amended Notice of
Appeal.  Assumptions 14p) and r.A) provide:                  p)       the
Appellant paid Adechsa, with whom it was not dealing at arm’s length, a price
for ranitidine which was greater than the amount that would have been
reasonable in the circumstances if the Appellant and Adechsa had been dealing
at arm’s length;                  r.A)    any
amounts paid by the appellant to Adechsa over and above the prices paid by
other Canadian pharmaceutical companies (as detailed in Schedule A attached)
were not for the supply of ranitidine; [71]                         
Glaxo Canada argues, in effect, that only
assumption 14r.A) constitutes the basis of the assessment and that it has
demolished that assumption.  The Minister argues that the basis of the
assessment is assumption 14p).  The text of the assumptions supports the
position of the Minister.  Here assumption 14p) sets out the statutory basis
for the reassessment, placing the reassessment squarely under s. 69(2).  The
taxpayer’s liability is governed by the Act  and the Minister’s authority to
reassess arises from invoking a particular provision or provisions of the Act . [72]                         
In Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997]
2 S.C.R. 336, Justice L’Heureux-Dubé states that the taxpayer’s burden is to “‘demolish’
the exact assumptions made by the Minister but no more” (para. 92
(emphasis deleted)).  Here, it is safe to say that assumption 14r.A) by the
Minister of the prices paid by Apotex and Novopharm as CUP transactions,
without adjustments, was indeed demolished.  However, assumption 14p) was not. [73]                         
Indeed, at the Tax Court, Glaxo Canada sought to
establish the reasonableness of the prices it paid, though its evidence and
argument were not accepted by the Tax Court judge.  In other words, it accepted
the burden of demonstrating that the prices it paid were reasonable within the
meaning of s. 69(2).  Had it been successful in establishing that the prices it
paid were reasonable, assumption 14p) as well as 14r.A), would have been
demolished. [74]                         
As it stands, the assumption that the prices
paid by Glaxo Canada for ranitidine were greater than the amount that would
have been reasonable in the circumstances, had Glaxo Canada and Adechsa been
dealing at arm’s length, has not been demolished.  Therefore, assumption 14p)
remains standing. [75]                         
At the Federal Court of Appeal, Glaxo Canada
argued that that court could determine “the reasonable amount”.  If the Federal
Court of Appeal could determine the reasonable amount, I cannot see why it
could not remit the matter to the Tax Court for that very determination. [76]                         
Like the Federal Court of Appeal, I would remit
the matter to the Tax Court to be redetermined, having regard to the effect of
the Licence Agreement on the prices paid by Glaxo Canada for the supply of
ranitidine from Adechsa.  The Tax Court judge should consider any new evidence
the parties seek to adduce and that he may choose to allow. VII.     Conclusion [77]                         
I would dismiss the appeal with costs
throughout; dismiss the cross-appeal with costs in this Court and remit the
matter to the Tax Court for redetermination.                     Appeal
and cross-appeal dismissed with costs.  