Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 298  Continental Bank Leasing Corporation                                            Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  and  The Canadian Bankers’ Association                                                Intervener  Indexed as:  Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v.
Canada  File No.:  25532.  1998:  January 26; 1998:  September 3.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Income tax -- Depreciable assets -- Recapture of
capital cost allowance -- Rollover of assets into partnership -- Bank
subsidiary entering into partnership and transferring assets to it pursuant to
rollover provision -- Bank Act  prohibiting banks from participating in
partnerships -- Provincial partnerships legislation providing for dissolution
of partnership upon happening of event making it unlawful for business of firm
to be carried on or for members of firm to carry it on in partnership --
Whether partnership rendered invalid -- If so, whether subsidiary liable for
recapture of capital cost allowance -- Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148,
ss. 13, 97(2) -- Bank Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-1, s. 174(2) --
Partnerships Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 370, s. 34.  In 1986, Continental Bank of Canada (the “Bank”),
which had decided to wind up its affairs, invited offers for the purchase of
the shares or assets of its wholly owned subsidiary, Continental Bank Leasing
Corp. (“Leasing”).  Central Capital Leasing (“Central”), which had concerns
about the creditworthiness of several of the leases and certain contingent tax
liabilities of Leasing, proposed a transaction whereby Leasing would form a
partnership with several Central subsidiaries to carry on the same business as
Leasing, transfer its assets other than the excluded leases to the partnership
using an election under s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act, a rollover
provision, distribute its partnership interest to the Bank at its cost base as
part of its winding-up, and then have the Bank sell its interest to Central or
its subsidiaries.  A master agreement was signed setting out the various
steps to be executed by the parties.  The partnership was formed on December
24, 1986; all partners, except Leasing, gave representations and warranties
that they were and would remain duly registered and qualified to carry on the
business of the partnership.  On December 27, Leasing and the Bank signed an
indenture providing for the transfer of Leasing’s partnership interest to the
Bank.  On December 29, 1986, the Bank sold the interest in the partnership to
subsidiaries of Central.  Leasing filed its income tax return for 1987 based on
these transfers.  The Minister of National Revenue reassessed Leasing on the
basis that the partnership transaction was invalid and that the true nature of
the transaction was a disposition by Leasing of its leasing assets to Central,
making the s. 97(2) election invalid and giving rise to recaptured capital
cost allowance in the hands of Leasing.  Under s. 174(2) of the Bank
Act , a bank may not, directly or indirectly, participate in a partnership
in Canada. Section 34 of the Ontario Partnerships Act provides that a
partnership is “dissolved by the happening of any event that makes it unlawful
for the business of the firm to be carried on or for the members of the firm to
carry it on in partnership”.  The Tax Court of Canada allowed Leasing’s appeal
of the reassessment.  The Federal Court of Appeal reversed that decision.  Held (L’Heureux-Dubé
and Bastarache JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed.  Per Gonthier, Cory,
McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.:  While the other aspects of Bastarache J.’s
reasons were agreed with, s. 34 of the Ontario Partnerships Act did
not render the partnership between Leasing and its partners void.  The business
of a partnership is not rendered illegal merely because an investor holds
shares in a corporate partner in the partnership when the law says it should
not.  The partnership must be distinguished from those who may invest in or support
the partners that make it up.  Prior to December 27, 1986, the Bank was not a
partner.  It merely held shares in one of the partners, Leasing, which was a
separate and legally distinct corporation.   Section 174  of the Bank Act 
accordingly did not make it unlawful for the partnership to carry on its
business, or for Leasing to be a partner, prior to December 27.  The
partnership was not dissolved under s. 34 of the Partnerships Act
simply because the Bank should not have held shares in one of the partners. 
Nor can Leasing’s participation in the partnership be considered unlawful
within the meaning of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act by reason of
the public policy component of the common law doctrine of illegality.  A
finding that Leasing’s participation should be void or unenforceable for public
policy reasons does not necessarily mean that its participation was illegal or
unlawful in the traditional sense of either term.  Moreover, public policy
requires that breaches of the Bank Act  should not lead to the
invalidation of contracts and other transactions.  More importantly,
s. 20(1)  of the Bank Act , which stipulates that no act of a bank is
invalid by reason only of a contravention of that Act, supports the view that
Parliament never intended breaches of the Bank Act  to render bank
transactions null and void.  Since the partnership was valid between December
24 and December 27, the election under s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act was
also valid.  Per L’Heureux-Dubé and
Bastarache JJ. (dissenting):  In cases such as this, where the parties have
entered into a formal written agreement to govern their relationship and hold
themselves out as partners, the courts should determine whether the agreement
contains the type of provisions typically found in a partnership agreement,
whether the agreement was acted upon and whether it actually governed the
affairs of the parties.  On the face of the agreements entered into, the
parties created a valid partnership within the meaning of s. 2 of the Partnerships
Act, which provides that partnership is the relation that subsists between
persons carrying on a business in common with a view to profit.  Moreover, the
parties acted upon the agreements and the agreements governed their affairs. 
While it is true that between December 24 and December 27, 1986, no meetings
were held, no new transactions were entered into by the parties and no
decisions were made, there was no termination of Leasing’s contracts with its
customers when Leasing’s business and assets were transferred to the
partnership and the contracts continued during this period.  The fact that no
new business was created during the period of Leasing’s and the Bank’s
involvement in the partnership does not negate the effect of the existing
business that was continued during this time.  As well, the business that was
carried on was carried on by the partners in common.   Leasing and the Bank
held themselves out as partners, and conducted themselves as partners for the
duration of their memberships in the partnership.  The business was also
carried on with a view to profit.  The partnership agreement provided for the
distribution of the profits from the leasing business being operated by the
partnership and the partnership continued to carry on the business operated for
profit by Leasing. While the Bank contravened s. 174(2) (i) of
the Bank Act  by entering into a partnership, the prohibition in that
provision does not make partnerships ultra vires the Bank.  Under
s. 18(1) of the Act, a bank has the “capacity and . . . the rights, powers
and privileges of a natural person”.  Section 20(1)  states that “[n]o act of a
bank, including any transfer of property to or by a bank, is invalid by reason
only that the act or transfer is contrary to this Act”.  While s. 20(1) is
not a complete bar to the application of the doctrine of illegality in the
appropriate case, the doctrine does not apply in the present circumstances. 
Section 20(1)  is not in conflict with s. 34 of the Ontario Partnerships
Act, however, which has the effect of dissolving the unlawfully formed
partnership ab initio.  Payment of the penalties set out in
s. 174(16)  of the Bank Act  does not render lawful what the Bank
Act  prohibits.  Any indirect participation by a bank, through a subsidiary
company, for example, makes the carrying on of business in the partnership
“unlawful” within the meaning of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act. 
Leasing’s participation in the partnership can also be considered “unlawful” by
reason of the public policy component of the common law doctrine of
illegality.  While it may not be strictly contrary to the Bank Act  for
Leasing to enter into a partnership, in all of the circumstances it is contrary
to public policy to allow the parties to benefit from their deliberate breach
of the Act’s prohibitions.  The collapse of the partnership scheme vis-à-vis
Leasing does not change the fact that Leasing’s assets were transferred to
Central’s subsidiaries on December 24, 1986.  Because these assets were not
transferred to a partnership pursuant to s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act,
Leasing cannot take advantage of that rollover provision and is therefore
liable for the recapture of capital cost allowance on its depreciable assets
pursuant to s. 13 of the Income Tax Act.  Cases Cited  By McLachlin J.  Referred to:  Salomon v. A. Salomon and Co., [1897] A.C. 22.  By Bastarache J. (dissenting)  Continental Bank of Canada v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 358; Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen,
[1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; Orion Finance Ltd. v. Crown Financial Management Ltd.,
[1996] 2 B.C.L.C. 78; Mahon v. Minister of National Revenue, 91 D.T.C.
878; Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336; Canada v.
Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312; Ashbury Railway Carriage and Iron Co. v.
Riche (1875), L.R. 7 H.L. 653; Communities Economic Development Fund v.
Canadian Pickles Corp., [1991] 3 S.C.R. 388; Cope v. Rowlands
(1836), 2 M. & W. 149, 150 E.R. 707; Sidmay Ltd. v. Wehttam Investments
Ltd. (1967), 61 D.L.R. (2d) 358, aff’d on other grounds, [1968] S.C.R. 828;
Royal Bank of Canada v. Grobman (1977), 18 O.R. (2d) 636; Still v.
Minister of National Revenue (1997), 221 N.R. 127; Neider v. Carda of
Peace River District Ltd., [1972] S.C.R. 678; Menard v. Genereux
(1982), 39 O.R. (2d) 55; Holman v. Johnson (1775), 1 Cowp. 341, 98 E.R.
1120; Hudgell Yeates & Co. v. Watson, [1978] 2 All E.R. 363.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Bank Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-1, ss. 18(1), 20(1), 174(2)(i),
(16), 246.  Canada Business Corporations
Act , S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 33, ss. 15(1), 16(3).  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148 [am. 1970-71-72, c. 63], ss. 13 [am.
1976-77, c. 4, s. 3; am. 1980-81-82-83, c. 48. s. 5], 56(4), 85(1)
[am. 1974-75-76, c. 26, s. 48; am. 1980-81-82-83, c. 48, s. 45; am.
1985, c. 45, s. 41], 88(1) [am. 1974-75-76, c. 26, s. 52; am. 1979, c. 5,
s. 29; am. 1980-81-82-83, c. 48, s. 48], 97(1), (2) [am. 1974-75-76,
c. 26, s. 61; am. 1980-81-82-83, c. 140, s. 58; am. 1985, c. 45,
s. 49].  Partnerships Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 370, ss. 1(1)(a) “business”, 2, 15,
34.  Authors Cited  Black’s
Law Dictionary, 6th ed.  St. Paul, Minn.:  West
Publishing Co., 1990, “unlawful”.  Cheshire, Fifoot and Furmston’s
Law of Contract, 13th ed.  London:  Butterworths,
1996.  Contracts:  Cases and
Commentaries, 5th ed.  Edited by Christine Boyle
and David R. Percy.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1994.  Crawford and Falconbridge,
Banking and Bills of Exchange:  A Treatise on
the Law of Banks, Banking, Bills of Exchange and the Payment System in Canada,
vol. 1, 8th ed.  Toronto:  Canada Law Book, 1986.  Fridman, G. H. L.  The Law of
Contract in Canada, 3rd ed.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1994.  Lindley & Banks on
Partnership, 17th ed.  London:  Sweet &
Maxwell, 1995.  Manzer, Alison R.  A Practical
Guide to Canadian Partnership Law.  Aurora, Ont.:  Canada Law Book, 1994
(loose-leaf updated October 1997, release No. 3).  Manzer, Alison R.  The Bank Act 
Annotated.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1993.  Ogilvie, M. H.  Canadian
Banking Law.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1991.  Treitel, G. H.  The Law of
Contract, 9th ed.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1995.  Wegenast, F. W.  The Law of
Canadian Companies.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1979.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal,
[1996] 3 F.C. 713, 199 N.R. 9, 25 B.L.R. (2d) 149, 96 D.T.C. 6355, [1997] 1
C.T.C. 13, [1996] F.C.J. No. 710 (QL), allowing the Crown’s appeal from a
decision of the Tax Court of Canada, [1995] 1 C.T.C. 2135, 94 D.T.C. 1858,
[1994] T.C.J. No. 585 (QL), allowing the taxpayer’s appeal from a
reassessment.  Appeal allowed, L’Heureux-Dubé and Bastarache JJ. dissenting.  H. Lorne Morphy and Kent
E. Thomson, for the appellant.  Larry R. Olsson, Q.C.,
and S. Patricia Lee, for the respondent.  Harry Underwood and Ira
Nishisato, for the intervener.  //Bastarache J.//  The reasons of L’Heureux-Dubé and Bastarache JJ. were
delivered by  Bastarache J. (dissenting) --  I.  Introduction  1                                  
This appeal and a related appeal (Continental Bank of Canada v.
Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 358) concern events arising out of the winding-up
of Continental Bank of Canada (the “Bank”) and its subsidiary, Continental Bank
Leasing Corporation (“Leasing”).  The broad issue is the validity of a
transaction by which Central Capital Leasing (“Central”) ultimately became the
owner of leasing assets formerly held by the Bank and Leasing.  The transaction
involved the formation of a partnership into which Leasing transferred its
leasing assets in return for a 99 percent interest in a partnership.  Leasing
transferred that partnership interest to the Bank, which subsequently sold it
to Central’s subsidiaries.  These transactions ultimately permitted Leasing to
file an election pursuant to s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C.
1952, c. 148, as amended; this election was rejected by the Minister of
National Revenue.  II.  Factual
Background  2                                  
The Bank was incorporated by an Act of Parliament in 1977 and commenced
operations in 1979.  In October 1981, the Bank amalgamated with IAC Limited
(“IAC”) and became the successor corporation to IAC.  Prior to the
amalgamation, IAC carried on a sales finance and leasing business which
involved, among other things, the purchase of depreciable assets by IAC,
including heavy equipment and aircraft, which were then leased for a term of
years to corporations that required the use of the assets in their businesses. 
In 1981, Leasing was incorporated as a subsidiary of the Bank pursuant to amendments
to the Bank Act  in 1980 which permitted chartered banks to carry on
leasing businesses through wholly owned subsidiaries.  In 1986, the Bank, no
longer being viable, made a decision to wind up its affairs.  On  October 31,
1986, the Bank entered into an asset purchase agreement with Lloyds Bank plc of
London (“Lloyds”) whereby Lloyds agreed to purchase all of the Bank’s assets
except the shares of Leasing, the remaining leases still held directly by the
Bank and its international loan portfolio.  The Bank invited offers for the
purchase of either the assets of Leasing or its shares.  3                                  
Pursuant to an agreement accepted by the Bank on October 15, 1986,
Central agreed to purchase the shares of Leasing from the Bank.  The October
15th agreement was made on the understanding that any leasing assets held
directly by the Bank would be transferred to Leasing prior to the completion of
the sale of the shares of Leasing.  The October 15th agreement was conditional
on certain due diligence to be conducted by Central.  4                                  
On November 1, 1986, the Bank transferred the leasing assets held directly
by it to Leasing, in contemplation of the share sale.  The share sale
transaction, however, was never completed.  After conducting due diligence in
respect of the October 15th agreement, Central expressed concern with regard to
certain tax liabilities of Leasing and  the creditworthiness of seven lessees. 
Given that the Bank was in the process of winding-up, it was not prepared to
assume the contingent tax liabilities and the parties were at an impasse.  5                                  
In December 1986, Central proposed an alternative transaction which was
structured to replicate the economic consequences of the October 15th
agreement, but would exclude the seven leases about which Central had expressed
concern and would avoid the contingent tax liabilities.  This transaction is the
one giving rise to this appeal.  In essence, Central proposed that Leasing form
a partnership with several Central subsidiaries to carry on the same business
as Leasing, transfer its assets into the partnership using an election under s.
97(2) of the Income Tax Act, distribute its partnership interest
to the Bank at its cost base pursuant to s. 88 of the Income Tax Act,
and then have the Bank sell its interest to Central or its subsidiaries.  6                                  
The transaction was governed by the provisions of a Master Agreement
that was signed on December 23, 1986 by the Bank, Leasing, Central, Central
Capital Management Inc. (“CCMI”), 693396 Ontario Limited (“693396”), 693397
Ontario Limited (“693397”) and 153587 Canada Limited (“153587”).  CCMI, 693396
and 693397 were wholly owned subsidiaries of Central.  153587 was a shelf
company.  The Master Agreement set out the following steps that were executed
by the parties:  (a)               On
December 23, 1986, Leasing acquired certain additional leasing assets that were
to be included at the request of Central in the agreement. (b)               On
December 24, 1986, Leasing and 153587 amalgamated and continued as one
corporation under the name Continental Bank Leasing Corporation (“Leasing”). 
The Bank was the sole shareholder of the corporation.  This created a new year
end for Leasing on December 23, 1986.  (c)               On
December 24, 1986, Leasing formed a partnership, known as Central Capital
Leasing (the “Partnership”), with 693396 and CCMI.  Leasing contributed its
leasing business to the Partnership in return for a 99 percent interest in the
Partnership, and filed an election pursuant to s. 97(2) of the Income Tax
Act.  693396 and CCMI each contributed $656,929 to the Partnership and each
received one-half of a 1 percent interest.  Under the Partnership Agreement,
693396 and CCMI gave representations and warranties that they were and would
remain duly registered and qualified to carry on the business of the
Partnership and enable it to own or lease property, that they could fulfill
their partnership obligations without violating the terms of their constating
documents or other agreements, and that their forming the Partnership would not
result in the breach of any law or agreement.  Leasing declined to give such
representations.  (d)               The
first fiscal period for the Partnership ended on December 27, 1986.  (e)               On
December 27, 1986, as part of its winding-up, Leasing and the Bank signed an
indenture providing for the transfer of Leasing’s 99 percent partnership
interest to the Bank pursuant to s. 88 of the Income Tax Act.  (f)                On
December 29, 1986, the Bank purchased secured notes and subordinated
convertible debentures of Central for a total amount of $130,071,985.  This
amount was credited to Central on the books of the Bank.  (g)               On
December 29, 1986, the Bank sold the interest in the Partnership to 693396 and
693397 for a total purchase price of $130,071,985. Pursuant to the Partnership
Interest Purchase Agreement and Assignment Agreement, 693396 purchased 1/11 of
the partnership interest and 693397 purchased 10/11 of the partnership
interest.  The agreements were signed on December 24, 1986 and were effective
December 29, 1986.  7                                  
On February 4, 1987, 693397 sent a cheque to Leasing from the
Partnership in the amount of $130,726 in respect of Leasing’s net earnings as
the 99 percent partner of Central Leasing for the fiscal year December 24 to
27, 1986.  8                                  
Leasing filed its income tax return for 1987 on the basis that pursuant
to s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act, it transferred all of its leasing
assets, with the exception of the seven excluded leases, to the Partnership on
December 24, 1986 in return for its interest in the Partnership and that it
transferred its interest in the Partnership to the Bank as part of its
winding-up pursuant to s. 88(1) of the Income Tax Act.  9                                  
On October 12, 1989, the Minister of National Revenue issued a Notice of
Reassessment for the 1987 taxation year.  Revenue Canada reassessed Leasing on
the basis that the partnership transaction was invalid and that the true nature
of the transaction was a disposition by Leasing of its leasing assets to
Central, making the s. 97(2) election invalid and giving rise to recaptured
capital cost allowance in the hands of Leasing.  III.  Relevant
Statutory Provisions  10                              
The following statutory provisions are relevant to this appeal:  Bank Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-1  18.  (1)  A bank has the capacity and,
subject to this Act, the rights, powers and privileges of a natural person.  20.  (1)  No act of a bank, including any
transfer of property to or by a bank, is invalid by reason only that the act or
transfer is contrary to this Act.  174.  . . .  (2)  Except as authorized by or under this Act and
in accordance with such terms and conditions, if any, as are prescribed by the
regulations, a bank shall not, directly or indirectly,                                                                     . . .  (i)  acquire or hold an interest in Canada in, or otherwise invest
or participate in Canada in, a partnership or limited partnership;                                                                     . . .  (16)  A bank that contravenes any of paragraphs
(2)(a), (c), (f), (h), (i) or (j) is
guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
five hundred dollars in respect of each contravention.  Partnerships Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 370  2.  Partnership is the relation that
subsists between persons carrying on a business in common with a view to
profit. . . .  34.  A partnership is in every case
dissolved by the happening of any event that makes it unlawful for the business
of the firm to be carried on or for the members of the firm to carry it on in
partnership.  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, as amended  85.  (1)  Where a taxpayer has after May 6,
1974 disposed of any of his property that was a capital property (other than
real property, an interest therein or an option in respect thereof, owned by a
non-resident person), a Canadian resource property, a foreign resource
property, an eligible capital property or an inventory (other than real
property) to a taxable Canadian corporation for consideration that includes
shares of the capital stock of the corporation, if the taxpayer and the
corporation have jointly so elected in prescribed form and within the time
referred to in subsection (6), the following rules apply:  (a)  the amount that the taxpayer and the corporation have
agreed upon in their election in respect of the property shall be deemed to be
the taxpayer’s proceeds of disposition of the property and the corporation’s
cost of the property;  88.  (1)  Where a taxable Canadian
corporation (in this subsection referred to as the “subsidiary”) has been wound
up after May 6, 1974 and not less than 90% of the issued shares of each class
of the capital stock of the subsidiary were, immediately before the winding-up,
owned by another taxable Canadian corporation (in this subsection referred to
as the “parent”) and all of the shares of the subsidiary that were not owned by
the parent immediately before the winding-up were owned at that time by persons
with whom the parent was dealing at arm’s length, notwithstanding any other
provision of this Act, the following rules apply:  (a)  . . . each property of the subsidiary that
was distributed to the parent on the winding-up shall be deemed to have been
disposed of by the subsidiary for proceeds equal to,                                                                     . . .  (iii)  in the case of any other property, the cost amount to the
subsidiary of the property immediately before the winding-up;  .
. .  (f)  where property that was depreciable property of a
prescribed class of the subsidiary has been distributed to the parent on the
winding-up and the capital cost to the subsidiary of the property exceeds the
amount deemed by paragraph (a) to be the subsidiary’s proceeds of
disposition thereof, for the purposes of sections 13 and 20 and any regulations
made under paragraph 20(1)(a),  (i)  notwithstanding paragraph (c) the capital cost to the
parent of the property shall be deemed to be the amount that was the capital
cost thereof to the subsidiary, and  (ii)  the excess shall be deemed to have been allowed to the parent in
respect of the property under regulations made under paragraph 20(1)(a)
in computing income for taxation years before the acquisition by the parent of
the property.  97.  (1)  Where at any time after 1971 a
partnership has acquired property from a taxpayer who was, immediately after
that time, a member of the partnership, the partnership shall be deemed to have
acquired the property at an amount equal to its fair market value at that time
and the taxpayer shall be deemed to have disposed of the property for proceeds
equal to that fair market value.  (2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Act, other than subsection 85(5.1), where at any time after November 12, 1981 a
taxpayer has disposed of any capital property, a Canadian resource property, a
foreign resource property, an eligible capital property or an inventory to a
partnership that immediately after that time was a Canadian partnership of
which the taxpayer was a member, if the taxpayer and all the other members of
the partnership have jointly so elected in prescribed form and within the time
referred to in subsection 96(4), the following rules apply:  (a)  the provisions of paragraphs 85(1)(a) to (f)
apply to the disposition as if  (i)  the reference therein to “corporation's cost” were read as a
reference to “partnership’s cost”,  (ii)  the references therein to “other than any shares of the capital
stock of the corporation or a right to receive any such shares” and to “other
than shares of the capital stock of the corporation or a right to receive any
such shares” were read as references to “other than an interest in the
partnership”,  (iii)  the references therein to “shareholder of the corporation” were
read as references to “member of the partnership”,  (iv)  the references therein to “the corporation” were read as references
to “all the other members of the partnership”, and  (v)  the references therein to “to the corporation” were read as
references to “to the partnership”;  (b)  in computing, at any time after the disposition, the
adjusted cost base to the taxpayer of his interest in the partnership
immediately after the disposition,  (i)  there shall be added the amount, if any, by which the taxpayer’s
proceeds of disposition of the property exceed the fair market value, at the
time of the disposition, of the consideration (other than an interest in the
partnership) received by the taxpayer for the property, and  (ii)  there shall be deducted the amount, if any, by which the fair
market value, at the time of the disposition, of the consideration (other than
an interest in the partnership) received by the taxpayer for the property so
disposed of by him exceeds the fair market value of the property at the time of
the disposition; and  (c)  where the property so disposed of by the taxpayer to the
partnership is taxable Canadian property of the taxpayer, the interest in the
partnership received by him as consideration therefor shall be deemed to be
taxable Canadian property of the taxpayer.  IV.  Judicial
History  Tax Court
of Canada, [1995] 1 C.T.C. 2135  11                              
Bowman J.T.C.C. allowed Leasing’s appeal of the reassessment. Dealing
first with illegality under s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act ,  Bowman
J.T.C.C. recognized that Leasing’s entering into the Partnership was a breach
of the Bank Act , given that this resulted in indirect participation of
the Bank in a partnership.  Bowman J.T.C.C. held, however, that the breach of
the Bank Act  was not sufficient to invalidate the scheme because the Bank
Act  provides a penalty for the breach and because s. 20(1)  preserves the
validity of the impugned act.   13                              
Bowman J.T.C.C. held that the requirement to consider “substance over
form” in income tax law does not mean that the legal effect of a transaction is
irrelevant, nor does it mean that one is entitled to treat substance as
synonymous with economic effect.  He held that he could not ignore the form of
the legally binding relations in this case because the essential nature of a
transaction cannot be altered for income tax purposes by nomenclature. Bowman
J.T.C.C. concluded that the ultimate purpose of the transactions did not
warrant a disregard of the legal relations created by the scheme; therefore,
the parties had formed a valid partnership.  14                              
With respect to the sale of the partnership interest in the final step
of the scheme, Bowman J.T.C.C. held that the Bank had not traded its
partnership interest in the same way that a speculator or trader would trade
land or securities.  He held that the Bank’s partnership interest had been a
capital asset and that any characterization of the disposition of the
partnership interest had to consider the context in which the transaction had
occurred.  The reasons for disposing of the partnership interest, in the
context of a composite transaction forming an integral part of the winding up
of Leasing, were sufficient to dispel any inference that the Bank had been
engaged in a profit-making scheme.  He noted that when subsidiaries are wound
up, their assets are often transferred at cost to their parents to be
immediately resold.  He also noted that under s. 85 of the Income Tax Act,
assets that are not inventory may be rolled into a corporation at their cost
amount and immediately resold by the corporation at a profit without becoming
inventory, because of the rapidity of the resale.  Bowman J. rejected the
Crown's argument that the Bank's gain on the sale of its partnership interest
was income from an adventure in the nature of trade.  15                              
Bowman J. rejected the Crown's argument that the transactions violated
the object and spirit of s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act.  He held that
the words of a statute are of primary importance when determining the statute's
“object and spirit”, but that any interpretation of a provision inconsistent
with the obvious purpose of the provision should be avoided.  He held that s.
97(2) is intended to defer tax by permitting an asset transfer without
triggering an immediate tax result when the transfer is to a partnership.  He
held that the premise underlying s. 97(2) is that a taxpayer's real economic
position is not enhanced because the assets are merely being held in a
different vehicle.  He held that a taxpayer does not contravene s. 97(2) by taking
advantage of it.  Federal
Court of Appeal, [1996] 3 F.C. 713  16                              
The Court of Appeal rendered two separate judgments.  The judgment
relevant to this appeal is that dealing with the liability of Leasing for the
recapture of the capital cost allowance.  In this judgment, Linden J.A. for the
court concluded that no valid partnership had been created or, if one had been
created, that it was void or ultra vires the Bank.  Linden J.A. held
that Leasing had sold its assets to Central and had recaptured capital cost
allowance; therefore, it had to pay tax on the recapture.  17                              
Linden J.A. agreed that the transaction had not been a sham because no
element of deceit had been involved and because the scheme had formed legally
binding relationships.  However, he held that to achieve the desired tax
results the substance of the tax transaction must be considered, the
partnership scheme must be real, and its form must not be fanciful.  Linden
J.A. reviewed the evidence and held that the parties had not intended to carry
on business with a view to profit; therefore, s. 97(2) could not be relied upon
by the parties.  18                              
Linden J.A. held that any involvement by the Bank in a partnership
through Leasing would have been legally invalid, void and illegal because it
would have contravened s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act , which
prohibits banks from indirectly participating in partnerships through
subsidiaries.  He also held that s. 34 of the Partnerships Act would
have dissolved any partnership that might have been established because a
violation of s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act  would be illegal and
criminal within the meaning of s. 34.  He also held that a partnership was ultra
vires the Bank.  He rejected arguments that ss. 18(1)  and 20(1)  of the Bank
Act  offset the ultra vires doctrine.  He held that the parties had
been advised by counsel that signing the Partnership Agreement was a violation
of the Bank Act , that flagrant violations of the Bank Act  will
not be ignored and that this is not a circumstance for which the Court of Appeal
should grant relief under s. 20(1) .  He held the Court of Appeal was obliged to
apply the doctrine of ultra vires and to view the scheme as invalid.  V.  Issues  19                              
The following issues must be addressed to determine this appeal.  1.    Was Leasing a member of a valid partnership
with the subsidiaries of Central in December 1986 within the meaning of s. 2 of
the Partnerships Act?  2.    If Leasing was a member of a valid
partnership within the meaning of s. 2 of the Partnerships Act, was the
partnership rendered invalid by s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act , by
s. 34 of the Partnerships Act, or by the common law doctrines of
illegality or ultra vires?  3.    If the partnership was invalid, was Leasing
liable for recapture under s. 13 of the Income Tax Act as the person
that disposed of its depreciable assets to the Central subsidiary?     VI.  Analysis  1.                Was Leasing a member of a
valid partnership with the subsidiaries of Central in December 1986 within the
meaning of s. 2 of the Partnerships Act?  20                              
In order to answer this question, it is necessary to consider the
various legal requirements for the proper characterization of the transactions
entered into by Leasing.  The sham doctrine will not be applied unless there is
an element of deceit in the way a transaction was either constructed or
conducted.  This requirement was outlined by Estey J. as follows in Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at pp. 545-46:  A sham transaction:  This expression comes to us from decisions in the
United Kingdom, and it has been generally taken to mean (but not without
ambiguity) a transaction conducted with an element of deceit so as to create an
illusion calculated to lead the tax collector away from the taxpayer or the
true nature of the transaction; or, simple deception whereby the taxpayer
creates a facade of reality quite different from the disguised reality.  Both the trial
judge and the Court of Appeal correctly held that the transactions entered into
by the parties did not amount to a sham and the sham issue was not argued in
this Court.  However, the Court of Appeal, after holding that the transaction
did not amount to a sham, stated that the present case is an example of a
transaction “[w]here legal reality is found to be lacking” (p. 726).  The Court
of Appeal found that the trial judge erred in law by relying exclusively on
documents and forms and did not give proper consideration to the reality of the
situation.  21                              
After it has been found that the sham doctrine does not apply, it is
necessary to examine the documents outlining the transaction to determine
whether the parties have satisfied the requirements of creating the legal
entity that it sought  to create.  The proper approach is that outlined in Orion
Finance Ltd. v. Crown Financial Management Ltd., [1996] 2 B.C.L.C. 78
(C.A.), at p. 84:  The first task is to determine whether the documents are a sham
intended to mask the true agreement between the parties.  If so, the court must
disregard the deceptive language by which the parties have attempted to conceal
the true nature of the transaction into which they have entered and must
attempt by extrinsic evidence to discover what the real transaction was.  There
is no suggestion in the present case that any of the documents was a sham.  Nor
is it suggested that the parties departed from what they had agreed in the
documents, so that they should be treated as having by their conduct replaced
it by some other agreement.  Once the documents are accepted as genuinely
representing the transaction into which the parties have entered, its proper
legal categorisation is a matter of construction of the documents.  This does
not mean that the terms which the parties have adopted are necessarily
determinative.  The substance of the parties’ agreement must be found in the
language they have used; but the categorisation of a document is determined by
the legal effect which it is intended to have, and if when properly construed
the effect of the document as a whole is inconsistent with the terminology
which the parties have used, then their ill-chosen language must yield to the
substance.  22                              
Section 2 of the Partnerships Act defines partnership as “the
relation that subsists between persons carrying on a business in common with a
view to profit”.  This wording, which is common to the majority of partnership
statutes in the common law world, discloses three essential ingredients:  (1) a
business, (2) carried on in common, (3) with a view to profit.  I will examine
each of the ingredients in turn.  23                              
The existence of a partnership is dependent on the facts and
circumstances of each particular case.  It is also determined by what the
parties actually intended.  As stated in Lindley & Banks on Partnership
(17th ed. 1995), at p. 73:  “in determining the existence of a
partnership . . . regard must be paid to the true contract
and intention of the parties as appearing from the whole facts of the case”.  24                              
The Partnerships Act does not set out the criteria for
determining when a partnership exists.  But since most of the case law dealing
with partnerships results from disputes where one of the parties claims that a
partnership does not exist, a number of criteria that indicate the existence of
a partnership have been judicially recognized.  The indicia of a partnership
include the contribution by the parties of money, property, effort, knowledge,
skill or other assets to a common undertaking, a joint property interest in the
subject-matter of the adventure, the sharing of profits and losses, a mutual
right of control or management of the enterprise, the filing of income tax
returns as a partnership and joint bank accounts.  (See A. R. Manzer, A
Practical Guide to Canadian Partnership Law (1994 (loose-leaf)), at pp. 2-4
et seq. and the cases cited therein.)  25                              
In cases such as this, where the parties have entered into a formal
written agreement to govern their relationship and hold themselves out as
partners, the courts should determine whether the agreement contains the type
of provisions typically found in a partnership agreement, whether the agreement
was acted upon and whether it actually governed the affairs of the parties (Mahon
v. Minister of National Revenue, 91 D.T.C. 878 (T.C.C.)).  On the face of
the agreements entered into by the parties, I have found that the parties
created a valid partnership within the meaning of s. 2 of the Partnerships
Act.  I have also found that the parties acted upon the agreements and that
the agreements governed their affairs.  26                              
It should be noted that Leasing is the company whose tax liability is
the subject of this appeal.  In determining the proper effect to be given to
the Partnership, the concern is whether Leasing was a partner in a valid
partnership between December 24, 1986 and December 26, 1986.  The main dispute
between the parties concerns whether Leasing intended to carry on business in
common with Central’s subsidiaries with a view to profit.  In order for Leasing
to take advantage of the rollover provisions in s. 97(2) of the Income Tax
Act, it had to be a valid member of a partnership when it transferred its
assets.  The dispute does not surround the validity of the partnership with respect
to Central’s subsidiaries who entered the Partnership on December 24, 1986 and
continued to operate that Partnership long after Leasing and the Bank were no
longer members.  27                              
The Partnership Agreement contains most of the standard provisions that
appear in partnership agreements.  The agreement provides for the carrying on
of “leasing services and such other businesses as the Managing Partner may from
time to time determine” (Art. 2.01); it also provides for the distribution of
income or loss to “those Persons who are Partners on the last day of the fiscal
year of the Partnership” (Art. 5.09) and sets out the liability of the partners
(Art. 3.02).  The agreement further provides for the Management of the
Partnership (Art. IV), Accounts and Allocations (Art. V), Dissolution (Art.
VIII) and other provisions common to partnership agreements.  It is not
surprising that the Partnership contains all of the provisions required to form
a valid partnership.  The parties intended to set up a partnership that would comply
with s. 2 of the Partnerships Act and they succeeded.  (a)  Was There a Business?  28                              
By s. 1(1)(a) of the Partnerships Act, “business” includes
“every trade, occupation and profession”.  There is no doubt that equipment
leasing constitutes a business within the meaning of the Partnerships Act. 
The activities carried on by Leasing that were subsequently transferred to the
Partnership included sales financing and leasing, which involved, among other
things, the purchase of depreciable assets including heavy equipment and
aircraft, which were then leased for a term to corporations that required the
use of the assets in their business.  (b)  Was the Business Carried On in Common?  29                              
If a partnership is to exist, it must be shown that two or more people
carried on the business.  It is also fundamental that the business is carried
on in common (Lindley & Banks on Partnership, supra, at pp.
9-10).  The respondent argues that no active business activity was conducted
between December 24 and December 29, the period in which Leasing and
subsequently the Bank were members of the Partnership.  Therefore, according to
the respondent, the Partnership did not carry on business within the meaning of
s. 2 of the Partnerships Act.  Further, s. A.9(a) of the Master
Agreement set out that new transactions were prohibited between December 24 and
December 29 without unanimous consent.  Moreover, the three days over the 1986
Christmas holiday that were chosen for the purported involvement of Leasing in
the Partnership ensured that no business would be conducted.   Where machinery is rented out, the essential core operations may at
times be limited to accepting rental revenue and assuming the business risk and
other obligations.  At any time during that period, any client could demand the
execution of any of the contractual obligations, such as fixing an engine, for
example.  Where, because a rental business is fortunate enough to experience no
mechanical breakdowns or accidents during a period of time, it “passively”
accepts rental revenue and assumes business risk and obligations, it does not
necessarily follow that it is not carrying on a business during that period. 
Holding otherwise would imply that rental businesses are “intermittent”, that
is, that they carry on a business only when something goes wrong in the
operations.  Such a proposition is unacceptable.  31                              
In the present instance, it is true that between December 24 and
December 27, 1986, no meetings were held, no new transactions were entered into
by the parties and no decisions were made.  However, that is not determinative
of the fact that no business was carried on by the Partnership.  Prior to its
entering the Partnership, Leasing carried on business.  This business and its
assets were transferred to the Partnership on December 24, 1986.  There was no
termination of Leasing’s contracts with its customers and the contracts
continued during the period of December 24 to December 27.  32                              
Evidence that the business previously carried on by Leasing was carried
on by the Partnership is contained in a letter dated December 24, 1986 from Air
Canada, one of the Bank’s customers.  In the letter, Air Canada acknowledges
that “[Leasing] intends to sell and assign its interest in the Purchase
Agreements, the Aircraft and the Leases to an Ontario
partnership . . .”.  Air Canada consented to the “sale and
assignment of the Purchase Agreements, the Aircraft and the Leases” from the
Bank to Leasing and consented “to the sale and assignment of the Purchase
Agreements, the Aircraft and the Leases by [Leasing] to the Partnership”.  33                              
The fact that no new business was created during the period of Leasing 
and the Bank’s involvement in the Partnership does not negate the effect of the
existing business that was continued during this time.  The existence of a
valid partnership does not depend on the creation of a new business.  It is
common that partnerships are formed when two parties agree to carry on the
existing business of one of them, while the other contributes capital.  34                              
In addition, I am satisfied that the business that was carried on was
carried on by the partners in common.  Under the Partnership Agreement, the
Partners “delegate to the Managing Partner full power and authority to manage,
control, administer and operate the business and affairs of the Partnership and
to represent and enter into transactions which bind the Partnership” (Art.
4.01).  The fact that the management of the Partnership was given to the
Managing Partner does not mandate a conclusion that the business was not
carried on in common.  Nor does the fact that Central, acting alone, was
negotiating transactions relating to the lease portfolios prior to December 29,
1986.  The respondent argues that the exclusion of Leasing and the Bank from
any of those activities negates any claim that the Central entities and the
Continental entities were actually carrying on business in common during that
period.  As Lindley & Banks on Partnership, supra, point out,
at p. 9, one or more parties may in fact run the business on behalf of
themselves and the others without jeopardizing the legal status of the
arrangement.  35                              
If any of the negotiations that Central was involved in had resulted in
a decision by Central’s subsidiaries who were members of the Partnership during
the relevant period to follow through with the transaction, under the
Partnership Agreement, the Partnership would have been bound by these
agreements.  By entering the Partnership Agreement, Leasing and the Bank
recognized that any partner had the authority to bind the firm.  36                              
It is also relevant that during the brief term that Leasing and the Bank
were parties to the Partnership Agreement, they held themselves out as
partners. Various supporting documents, including correspondence with third
parties, tax returns, financial statements and assignments of leases effected
during this period, are consistent with the carrying on of a business in
common.  While this alone would not have the effect of validating the
Partnership, because holding out affects liability as against third parties and
not the essential validity of the arrangement (s. 15, Partnerships Act),
it is nonetheless evidence of the parties’ intention to carry on business in
common under the Partnership.  37                              
Bowman J.T.C.C. was correct in emphasizing that the members of the
Partnership could not hold themselves out to third parties as not being
partners.  In the Partnership Agreement, art. 3.02 sets out the liability of
the partners.  It provides in part:  “[s]ubject to Article XI, the Partners
shall, as between themselves, be liable for the obligations, liabilities and
losses of the Partnership in the same proportion as their respective
Interests.”  The Partnership was involved in the leasing of aircraft.  If,
during the period in which Leasing and the Bank were members of the
Partnership, liability of the lessor was engaged because of an event involving
a leased aircraft, Leasing and the Bank could not have denied that they were
members of the Partnership and, according to art. 3.02, would have been liable
for 99 percent of the loss incurred by the lessee.  38                              
The Bank and Leasing conducted themselves as partners for the duration
of their memberships in the Partnership.  Throughout that period, they were
subject to all of the rights and obligations of partners and carried on the
business of leasing in common with the other partners.  There is no evidence to
show that the leasing business carried on as defined in Hickman, supra,
was not carried on by Leasing and the Central subsidiaries.  (c)  Was the Business Carried On in Common with a View to Profit?  39                              
The Court of Appeal held that the parties intended to conduct a sale of
assets through a device they chose to call a partnership.  This intention did
not include a view to profit and in fact “the idea to share profits was an
afterthought when the parties originally put the deal together” (p. 731).  This
characterization by the Court of Appeal ignores the fact that the Partnership
Agreement provided for the distribution of the profits from the leasing
business being operated by the Partnership and that the Partnership continued
to carry on the business operated for profit by Leasing.  There is no evidence
of any expectation other than that profits would continue to be generated
during the predetermined term of Leasing’s involvement in the Partnership.  The
Court of Appeal also relied heavily on the fact that Leasing was not legally
entitled to a share of the profits of the first fiscal year because its
partnership interest had already been transferred to the Bank by the time the
year end was triggered on December 27, 1986.  This, however, is irrelevant to
the determination of the issue.  40                              
To determine whether the business was carried on with a view to profit,
it is necessary to look to the provisions of the Partnership Agreement
governing the distribution of profits.  5.06  Allocation of Net Income or Loss.  The net income or loss
for each fiscal year of the Partnership shall be allocated to the current
accounts of the Partners in proportion to their respective average capital
accounts for the period for which the allocation is made.  5.09  Allocation of Income and Loss for Tax Purposes.  The
income or loss of the Partnership for the whole of a fiscal year for the
purposes of the Income Tax Act shall be allocated to those Persons who
are Partners on the last day of the fiscal year of the Partnership in the proportions
set out in section 5.06.  The income or loss of the Partnership which is
allocated to those Partners shall be allocated among those Partners as of the
time and in the proportions set out in this article.  41                              
These provisions clearly contemplate the distribution of profits in
accordance with a partner’s interest in the Partnership.  Profit was
accumulated by the Partnership during the period of Leasing’s membership in
that partnership and that profit was distributed.  Leasing received a cheque
dated February 4, 1987 for $130,726 that was described in a financial statement
dated January 11, 1988 as a 99 percent share of partnership income for the
period December 24 to December 27, 1986.  Because Leasing had already
transferred its partnership interest to the Bank by December 27, 1986, it was
not entitled to receive the partnership income under the Partnership Agreement
as it was no longer a partner at year end.  This however, does not change the
fact that a generation of profit and profit sharing was contemplated and
effected under the Partnership Agreement.  Whether the entitlement belonged to
Leasing or to the Bank at the end of the year is of no consequence.  The
important consideration is that the 99 percent partnership interest owned initially
by Leasing and then the Bank carried with it a right to share in the profits of
business carried on by the Partnership.  42                              
It is not disputed that the ultimate objective of the series of
transactions  entered into by the parties and in particular the Partnership was
to duplicate the tax consequences of the original share transaction with
Central.  The Bank’s main intention and by extension, Leasing’s main intention
was to get rid of its leasing assets for the purpose of winding up.  As Bowman
J.T.C.C. held, at p. 2151:  One thing is clear.  Notwithstanding the pious assertions of a number
of witnesses that they intended to enter into a partnership with the other
parties, [the Bank’s] and [Leasing’s] intention was patently not to go into the
leasing business in partnership with [Central]. . . .  The whole
object of the exercise was precisely the opposite — to get out of
that business.  The partnership was merely a means to that end.  43                              
Simply because the parties had the overriding intention of creating a
partnership for one purpose does not, however, negate the fact that
profit-making and profit-sharing was an ancillary purpose.  This is sufficient
to satisfy the definition in s. 2 of the Partnerships Act in the
circumstances of this case.  At pp. 10-11, Lindley & Banks on
Partnership makes the following observation:  . . . if a partnership is formed with some other
predominant motive [other than the acquisition of profit], e.g., tax
avoidance, but there is also a real, albeit ancillary, profit element, it may
be permissible to infer that the business is being carried on “with a view of
profit.”  If, however, it could be shown that the sole reason for the creation
of a partnership was to give a particular partner the “benefit” of, say, a tax
loss, when there was no contemplation in the parties’ minds that a
profit . . . would be derived from carrying on the relevant
business, the partnership could not in any real sense be said to have been
formed “with a view of profit.”  44                              
This is not a case where the disentitlement of one partner to a share of
the profits was agreed to by the parties; nor is it a case where no profits
were anticipated during the term of a partner’s involvement.  During the period
in which Leasing and the Bank were partners in the business, the Partnership
earned a profit from its leasing operations and that profit was distributed at
year end.  45                              
The respondent argues that intending to constitute a valid partnership is
not the same thing as intending to carry on business in common with a view to
profit.  I agree.  The parties in the present case, however, set up a valid
partnership within the meaning of s. 2 of the Partnerships Act.  They
had the intention to and did carry on business in common with a view to
profit.  This conclusion is not based simply on the parties’ subjective
statements as to intention.  It is based on the objective evidence derived from
the Partnership Agreement entered into by the parties.  As Millett L.J. held in
Orion Finance, supra, at p. 85:  The question is not what the transaction is but whether it is in truth
what it purports to be.  Unless the documents taken as a whole compel a
different conclusion, the transaction which they embody should be categorised
in conformity with the intention which the parties have expressed in them. 46                              
I do not see anything in the documentation that is inconsistent with the
intention of the parties to create a partnership within the meaning of the Partnerships
Act.  (d)  Duration of the Partnership  47                              
In the present case, the Partnership Agreement provided for a fixed term
of membership for Leasing and the Bank in the Partnership.  It also provided
that the Partnership would continue indefinitely after Leasing and the Bank
were no longer members (Article XI, Initial Transactions).  There is no
authority for the proposition that a valid partnership cannot be formed for
fixed or relatively short and predetermined periods, nor is there authority for
the proposition that a person cannot be a member of a partnership for a single
transaction.  The respondent recognized that there is no set minimum period of
time required for a partnership to exist and accepted that a partnership may be
formed for a predetermined period.  The respondent argues, however, that a
partnership, being a relationship that “subsists” and that pertains to the
“carrying on” of a business in common with others, has a temporal quality.  In
the present case, the respondent argues, no business was carried on between
December 24, 1986 and December 26, 1986, the period that Leasing was a member
of the Partnership.  48                              
The duration of Leasing’s membership in the Partnership is not relevant 
in this case.  I found above that business was carried on in common with a view
to profit through the leasing activities of the Partnership between December 24
and December 27.  This satisfies the definition of partnership under the Partnerships
Act.  It is not necessary for Leasing to show that it carried on business
over a long period of time in the Partnership.  The Partnerships Act
does not limit the ability of a person to enter into a partnership for a single
transaction.  As long as the parties do not create what amounts to an empty
shell that does not in fact carry on business, the fact that the partnership
was created for a single transaction is of no consequence.  49                              
Section 85(1) of the Income Tax Act is a rollover provision for
corporations similar to the provision for partnerships contained in s. 97(2). 
Corporations are frequently created for the single purpose of deferring tax
liability by using s. 85(1) of the Income Tax Act.  As long as the
corporation is validly formed, there is no requirement that the taxpayer
demonstrate that the corporation was formed for anything other than the single
purpose of deferring tax liability.  Similarly, as long as the definition in s.
2 of the Partnerships Act is satisfied, a person is permitted to create
a partnership for the purpose of using s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act. 
It is recognized that the definition of a partnership requires that business
actually be carried on and that there is no such requirement for a corporation.
However, that  does not detract from the principle that a person should be
permitted to create a partnership for a single transaction.  50                              
The Court of Appeal held, in effect, that because the ultimate objective
of the Bank in proceeding with the partnership transaction was to effect a sale
of its leasing business to Central, neither Leasing nor the Bank could have had
the requisite intention to form a valid partnership.  The result of this
reasoning is that unless the only motive underlying the formation of a
partnership is to carry on business in common with a view to profit, a valid
partnership cannot be formed.  The underlying premise of this reasoning is also
that a transaction that is motivated by the securing of tax benefits is not a
valid transaction.  This reasoning cannot be supported.  51                              
A taxpayer who fully complies with the provisions of the Income Tax
Act ought not to be denied the benefit of such provisions simply because
the transaction was motivated for tax planning purposes.  In Stubart
Investments, supra, this Court unanimously rejected the “business
purpose test” and affirmed the proposition that it is permissible for a
taxpayer to take advantage of the terms of the Income Tax Act by
structuring a transaction that is solely motivated by the desire to minimize taxation. 
Similarly, in Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312, Iacobucci J., for
a unanimous Court, found, at p. 328:  In this appeal, despite conceding that these
factual elements are present, the respondent is asking the Court to examine and
evaluate the transaction in and of itself, and to conclude that the transaction
is somehow outside the scope of the section in issue.  In the absence of
evidence that the transaction was a sham or an abuse of the provisions of the
Act, it is not the role of the court to determine whether the transaction in
question is one which renders the taxpayer deserving of a deduction.  If the
terms of the section are met, the taxpayer may rely on it, and it is the option
of Parliament specifically to preclude further reliance in such situations.  Iacobucci J.
went on to say, at p. 330:  This transaction was obviously not a sham.  The
terms of the section were met in a manner that was not artificial.  Where the
words of the section are not ambiguous, it is not for this Court to find that
the appellants should be disentitled to a deduction because they do not deserve
a “windfall”, as the respondent contends.  In the absence of a situation of
ambiguity, such that the Court must look to the results of a transaction to
assist in ascertaining the intent of Parliament, a normative assessment of the
consequences of the application of a given provision is within the ambit of the
legislature, not the courts.  52                              
Having found that the transaction was not a sham, the Court of Appeal
should not have found that the parties lacked the requisite intention to form a
valid partnership simply because the transaction was motivated by a resulting
tax benefit.  The Court of Appeal proceeded on the basis that the predominance
of fiscal motives or the absence of a concurrent business purpose justifies or
compels the court to disregard the legal form of the transaction which the
parties intended.  53                              
The legal and commercial reality in the present case is that Leasing
intended to and did enter into a partnership with Central within the meaning of
s. 2 of the Partnerships Act.  The Court of Appeal erred by ignoring the
substance of a legally effective transaction.  2.                If Leasing was a member of a
valid partnership within the meaning of s. 2 of the Partnerships Act, was the
partnership rendered invalid by s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act , by s. 34 of the
Partnerships Act, or by the common law doctrines of illegality or ultra vires?  54                              
Section 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act  states that a bank
“shall not, directly or indirectly . . . acquire or hold an
interest in Canada in, or otherwise invest or participate in Canada in, a
partnership”.  There is no dispute that the entry into a partnership
constitutes a breach by the Bank of s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act . 
The Bank therefore contravened the Bank Act  by indirectly investing or
participating in a partnership.  The dispute concerns the effect of ss. 18(1) 
and 20(1)  of the Bank Act , the applicability of the ultra vires
doctrine, the effect of the doctrine of illegality and the effect of s. 34 of
the Partnerships Act.  (a)  Ultra Vires  55                              
The ultra vires doctrine was developed by the courts in the
mid-19th century to restrict the legal capacity of corporations created under
the Companies Act and its successor statutes.  The doctrine provided
that a corporation had the legal capacity to perform only those acts authorized
by its articles.  Any acts not authorized by the articles were void for want of
legal capacity (Ashbury Railway Carriage and Iron Co. v. Riche (1875),
L.R. 7 H.L. 653).  56                              
The doctrine was meant to limit the scope of activities of a corporation
in order to protect the interests of its creditors and shareholders.  It came
to be recognized that the doctrine produced inconvenience and occasional
hardship for the public who were expected to take notice of all limitations on
the corporation’s capacity as revealed through public documents.  The doctrine
was characterized by Iacobucci J. in Communities Economic Development Fund
v. Canadian Pickles Corp., [1991] 3 S.C.R. 388, at p. 406, as “a protection
to no one and a trap for the unwary”.  57                              
In 1974, the Canada Business Corporations Act , S.C. 1974-75-76,
c. 33 (“CBCA”), abolished the ultra vires doctrine in the context
of Canadian corporations by attributing to corporations the capacity of a
natural person.  Section 15(1) of the CBCA provided that “[a] corporation has
the capacity and, subject to this Act, the rights, powers and privileges of a
natural person”.  The CBCA also provides at s. 16(3)  that “[n]o act of a
corporation, including any transfer of property to or by a corporation, is
invalid by reason only that the act or transfer is contrary to its articles or
this Act”.  58                              
In 1980, the Bank Act  was amended to provide, in s. 18(1) , that
“[a] bank has the capacity and, subject to this Act, the rights, powers and
privileges of a natural person”.  Section 20(1)  states that “[n]o act of a
bank, including any transfer of property to or by a bank, is invalid by reason
only that the act or transfer is contrary to this Act”.  These amendments
parallel the amendments to corporations Acts and their aim is also to abolish
the ultra vires doctrine.  As a result of s. 18(1) , banks were given the
legal capacity to perform any act, even if it would constitute an offence under
the Bank Act .  M. H. Ogilvie, Canadian Banking Law (1991),
states, at p. 35:  When a bank engages in any conduct — including the
transfer of property to or by a bank — which is contrary to the Bank
Act , the conduct is not invalid, rather merely contrary to the Act.  At
common law, when a company had been found to have engaged in an ultra vires
transaction, the legal effect was to render that transaction void and
unenforceable.  Since 1980, that is no longer the case in relation to
transactions with banking corporations.  Legal rights and duties created in
transactions prohibited to banks by the Act and conferred on third parties are
valid and no longer subject to disturbance by judicial avoidance of the
original prohibited transaction.  Rather, the bank is subject to the penalties
set out in the Bank Act , and probably also those existing in the general
law, for engaging in prohibited actions.  59                              
Crawford and Falconbridge, Banking and Bills of Exchange (8th ed.
1986), vol. 1, states a similar principle, at p. 94:  It will be noted that the Bank Act  bestows
on the banks the capacity of a natural person, without limitation or
qualification.  The reference to the other provisions of the Act qualifies only
the rights, powers and privileges of the banks.  In other words, the banks now
have the legal capacity to perform any act, even though it may constitute an
offence under the Bank Act  or some other law.  Like man, in Milton’s
view, they have been created capable of standing, but free to fall.  A good
illustration of this is provided by sub-s. 174(2) , which prohibits the banks
from engaging in the activities therein described.  A violation of one of those
prohibitions by a bank would not result in the transaction involved being
void — or even necessarily
voidable. . . .  It would, however, subject the bank,
and possibly also the directors, to the penalties set out in sub-ss. 174(17)  to
(20)  and sub-s. 54(2)  respectively.  60                              
The doctrine of ultra vires has been abolished with respect to
banks.  Banks now have the capacity of a natural person.  The Court of Appeal
came to the wrong conclusion in this regard because it misapplied the Canadian
Pickles case by relying on it to hold that the ultra vires doctrine
is not abolished, but merely curtailed by s. 18(1)  of the Bank Act .  The
Court of Appeal erred by failing to recognize the distinction between the
statutory provisions in Canadian Pickles and the relevant provisions of
the Bank Act .  61                              
In Canadian Pickles, this Court held that the doctrine of ultra
vires has been abolished for corporations incorporated under most business
corporations legislation.  The Court held, however, that the doctrine was still
alive with respect to the Communities Economic Development Fund of Manitoba. 
The Court stated that the doctrine continues to apply to corporations created
by special Act for public purposes.  At pp. 406-7, Iacobucci J. held:  However, in spite of the general trend towards
abolition of the doctrine of ultra vires, the limited aspects of the
doctrine, as seen from the above review, may be present with respect to
corporations created by special act for public purposes.  Not only is there a
long line of cases supporting the principle, but one may argue that this
protects the public interest because a company created for a specific purpose
by an act of a legislature ought not to have the power to do things not in
furtherance of that purpose.  Of course, it is open to the legislature to rebut
this presumption because, for example, the legislature may provide for other
remedies short of invalidity for acts contrary to the statute.  62                              
Banks are not analogous to the Economic Development Fund described in
the Canadian Pickles case.  The Bank was not created by a special Act
for public purposes.  It was incorporated under a general Act of Parliament to
engage in the ordinary commercial business of banking.  Parliament has provided
for other remedies short of invalidity for acts of banks that are contrary to
the statute.  The Bank Act  contains penalties for breaches and, pursuant
to s. 246 of the Act, the Inspector General of Banks is empowered to “take
charge on the premises of the assets of the bank or any portion thereof, if the
need should arise, for the purposes of satisfying himself that the provisions
of this Act . . . are being duly observed”.  63                              
The Bank, by virtue of its capacity, rights, powers and privileges, had
the capacity to participate in a partnership.  The prohibition in s. 174(2) (i)
of the Bank Act  does not make partnerships ultra vires the Bank. 
The questions remain, however, whether the Bank’s participation in the
Partnership is void on the basis of the doctrine of illegality or by virtue of
s. 34 of the Partnerships Act.  (b)   The Doctrine of Illegality  64                              
Under the doctrine of illegality, a contract prohibited by statute or
for an illegal purpose will be declared void even if  it conforms to all other
requirements of a valid transaction.  A classic case concerning statutory
illegality is Cope v. Rowlands (1836), 2 M. & W. 149, 150 E.R. 707,
where Parke B. held (at p. 710):  . . . where the contract which the plaintiff seeks to
enforce, be it express or implied, is expressly or by implication forbidden by
the common or statute law, no court will lend its assistance to give it
effect.  It is equally clear that a contract is void if prohibited by a
statute, though the statute inflicts a penalty only, because such a penalty
implies a prohibition.  65                              
It should follow, therefore, that the absolute prohibition of a contract
by a statute renders the contract void and of no effect.  However, as G. H. L.
Fridman points out in The Law of Contract in Canada (3rd ed. 1994), at
p. 348:  It might be thought . . . that
the doctrine was clear and uncomplicated, that whenever a statute prohibited a
certain course of conduct, or required a particular course of conduct, the
failure to observe which resulted in a penalty of some kind, a contract which
infringed the statutory prohibition or requirement would be illegal and
therefore void.  This situation is not as straightforward as that.
. . . in some instances a statute while involving illegality, in
the sense of prescribing penalties for certain conduct, will not have the
effect of rendering void a contract entered into in breach of the statute.  66                              
In fact, the rigidity of the doctrine of illegality first gave rise to
exceptions  which dealt with the return of property transferred under an
illegal contract  (Fridman, supra, at p. 424).  This development was
nevertheless considered insufficient.  In Sidmay Ltd. v. Wehttam Investments
Ltd. (1967), 61 D.L.R. (2d) 358 (Ont. C.A.), aff’d on other grounds, [1968]
S.C.R. 828, Laskin J.A. (as he then was) held that the court must take into
account the harmful effect on the parties for whose protection the law making
the bargain illegal exists before deciding to enforce or rescind the bargain. 
This approach was also adopted by Krever J. (as he then was) in Royal Bank
of Canada v. Grobman (1977), 18 O.R. (2d) 636 (H.C.), at pp. 652-53.  67                              
The doctrine of illegality was recently examined by the Federal Court of
Appeal in Still v. Minister of National Revenue (1997), 221 N.R. 127. 
Robertson J.A. noted at the outset that the doctrine of illegality is divided
into two categories:  common law illegality and statutory illegality.  With
regard to statutory illegality, he noted that the classic approach affirmed in Neider
v. Carda of Peace River District Ltd., [1972] S.C.R. 678, had given rise to
many avoidance techniques in the courts, particularly where the illegality
resulted from the performance of the contract rather than its formation.  On
the issue of formation, Robertson J.A. was prepared to expand the modern
approach to illegality further, stating, at p. 139, that “a finding of
illegality is dependent, not only on the purpose underlying the statutory
prohibition, but also on the remedy being sought and the consequences which
flow from a finding that a contract is unenforceable”.  68                              
The Court of Appeal held that not all findings of invalidity are
prohibited by s. 20(1)  of the Bank Act .  This approach is supported by
Crawford and Falconbridge, supra, and Ogilvie, supra.  Crawford
and Falconbridge state, at p. 97:  But it should be noted that s. 20 refers to invalidity “by reason only”
of acts in contravention.  That leaves open the possibility that vestiges of
the common law sanctions upon unlawful conduct might still apply.  For example,
the modern approach of the courts could not be relied upon to validate or
enforce an agreement consciously and deliberately entered into in violation of
the Bank Act . . . .  69                              
The appellant’s position is that s. 20(1)  of the Bank Act  has the
effect of eliminating the continued application of the doctrine of illegality. 
A construction of s. 20(1)  that completely ousts the Court’s jurisdiction to
find an act of the bank invalid would impose a requirement that a court
recognize all acts as valid, no matter how egregious the illegality.  The
respondent argues that to find that no act done by a bank that is contrary to
the Bank Act  is invalid is to render the prohibitions set out in s.
174(2) of the Act meaningless.  In answer to this, the appellant submits that
the proper effect to be given to the prohibitions in the Bank Act  is
that the penalties set out in the Bank Act  amount to a mere licence fee
for doing what the Bank Act  prohibits.  70                              
The consequence of prohibiting certain transactions under the Bank
Act   can be disastrous for third parties who may be unaware of the
limitations on a bank’s rights.  The consequences are the same as those
identified by courts and Law Reform Commissions which criticized the rigid
application of a declaration of invalidity under the doctrine of illegality as
it relates to statutory prohibitions.  I agree with the Court of Appeal,
however, that s. 20(1)  on its face does not limit all findings of invalidity. 
Section 20(1)  states that no act of a bank is invalid by reason only
that the act is contrary to the Act.  This section serves, in particular, to
relieve the hardship for unsuspecting third parties of the effects of a rigid
application of the doctrine of illegality but does not eliminate the doctrine
entirely.  A. R. Manzer, in an annotation to this section in The Bank Act 
Annotated (1993), at p. 29, states:  This provision is for the benefit of third parties dealing with a bank
by preventing actions of the bank from being declared null and void and
consequently of no effect, only because they are contrary to the bank’s
incorporating instrument or the Bank Act .  71                              
There is no conflict between the doctrine of ultra vires and a
finding that s. 20(1)  does not eliminate all findings of illegality.  The
apparent conflict between the doctrine of illegality and the doctrine of ultra
vires must be addressed by referring to the foundations of those
doctrines.  It is not the capacity of the bank to enter into a partnership that
is limited by a finding of invalidity.  Rather, it is the right of the bank to
participate in certain activities that may be limited.  The distinction between
capacity under the ultra vires doctrine and illegality was explained by
F. W. Wegenast in The Law of Canadian Companies (1979), at pp. 136-37,
where he stated:  It must be borne in mind also that the entire
absence of the ultra vires rule would not mean that there were no
limitations on the legal rights of a corporation.  Just as a natural person is
capable of doing things that are unlawful, so the capacity of a corporation may
be broader than its rights.  It has been said that “ultra vires and
illegality represent totally different ideas,” although a prohibition may be in
such form that it renders the prohibited act both illegal and ultra vires. 
But an act which is ultra vires is not necessarily either malum in se
or malum prohibitum.  On the other hand, although it may be true,
generally speaking, that a corporate act expressly forbidden by statute is ultra
vires, it is also clear that an act may be illegal without being ultra
vires, and remedies are available to enforce the legal limitations of
corporations without invoking the plea of ultra vires.  In many cases,
indeed, it would be quite immaterial whether the question were raised as one of
right or of capacity.  Thus in the case of a shareholder seeking an injunction
to restrain the company from any particular act it would be a sufficient ground
to say that the company had not the right to do the act, without saying
that it was not capable.  The same could be said as regards action on behalf of
the Crown by way of scire facias or otherwise.  [Emphasis in original.]  72                              
Section 20(1) is a saving provision.  It is not a provision allowing a
bank to do what it is prohibited from doing.  Since it is a saving provision,
the same principles that guide the modern doctrine of illegality should guide a
finding of invalidity under the Bank Act .  In the present case, a
declaration that the bank’s participation in the Partnership is prohibited does
not harm any third party.  The bank deliberately contravened the Bank Act 
and it appears from the evidence that it did so with the knowledge of the other
partners.  However, a finding of invalidity on the basis of illegality in the
present case would deprive s. 20(1) of any effect.  The doctrine of illegality
would be triggered by the prohibition set out in s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank
Act .  To find that the Partnership is invalid on this basis alone amounts
to a finding on invalidity by reason only of an act in contravention of
the statute.  73                              
It does not follow, however, as the appellant argued, that the
prohibitions set out in the Bank Act  amount to a licensing scheme. 
These are clear restrictions on the Bank’s right to enter into transactions. 
Section 20(1) , in this context, precludes a finding of invalidity that is based
only on a breach of the statute.  There are other remedies, in the Bank Act 
in particular, to enforce the prohibitions set out in the Bank Act .  For
example, pursuant to s. 246  of the Bank Act , the Inspector General of
Banks is empowered to “take charge on the premises of the assets of the bank or
any portion thereof, if the need should arise, for the purposes of satisfying
himself that the provisions of this Act . . . are being duly
observed”.  74                              
Although I accept that s. 20(1)  is not a complete bar to the application
of the doctrine of illegality in the appropriate case, I do not think that it
applies in the present circumstances.  I will now examine the application of s.
34 of the Partnerships Act on the validity of the partnership created on
December 24, 1986.  (c)  The Partnerships Act  75                              
The Court of Appeal held that s. 34 of the Partnerships Act
expressly dissolved any partnership that may have been created in the present
case because s. 174(2) (i) of the Bank Act  made it unlawful within
the meaning of s. 34 for members of the firm to carry on the Partnership. 
Section 34 provides:  34.  A partnership is in every case
dissolved by the happening of any event that makes it unlawful for the business
of the firm to be carried on or for the members of the firm to carry it on in
partnership.  76                              
The appellant argues that the Court of Appeal erred because the penalty
imposed by s. 174(16)  of the Bank Act  represents what has been described
as “the price of a licence for doing what the statute apparently forbids.” 
Therefore, it does not compel the conclusion that either the Bank or Leasing
was incapable of becoming a member of a valid partnership or that the
Partnership was automatically dissolved after its formation on the basis of
unlawfulness, pursuant to s. 34.  77                              
Both the Court of Appeal and the appellant rely on Lindley &
Banks on Partnership, supra, at p. 135, where it states:  . . . although a statute may appear to prohibit certain
activities and impose a penalty for failure to observe its provisions, it does
not follow that conduct which would attract the penalty is necessarily
illegal.  If the statute can genuinely be classed as prohibitory, as will be
the case if the penalty is imposed for the protection of the public, then such
conduct will be illegal.  Per contra if, on a true construction of the
statute, the penalty merely represents, as Lord Lindley put it, “the price of a
licence for doing what the statute apparently forbids.”  78                              
The penalty provision in the Bank Act  dealing with the
participation in a Canadian partnership contrary to s. 174(2) (i) is
contained in s. 174(16) .  It reads as follows:  174.  . . .  (16) A bank that contravenes any of paragraphs (2)(a),
(c), (f), (h), (i) or (j) is guilty of an
offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars in respect of each contravention.  79                              
It is argued that s. 34 of the Partnerships Act and s. 20(1)  of
the Bank Act  are in conflict because s. 20(1)  ensures that all acts done
contrary to the Bank Act  are not invalid by reason only of a
contravention of the statute.  The effect of s. 20(1) , it is argued, is that no
acts done contrary to the Bank Act  are unlawful.  By paying the “licence
fee” set out in s. 174(2)  of the Bank Act , a bank is permitted to enter
into a partnership.  For s. 34 of the Partnerships Act to then render
the participation of a bank in a partnership unlawful is contrary to the Bank
Act  as it prohibits what the Bank Act  allows.  What is argued, in
effect, is that the Bank Act , as a federal statute, must prevail over
the Partnerships Act, which is a provincial statute.  80                              
The wording of the penalty provision contained in s. 174(16)  makes it
clear that the prohibitions contained in s. 174(2)  do not amount to a
regulatory scheme providing that licence fees be paid for what the Bank Act 
prohibits.  To interpret the section in this manner ignores the clear wording
of the Bank Act .  Section 174(16)  labels a contravention of the Act an
“offence” subject to “summary conviction” and sets out what amounts to a fine. 
Moreover, even if the combination of ss. 18(1)  and 20(1)  serves to preserve the
validity of the transaction that is prohibited by the Act, the action is no
less “unlawful” within the meaning of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act
because it is an action that is contrary to the clear wording of the Bank
Act .  81                              
As I do not accept that the penalties outlined in s. 174(16)  represent a
licence fee for doing what the Bank Act  clearly prohibits in s. 174(2) ,
I do not find that s. 20(1)  of the Bank Act  and s. 34 of the Partnerships
Act are in conflict.  The effect of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act is
clear:  the unlawfully formed partnership is dissolved ab initio.  The
stipulation in s. 20(1)  of the Bank Act , that no act of a bank is invalid
by reason only of a contravention of that Act, is of no consequence; the
act is not invalid by reason only of the prohibition in s. 174(2) (i),
but rather by reason of the effect of the contravention on the validity of the
partnership under another statute, the Partnerships Act.  Payment of the
penalties set out in s. 174(16)  of the Bank Act  does not render lawful
what the Bank Act  prohibits.  82                              
The respondent submits that s. 34 of the Partnerships Act should
be construed to render invalid any partnership entered into by the Bank or its
subsidiary.  It can be argued, however,  that the effect of dissolving the
Partnership under s. 34 of the Partnerships Act, when Leasing became a
partner, is to make Leasing subject to the prohibitions in the Bank Act . 
If Leasing were subject to the prohibitions in the Bank Act , it would be
unlawful for it, as a partner, to carry on the business of the Partnership and
would therefore be contrary to s. 34 of the Partnerships Act.  The
argument is that the Bank is subject to the prohibitions and penalties set out
in the Bank Act , but that Leasing’s activities are not made unlawful
because of the Bank’s breach of the statute.  To hold otherwise would amount to
lifting the corporate veil to determine who are the investors who hold shares
in a corporate partner and to determine if the investor has been involved in
any unlawful activity.  83                              
I do not accept that a finding that the Partnership is unlawful under s.
34 necessitates a finding that Leasing is subject to the prohibitions in the Bank
Act .  Section 34 of the Partnerships Act states that a partnership
is dissolved upon the happening of an event that makes it unlawful “for the
business of the firm to be carried on or for the members of the firm to
carry it on in partnership” (emphasis added).  The prohibitions in the Bank
Act  clearly make it unlawful for a bank to “indirectly” participate in a
partnership.  Any indirect participation by a bank, i.e., participation through
a subsidiary company,  makes the carrying on of business in the partnership
“unlawful” within the meaning of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act.  84                              
With regard to the second part of s. 34, under the reasoning that it
cannot be unlawful for Leasing to be a member of the Partnership because it is
not subject to the prohibitions of the Bank Act , the unlawful event must
have occurred when the Bank, which is clearly subject to the Bank Act ,
became a partner on December 27, 1986.  The Partnership would therefore have
been dissolved on December 27, 1986.  I do not accept, however, that the
“unlawful” event under s. 34 of the Partnerships Act occurred only when
the Bank directly became involved in the Partnership on December 27, 1986.  In
my view, Leasing’s participation in the Partnership on December 24, 1986 can
still be considered “unlawful” within the meaning of s. 34 of the Partnerships
Act by reason of the public policy component of the common law doctrine of
illegality.  85                              
The public policy component of the common law doctrine of illegality was
not specifically pleaded in the present case; however, the respondent did plead
that the Partnership was rendered invalid by s. 34 of the Partnerships Act
because of the Bank’s or Leasing’s involvement in the Partnership. 
Moreover, as Krever J. (as he then was) set out in Menard v. Genereux
(1982), 39 O.R. (2d) 55 (H.C.), at p. 64:  It is, however, well established that whether or not they are pleaded,
if facts are shown in the course of a trial which may render an agreement
unenforceable by reason of illegality or public policy a court must take these
facts into consideration and, depending on the circumstances, act upon them if
necessary by refusing to lend its assistance to a party seeking to enforce his
or her rights by relying on the agreement.  86                              
I have discussed the doctrine of illegality as applied to contracts
prohibited by statute.  The common law doctrine of illegality and its effect on
the validity of a contract must also be considered with regard to acts contrary
to public policy.  The development of the law in this area can be traced to Holman
v. Johnson (1775), 1 Cowp. 341, 98 E.R. 1120, where Lord Mansfield stated,
at p. 1121:  The principle of public policy is this;  ex dolo malo non oritur
actio.  No Court will lend its aid to a man who founds his cause of action upon
an immoral or an illegal act.  If, from the plaintiff’s own stating or
otherwise, the cause of action appears to arise ex turpi causâ, or the
transgression of a positive law of this country, there the Court says he has no
right to be assisted.  It is upon that ground the Court goes; not for the sake
of the defendant, but because they will not lend their aid to such a plaintiff.  87                              
Since Holman, the courts have examined many transactions which
involve what the courts considered to be immoral or illegal acts. The public
policy in the present case is similar to the public policy recognized in the
case law where the courts have refused to uphold a contract to commit a crime. 
To enforce a contract of this type is to recognize that it is valid to agree to
circumvent the law for economic gain.  As Cheshire, Fifoot and Furmston’s
Law of Contract (13th ed. 1996), explains, at p. 375:  “An allied rule of
public policy is that no person shall be allowed to benefit from his own
crime.”  88                              
While it may not be strictly contrary to the Bank Act  for Leasing
to enter into a partnership, the parties to the agreements are, in effect,
asking that they be permitted to benefit from a deliberate breach of the
provisions of the Bank Act .  In this case, it is clear that, by virtue
of s. 174  of the Bank Act , the Bank is prohibited from directly or indirectly
participating in a partnership.  The parties to the Master Agreement and the
Partnership Agreement were aware of this prohibition, but proceeded to enter
into the Partnership with this knowledge.  It is worth reiterating that Leasing
declined to give the representations and warranties regarding qualification to
carry on the business of the Partnership that had been requested of all
proposed members.  89                              
The Bank negotiated the terms of the Master Agreement and set up a
transaction that it hoped would allow it to circumvent the terms of the Bank
Act  and avoid the consequences of the dissolution section in s. 34 of the Partnerships
Act.  To find that the Partnership is dissolved when the Bank directly
becomes involved on December 27, 1986 but not when Leasing, acting for the
Bank, became involved in the Partnership on December 24, 1986 is to give effect
to a transaction that offends public policy.  To sanction the participation of
Leasing in the Partnership is to sanction the agreement to circumvent the
provisions and penalties of the Bank Act  and the Partnerships Act.  90                              
Is the finding that the transaction offends public policy sufficient to
label the transaction illegal?  As noted earlier, Still, supra,
sets out the modern approach to this area of the law.  At p. 138, Robertson
J.A. explains the differences between the classical model of illegality and the
modern approach.  He states that the modern approach to illegality recognizes
that a contract will not be considered void ab initio simply because it
is prohibited.  Under the modern approach, the contract can be declared
illegal, and relief may be granted as an exception, or the contract can be held
not to be illegal, and therefore enforceable.  Enforceability of a contract
depends upon an assessment of the purpose and objects of the prohibition, in
the context of the case.  91                              
Similarly, C. Boyle and D. R. Percy, eds., in Contracts:  Cases
and Commentaries (5th ed. 1994), state, at p. 719:  One way of conceptualizing this area might be to focus on the instances
where public or communitarian concerns override the contracting parties’
interests in ordering their private affairs as they choose. . . . 
This approach is well-expressed in the early case of Maddox v. Fuller
(1937), 173 So. 12 at 16:  “The true test . . . is whether the
public interest is injuriously affected in such substantial manner that private
rights and interests should yield to those of the public.”  92                              
Boyle and Percy go on to state that “[o]n the other hand, it is possible
to see the enforcement of certain contracts as reflecting public policy
concerns just as much as the non-enforcement of other contracts”.  The proper
question therefore, in my view, is whether it is in the interests of public
policy to recognize the validity of the Partnership or whether it is in the
interests of public policy to refuse to give effect to the transaction.  In all
of the circumstances, I conclude that it is contrary to public policy to allow
the parties to the transaction to benefit from their deliberate breach of the
prohibitions set out in the Bank Act .  No third party will be harmed by
the refusal to give effect to the transaction.  All of the parties to the
Master Agreement and the Partnership Agreement were aware that they were
assisting the Bank in breaching the statute.  The only hardship that may result
from a finding that the formation of the Partnership on December 24, 1986 is
illegal at common law on the grounds of public policy is that Leasing will not
benefit from the deferred tax payment under s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act.  93                              
Even though I have found that Leasing’s participation in the Partnership
is illegal on the ground of public policy, it is not necessary in this case to
consider the effect of a finding of illegality at common law and the possible
remedies set out in G. H. Treitel, The Law of Contract (9th ed. 1995),
at pp. 438-66; Cheshire, Fifoot and Furmston’s Law of Contract, supra,
at pp. 385-406.  The result of a finding that Leasing’s participation in the
Partnership is contrary to public policy is that it is “unlawful” within the
meaning of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act and that the Partnership is
dissolved.  94                              
In closing on this issue, I wish to add that a finding that the Bank was
prohibited from participating in the Partnership, directly or indirectly,
therefore rendering the transaction invalid, does not render invalid the
participation of the other parties in the Partnership.  The other two
subsidiaries of Central (693396 and CCMI) were valid participants in the
Partnership and in my view created a valid partnership at law between
themselves on December 24, 1986.  After Leasing and subsequently the Bank are
removed from the Partnership, it continued as a valid entity.  This proposition
is supported by Hudgell Yeates & Co. v. Watson, [1978] 2 All E.R.
363 (C.A.).  In that case, a partnership was dissolved by operation of s. 34 of
the Partnership Act 1890, the same provision as that contained in the
Ontario Partnerships Act, because one member of a law firm’s practising
certificate lapsed without the knowledge of the other partners.  The
partnership, however, was reconstituted as a partnership between the remaining
partners.  3.                Was Leasing liable for
recapture under s. 13 of the Income Tax Act as the person that disposed of its
depreciable assets to the Central subsidiary?  95                              
Having found that Leasing was not a member of a valid partnership and could
not take advantage of s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act, I must determine
whether Leasing is liable for recapture of capital cost allowance as the vendor
of the leasing assets. Since the transaction entered into by the parties did
not involve the transfer of a partnership interest, it follows that what was
transferred from the Continental group to the Central group was leasing
assets.  Leasing claims that a finding that the property that was transferred
to Central was leasing assets, rather than an interest in a partnership, does
not make Leasing the vendor of those assets and, therefore, liable for the
recapture of capital cost allowance.  The Court of Appeal, after finding that
no valid partnership existed, did not make an express finding that Leasing sold
the leasing assets to Central.  It simply attributed the recapture to Leasing
and upheld the Crown’s reassessment.  Bowman J.T.C.C. did not make a finding on
this issue because once he found that a valid partnership had been formed, it
was not necessary to determine who would have disposed of the assets if no
partnership had been formed.  96                              
Leasing argues that it was the Bank that disposed of the leasing assets 
and on that basis, it is not liable for the recapture of capital cost
allowance.  Leasing stressed that the original transaction with Central was to
be a sale of the shares in Leasing and that the Bank would have been the
vendor, given that it was the sole shareholder in the company.  While this may
be true, I do not think that it follows that the Bank was the vendor of the
leasing assets.  97                              
Having found that the substance of the transaction was a sale of assets,
the conveyance of those assets occurred when Leasing signed the Master
Agreement on December 23, 1986. The s. 97(2) election showed all three of the
Central subsidiaries as transferees under the conveyance of assets, not just
the two subsidiaries that signed the December 24, 1986 Partnership Agreement. 
The three Central subsidiaries appeared to have a bona fide intention to
carry on business in common with each other and there was no legal prohibition
to prevent them from forming a partnership between themselves under the name
Central Capital Leasing.  The failure of Leasing ever to be a member of a valid
partnership with any of them did not prevent the assets from being acquired by
the Central subsidiaries and being held by them under the name Central Capital
Leasing.  Once the partnership scheme is collapsed vis-à-vis Leasing,
what is left is a sale of Leasing’s assets to Central’s subsidiaries on
December 24, 1986.  98                              
Leasing argues that the sale of the assets effectively took place on
December 29, 1986, two days after the purported transfer of the 99 percent
partnership interest from Leasing to the Bank.  In other words, it is argued
that the transfer from Leasing to the Bank on December 27, 1986 would in
reality have been a transfer of the leasing assets if the partnership was
invalid and would have made the Bank the owner of the assets on the date they
were transferred to Central.  99                              
Section 13 of the Income Tax Act imposes the tax liability for
recapture of capital cost allowance on the person who owned depreciable assets
and disposed of those assets.  The only person that can be liable for the
recapture is Leasing because, as owner of the assets on December 24, 1986,
Leasing transferred those assets to what it hoped to be a valid partnership. 
The Bank was not a party to the transfer.  100                          
What the appellant seeks to do is to characterize the Bank as having
acquired Leasing’s assets when the 99 percent partnership interest was
transferred to it on December 27, 1986.  This would make the Bank the vendor of
the assets which disposed of them to Central on December 29, 1986.  To adopt
this approach would require the invalid partnership interest that was
transferred to the Bank by Leasing to be converted to a transfer of assets. 
This approach is flawed because, by December 29, 1986, Leasing was no longer
the owner of the assets.  The fact that the Partnership was not a valid one vis-à-vis
Leasing and that consequently the s. 97(2) rollover was ineffective does not
negate the consequence that the assets were transferred on December 24, 1986.  101                          
The proceeds of the sale of the assets were paid to the Bank on December
29, 1986 in the form of notes and debentures from Central.  This, however, does
not change the fact that Leasing was the vendor of those assets on December 24,
1986 and was entitled to the proceeds of the disposition.  Income tax
principles require that taxpayers be taxed on amounts that are receivable.  The
transfer of the “partnership interest” from Leasing to the Bank could arguably
be characterized as a transfer of  the proceeds that Leasing was to receive
from the sale of its assets to Central subsidiaries.  However, even
characterized in this way, Leasing is liable for the recapture of capital cost
allowance as the vendor of the assets.  Subsection 56(4) of the Income Tax
Act requires that where a taxpayer transfers rights to income that should
have been included as income for the taxation year because the amount would
have been receivable in that year, the taxpayer will be taxed on that income.  VII.  Conclusion  102                          
Although the parties in this case set up a valid partnership within the
meaning of s. 2 of the Partnerships Act, the participation of Leasing in
that partnership was void by virtue of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act. 
The collapse of the partnership scheme vis-à-vis Leasing, however, does
not change the fact that Leasing’s assets were transferred to Central’s
subsidiaries on December 24, 1986.  Because these assets were not transferred
to a partnership pursuant to s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act, Leasing
cannot take advantage of that provision and is therefore liable for the
recapture of  capital cost allowance on its depreciable assets pursuant to s.
13 of the Income Tax Act.  I would dismiss the appeal with costs.  //McLachlin
J.//  The judgment of Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ. was
delivered by  103                          
McLachlin J. -- My
colleague Justice Bastarache concludes that the Continental Bank Leasing
Corporation (“Leasing”) cannot take advantage of s. 97(2) of the Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, as amended, because its participation in the
partnership was void by virtue of the Partnerships Act, R.S.O. 1980, c.
370.  While I agree with all other aspects of his reasons, I
respectfully differ on this point and consequently on the disposition of this
appeal.  104                          
The partnership in question was formed between Leasing and two wholly
owned subsidiaries of Central Capital Leasing, 693396 Ontario Limited
(“693396") and Central Capital Management Inc. (“CCMI”), on December 24,
1986.  The trial judge found that it was a real and binding partnership.  The
partners would not have been able to tell a third party that they were not
partners.  On this basis, he found the arrangements set up to reduce tax were
valid and held that Leasing was entitled to take advantage of s. 97(2) of the Income
Tax Act.  105                          
The respondent on appeal argued that the partnership was not valid by
reason of the combined operation of s. 174(2) of the Bank Act, R.S.C.,
1985, c. B-1, and s. 34 of the Ontario Partnerships Act.  The Bank
Act  states:  174. . . . (2)  Except as authorized by or under this Act and
in accordance with such terms and conditions, if any, as are prescribed by the
regulations, a bank shall not, directly or indirectly,  .
. .  (i) acquire or hold an interest in Canada in, or otherwise
invest or participate in Canada in, a partnership or  limited partnership. . .
.  The Partnerships
Act states:  34.  A partnership is in every case
dissolved by the happening of any event that makes it unlawful for the business
of the firm to be carried on or for the members of the firm to carry it on in
partnership.  106                          
The reasoning underlying the respondent’s argument appears to be as
follows:  1.    Section 174 of the federal Bank Act 
prohibits the Continental Bank of Canada (the “Bank”) from acquiring or holding
an interest, or otherwise investing or participating in, a partnership or
limited partnership in Canada.  2.    The Bank violated this provision when its
wholly owned subsidiary, Leasing, entered into a partnership with 693396 and
CCMI.  3.    Section 34 of the Ontario Partnerships
Act provides that a partnership is “dissolved” by the happening of any
event that makes it unlawful for the business of the firm to be carried on or
for the members of the firm to carry it on in partnership.  4.    The partnership formed initially by Leasing
and the two other corporations was dissolved under s. 34 because of the
operation of s.  174  of the Bank Act  either (a) because s. 174  made the
partnership’s business unlawful; or (b) because s. 174  made it unlawful for the
members of the firm to carry it on in partnership.  5.    This effect prevails despite s. 20(1)  of the
Bank Act , which provides that “[n]o act of a bank, including any
transfer of property to or by a bank, is invalid by reason only that the act or
transfer is contrary to this Act”.  107                          
In my view, steps 4 and 5 of the argument are not made out.  108                          
The first question is whether s. 34 of the Partnerships Act is
attracted because the Bank’s investment in a partner (Leasing) makes it
unlawful for the business of the partnership to be carried on.  If an investor
holds shares in a corporate partner in a partnership when the law says it
should not, is the business of the partnership thereby rendered illegal?  I
think not.  The partnership must be distinguished from those who may invest in
or support the partners that make it up.  The investors are behind the scenes. 
They do not incur liability for partnership obligations.  The law looks only to
the partners to satisfy any liability that the partnership may incur.  An
investor may supply money to a partner which the partner then uses to carry on
lawful business.  The fact that the law says that the investor should not have
supplied the money does not render the partnership business unlawful.  109                          
This is precisely the situation in the case at bar.  Prior to
December 27, 1986, the Bank was not a partner.  It merely held shares in one of
the partners, Leasing, which was a separate and legally distinct corporation. 
The Bank Act  says that the Bank should not have held shares in Leasing
if Leasing was a partner in a partnership.  But this does not render illegal
the business that Leasing carried on in the partnership.  Leasing was a
distinct and separate entity from the Bank, as was the partnership it entered
into.  The fallacy in the argument of the respondent is that it treats the Bank
as if it were a partner in the partnership.  But, prior to December 27th,  it
was not a partner.  Leasing was the partner.  And Leasing did not violate s.
174  of the Bank Act .  Indeed, Leasing could not violate s. 174  of the Bank
Act , because it was not a bank.  110                          
The next question is whether s. 34 of the Partnerships Act is
attracted because s. 174  of the Bank Act  made it unlawful for Leasing to
be a partner in the firm.  The same point disposes of this question.  Leasing
was a separate corporation from the Bank.  It had its own identity.  It was not
a bank.  So s. 174 does not touch it.  There is nothing in s. 174  of the Bank
Act  that made it unlawful for Leasing to be a member of the partnership.  111                          
If these observations are correct, then, prior to December 27th,  s. 174 
did not make it unlawful for the partnership to carry on its business, or for
Leasing to be a partner.  It made it unlawful for the Bank to invest in
Leasing, but that is an entirely different thing.  It does not affect the
legality of the partnership’s business or of Leasing’s participation in the
partnership.  112                          
It follows that the partnership was not dissolved under s. 34 of the Partnerships
Act because the Bank should not have held shares in one of the partners. 
To suggest that partnerships could be dissolved simply because a
behind-the-scenes investor or supporter of one of the partners was legally
prohibited from investing in the partnership is to assert a proposition novel
to the law.  In determining who may be partners and what the lawful business of
the partnership is, the law looks to the partnership and the partners, not
those who invest or hold shares in the partners.  Where the partner is a
corporation, as here, the general rule that the law does not pierce the
corporate veil reinforces this conclusion:  Salomon v. A. Salomon and Co.,
[1897] A.C. 22 (H.L.).   Were it otherwise, one would never know whether a
partnership is valid without investigating all those who may own shares or
financially support the partners.  This would make it difficult if not
impossible to do business with partnerships with any sense of security.  In the
case at bar, the consequence of holding the partnership void is to defeat a
transaction aimed at minimizing tax.  However, in other cases it might affect
innocent third parties relying on the partnership.  113                          
A further consequence of holding that an unlawful investment voids a
partnership entered into by an investee is that the legal status of
partnerships would vary with the shareholders in corporate partners.  If a bank
holds shares in a corporate partner, the partnership would be void.  But if the
bank sells those shares to a non-bank (and who is to know?) is the partnership
reconstituted?  The only sensible rule is what I apprehend to be the legal rule
-- that the validity of a partnership depends on its members, not on who may
hold shares in them.  114                          
This brings me to Bastarache J.’s argument that Leasing’s participation
in the partnership on December 24, 1986 can be considered unlawful within the
meaning of s. 34 of the Partnerships Act by reason of the public policy
component of the common law doctrine of illegality.  This argument posits that,
despite the fact that Leasing’s participation in the partnership does not
contravene the provisions of the Bank Act , it should be considered
illegal for public policy reasons, namely because “[t]o sanction the
participation of Leasing in the Partnership is to sanction the agreement to
circumvent the provisions and penalties of the Bank Act  and the Partnerships
Act” (para. 89).  In essence, Bastarache J. equates his conclusion that
Leasing’s participation in the partnership is “illegal” under the doctrine of
illegality with a finding that that participation is also “unlawful” under s.
34 of the Partnerships Act.  In my view, the equation is not warranted.  115                          
I will not repeat the historical foundations for the doctrine of
illegality, which have been ably summarized by my colleague, Bastarache J.  I
simply note that   the meaning of the term “illegal” within the context of the
doctrine of illegality does not always mean “unlawful” in the traditional sense
of being “contrary to, prohibited, or unauthorized by law” (Black’s Law
Dictionary (6th ed. 1990)).  The need to exercise caution in the use of the
term “illegal” in this area was underlined by C. Boyle and D. R. Percy, eds.,
in Contracts: Cases and Commentaries (5th ed. 1994), at p. 721:    A word of warning is necessary with respect to
terminology.  It will be evident already that the expressions “illegal” and
“contrary to public policy” are used somewhat loosely and interchangeably.  The
approach of the British Columbia Law Reform Commission may be helpful.  After
recognizing that the word “illegal” is not always entirely appropriate,
the Commission stated in its Report on Illegal Transactions (1983), at
2:  The term “illegal” is used as a convenient shorthand expression,
signifying that the transaction so designated is one which a court will decline
to enforce on the ground that it infringes some public policy, or the terms or
object of an enactment.  [Emphasis added.]   116                          
The fact that the court determines that a contract is void or
unenforceable for public policy reasons under the doctrine of illegality does
not render either the contract itself or the subject of the contract unlawful. 
As noted by G. H. Treitel in The Law of Contract (9th ed. 1995), at p.
399: “Such contracts are often called ‘illegal.’  It is sometimes said that
they are only ‘void’ or ‘unenforceable’; but these statements only emphasise
that no specific legal wrong is involved.  So long as this point is
borne in mind, no harm is done by using the traditional terminology in which
these contracts are ‘illegal.’”  (Emphasis added.)  117                          
It follows that a finding that Leasing’s participation in the
partnership should be void or unenforceable for public policy reasons under the
doctrine of illegality does not necessarily mean that its participation
was illegal or unlawful in the traditional sense of either term.  As a result,
s. 34 of the Partnerships Act is not attracted.  118                          
This is sufficient to dispose of the argument that s. 34 of the Ontario Partnerships
Act rendered the partnership between Leasing and its partners void.
However, the question remains whether Leasing’s participation in the
partnership should be deemed unenforceable as a result of the application of
public policy principles under the doctrine of illegality, quite apart from s.
34 of the Partnerships Act.  In my opinion, this question must be
determined in the negative.  Contrary to my colleague, I find that public
policy requires that breaches of the Bank Act  should not lead to
the invalidation of contracts and other transactions.  There is a good reason
for this; to unravel commercial transactions on the basis that a corporate
actor breached a statute is to introduce uncertainty into the affairs of individuals
and businesses. This is especially true where the transactions at issue involve
a subsidiary of the corporate actor.  119                          
More importantly, s. 20(1)  of the Bank Act  clearly states that
“[n]o act of a bank . . . is invalid by reason only that the act or transfer is
contrary to this Act”. Section 20(1)  thus supports the view that Parliament
never intended breaches of the Bank Act  to render bank transactions,
including investments in other corporations, like Leasing,  null and void.  
This supports the argument that Parliament intended to create an offence
punishable by fines, not to invalidate otherwise lawful transactions and that
the doctrine of illegality should have no application in the case at bar.  120                          
I conclude that the partnership between Leasing, 693396 and CCMI was
valid between December 24th and December 27th.  It follows that the election
under s. 97(2) of the Income Tax Act was also valid.  It is not
necessary, for the purposes of this first appeal, to consider the transfer of
Leasing’s partnership interest to the Bank.  That transfer and the subsequent
transfer of the Bank’s partnership  interest to 693396 and 693397 Ontario Ltd. 
are the subjects of the second appeal.  I would allow this appeal with costs
and refer the assessment back to the Minister of National Revenue for
reconsideration and reassessment in accordance with these reasons.  Appeal allowed with costs, L’Heureux-Dubé
and Bastarache JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Tory Tory Des Lauriers
& Binnington, Toronto.  Solicitor for the respondent:  George Thomson, Toronto. Solicitors for the intervener:  McCarthy Tétrault, Toronto.    