 The Queen v. Golden et al., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 209  Her Majesty The Queen     Appellant;  and  George Golden, Eleanor Golden, John McGuckin and Leemar Holdings Ltd.       Respondents.  File Nos.: 17708, 17709, 17710, 17711.  1985: May 2; 1986: February 28.  Present: Dickson C.J. and Beetz, Estey, Chouinard, Lamer, Wilson and La
Forest JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal                      Respondents sold in an arm's length transaction a
plot of land containing apartment buildings for $5,850,000. The Agreement of
Purchase and Sale expressly provided that of this total price $5,100,000 was
allocated to land and $750,000 was allocated to "equipment, buildings,
roads, sidewalks, etc." Pursuant to s. 68 of the Income Tax Act,
the Minister of National Revenue reassessed the respondents' allocation of
proceeds with the result that substantial amounts of recaptured capital cost
allowances were added to their incomes. The respondents appealed the Minister's
assessment to the Federal Court. The Trial Division dismissed their appeal but
the Court of Appeal unanimously set aside the judgment with the majority
holding that s. 68 had no application to this transaction.                     Held: The appeal should
be dismissed.                      Finally, for the reasons given by the Federal Court
of Appeal, the allocation of purchase price made by the parties was
"reasonable" within the meaning of the section.                      The legislative history of s. 68 and its place
within the scheme of the Act reinforce this plain meaning. Indeed, despite some
similarity in language, s. 68 is not the successor of s. 20(6)(g)
repealed the same year s. 68 was enacted. Section 68 is found in that portion
of the Act dealing with the computation of income generally, whereas s. 20(6)(g)
was found in the part dealing with depreciable property and capital cost
allowances. Both provisions embody two distinct policy objectives and each has
its own sphere of operation.   Cases Cited                     Attorney General of Canada v. Matador Inc., [1980] 2 F.C. 703; Rapistan Canada Ltd. v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1974] 1 F.C. 739, aff'd [1976] 1 S.C.R. vi; Canadian Propane
Gas & Oil Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, 73 DTC 5019; R.
v. Malloney’s Studio Ltd., [1979] 2 S.C.R. 326; Minister of National
Revenue v. Leon, [1977] 1 F.C. 249; Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The
Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, referred to.  Statutes and Regulations Cited     Authors Cited  Maxwell on the
Interpretation of Statutes, 12th ed. by P. St. J.
Langan, London, Sweet & Maxwell, 1969.                      APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of
Appeal, [1983] 2 F.C. 599, [1983] CTC 112, 83 DTC 5138, 47 N.R. 117, setting
aside a judgment of the Trial Division, [1980] CTC 488, 80 DTC 6378. Appeal
dismissed.                     Alban Garon, Q.C.,
and Beverly J. Hobby, for the appellant.                     Gregory T. W. Bowden
and Jacklyn Dean, for the respondents.                     The judgment of Dickson C.J. and Beetz, Estey and La
Forest JJ. was delivered by                       68. Where an amount can reasonably be regarded as being in part the
consideration for the disposition of any property of a taxpayer and as being in
part the consideration for something else, the part of the amount that can
reasonably be regarded as being the consideration for such disposition shall be
deemed to be proceeds of disposition of that property irrespective of the form
or legal effect of the contract or agreement; and the person to whom the
property was disposed of shall be deemed to have acquired the property at the
same part of that amount.                      (g)
where an amount can reasonably be regarded as being in part the consideration
for disposition of depreciable property of a taxpayer of a prescribed class and
as being in part consideration for something else, the part of the amount that
can reasonably be regarded as being the consideration for such disposition
shall be deemed to be the proceeds of disposition of depreciable property of
that class irrespective of the form or legal effect of the contract or
agreement; and the person to whom the depreciable property was disposed of
shall be deemed to have acquired the property at a capital cost to him equal to
the same part of that amount.  This section came before the Court in R. v. Malloney’s Studio Ltd.,
[1979] 2 S.C.R. 326, where the Court determined that the section applied to a
disposition of depreciable property together with "something else".
In the context of that proceeding, this meant that the Minister of National
Revenue was not empowered by the section to reallocate a consideration received
by the vendor from a purchaser on a sale of land "clear of all
buildings".   5.                I find support for this construction of
s. 68 in the French language text where the phrase "de tout bien"
is employed in place of "any property" in the English version. Again,
in the French version, "that property" and "the property"
appear as "ce bien" and "le bien", and not in
the plural form. The singular form is chosen because it is not «biens»,
or property in general, that is contrasted with "something else", but
rather particular property.  6.                The quantity or element in contrast to
"any property", construed as above discussed, is the consideration
paid for "something else". In this appeal, the issue, simply stated,
narrows down to a determination as to whether "something else"
includes other property or refers only to something other than property.  7.                Even a cursory examination of the result
of the adoption of the latter alternative, namely that the "something
else" must be something which is not in law "property", reveals
that the section would be substantially gutted of all meaning. Section 248(1)
of the Income Tax Act defines property as follows:  "property" means
property of any kind whatever whether real or personal or corporeal or
incorporeal and, without restricting the generality of the foregoing, includes  (a) a right of any
kind whatever, a share or a chose in action,                                                                      ...      11.              I conclude that s. 68 is applicable to the
transaction here before the Court. It is therefore necessary to determine the
second issue, namely whether the Court of Appeal was correct in its conclusion
that the allocation of purchase price made by the parties is
"reasonable" within the meaning of the section. For the reasons given
by the learned Chief Justice and Heald J. in the Court of Appeal, in the
circumstances of this proceeding, the allocation established by the contract
between the parties is reasonable.  12.              I therefore would dismiss the appeal in
the manner proposed by Wilson J.                     The reasons of Chouinard, Lamer and Wilson JJ. were
delivered by                      68. Where an amount can reasonably be regarded as being in part the
consideration for the disposition of any property of a taxpayer and as being in
part consideration for something else, the part of the amount that can reasonably
be regarded as being the consideration for such disposition shall be deemed to
be proceeds of disposition of that property irrespective of the form or legal
effect of the contract or agreement; and the person to whom the property was
disposed of shall be deemed to have acquired the property at the same part of
that amount.  1. The Facts   15.              On March 7, 1973 a syndicate consisting of
N. M. Skalbania Ltd. and others ("Skalbania") made an unsolicited
offer to purchase the Bel Air property for the sum of $5,600,000 in accordance
with a valuation breakdown of $2,600,000 for the land, $2,400,000 for the
buildings and $600,000 for "trucks, equipment, roads, etc." The
respondents rejected this offer but pursued further negotiations with
Skalbania. These negotiations were successful and on March 14, 1973 the parties
entered into an Agreement of Purchase and Sale stipulating a total sale price
of $5,850,000. The Agreement expressly provided that of this total price
$5,100,000 was allocated to land and $750,000 was allocated to "equipment,
buildings, roads, sidewalks, etc." Based on this allocation the
respondents reported a small taxable capital gain resulting from the sale but
did not include any recapture of capital cost allowances in computing their
1973 incomes. The Minister reassessed the respondents pursuant to s. 68 of the Income
Tax Act with the result that substantial amounts of recaptured capital cost
allowances were added to their incomes. The respondents appealed the Minister's
reassessment to the Federal Court.  2. The Courts Below  16.              In the Federal Court Trial Division,
[1980] CTC 488, 80 DTC 6378, Mahoney J. found that, in assessing the
apportionment of the purchase price between land and depreciated equipment and
buildings, the Minister can under s. 68 deem a reasonable apportionment without
regard to the figures stipulated in the Agreement of Purchase and Sale. Indeed,
the entire trial proceeded on the assumption that s. 68 was applicable to this
transaction and that the only dispute was with respect to the proper approach
to the computation of the Minister's deemed allocation. The Crown's expert land
appraiser testified that the value of the land alone at the time of the sale
was $2,320,000 rather than $5,100,000 as stipulated in the Agreement. This
figure was accepted by the learned trial judge as being objectively correct. He
then went on to consider whether s. 68 called for such an objective valuation
or whether it was more appropriate to consider the values in question from the
point of view of one or the other of the parties to the transaction.  17.              Mahoney J. accepted that the value of the
Bel Air land to Skalbania in March 1973 was $5,100,000 as indicated in the
Agreement and that this was in fact what Skalbania had agreed to pay for it.
Emphasis was placed on the fact that Skalbania was a knowledgeable real estate
operator dealing at arm's length with the respondent vendors and that from
Skalbania's point of view this was not an unreasonable purchase price for the
land in question. Mahoney J. did not, however, consider this finding to be
determinative of the valuation issue since what was sold was not the land alone
but other things along with it. He proceeded to reason that what must be
determined under s. 68 is not the value of the land to the purchaser but:  ...‘the amount that can
reasonably be regarded as being the consideration for ... disposition’ of the
land in the circumstance [in which] that land and other things were sold.  This was perceived as a determination to be approached from the point
of view of the vendor rather than the purchaser as it is consideration for
disposition, not consideration for acquisition, that the section specifies.  18.              Having held that the determination is to
be made from the vendors' rather than the purchaser's point of view, Mahoney J.
then found that the respondents had led no evidence whatsoever upon which he
could make such a determination. Rather than deem an allocation between the
value of the land and the value of the depreciable property based on the
testimony of the Crown's expert witness alone, he referred the matter back to
the Minister for reassessment in accordance with the principle he had set out.
Ultimately, these reassessments resulted in a substantial recapture of
depreciation brought into the respondents' 1973 income.  19.              The respondents appealed to the Federal
Court of Appeal, [1983] 2 F.C. 599, [1983] CTC 112, 83 DTC 5138, 47 N.R. 117.
When the appeal came on for hearing, the Court of its own motion raised a
question as to the applicability of s. 68 of the Income Tax Act to the
transaction in issue. As noted above, it was evident that the action in the
Trial Division had proceeded on the basis that s. 68 did apply. Its
applicability or otherwise was not argued. Nor was the matter advanced as a
ground of appeal before the Federal Court of Appeal. Accordingly, the Court
heard the entire case as prepared by both parties and then adjourned for
several days to enable both counsel to prepare argument on whether or not the
section applied.   21.              By contrast, Heald J. reasoned, s. 68
applies to the disposition of any property. Whereas s. 20(6)(g) applied
in circumstances where an amount received by a taxpayer could reasonably be
regarded as being in part consideration for the disposition of depreciable
property and in part consideration for the disposition of something other than
depreciable property, s. 68 applied only "in circumstances where an amount
received by a taxpayer can reasonably be regarded as being in part the
consideration for the disposition of any property and as being in part
consideration for something else other than any property" (emphasis
in the original). Having regard to the extremely broad definition of
"property" found in s. 248(1) of the Act, Heald J. concluded that the
transaction in question disposed of property alone and included nothing that
could be characterized as something "other than any property".
Accordingly, he held that s. 68 had no application to this transaction and that
the allocation set out by the parties to the Agreement of Purchase and Sale
must form the basis of the Minister's assessment.  22.              Thurlow C.J. concurred in this result. In
separate reasons he expressed the view that, if s. 68 were applicable, the
trial judge erred in approaching a determination under the section from the
point of view of the vendor alone. He held that it was therefore open to the
Court of Appeal to reach its own determination of the amount that can
reasonably be regarded as the proceeds of disposition of the depreciable property
included in the sale. He went on to hold that, where an allocation is made by
the parties, the inquiry under s. 68 is not as to reasonable value but as to
proceeds of disposition. It was open to the taxpayer to dispose of his property
as he saw fit and to realize the greatest advantage in the disposition. Thurlow
C.J. also stressed the fact that the trial judge had specifically found that
$5,100,000 was not an unreasonable price for the respondents, for their own
reasons, to insist on receiving for the land and for Skalbania to agree to pay.
The contractual valuation of $750,000 for the depreciable property sold was
therefore the appropriate basis on which the tax assessment should proceed.  23.              Although he based his decision on the
above ground, Thurlow C.J. also commented on a case advanced by the Crown in
support of its argument that s. 68 applied to this transaction. The Chief
Justice noted that in Attorney General of Canada v. Matador Inc., [1980]
2 F.C. 703 (C.A.), the applicability of s. 68 of the Act did not appear to have
been seriously argued. In the view of Thurlow C.J. the case was concerned with
s. 13 of the Act and the comments made on s. 68 by Pratte J. in a footnote to
the judgment were not necessary to the decision. Pratte J. had expressed the
view that where land and buildings are disposed of s. 68 applies to authorize
an apportionment of the consideration between the land and the buildings.
Thurlow C.J. disagreed that s. 68 applied in that case or in this one either,
but preferred to deal with this case as if the section applied because it had
been argued on that assumption.  3. The Applicability of s. 68  24.              Although the Crown's case is premised on
the forceful assertion that the decision of the majority in the Federal Court
of Appeal is contrary to "consistent judicial decisions in the past",
the question of the applicability of s. 68 to circumstances of this type does
not appear to have given rise to any extensive body of case law. Indeed, the
sole authority to which counsel for the Crown referred on this point is Pratte
J.'s footnote in Matador, supra, where he said at p. 709:  Counsel for the respondent
suggested that section 68 was not applicable to this case. I do not agree. In
my view, that section is applicable when `an amount can reasonably be regarded
as being in part the consideration for the disposition of any property of a
taxpayer and as being in part consideration' either for the disposition of
property of another type or for something other than the disposition of
property.  (Emphasis added.)   25.              The Crown supports this interpretation by
pointing to the policy underlying the now repealed s. 20(6)(g) of the
Act which is described as the predecessor of the present s. 68. That subsection
was found in the part of the Act dealing with depreciable property and capital
cost allowances and applied specifically to transactions in which a sum was
received by the taxpayer "in part the consideration for disposition of
depreciable property ... and ... in part consideration for something
else". The cases cited by the Crown in support of the interpretation of s.
68 adopted by Pratte J. in Matador, supra, all deal with s.
20(6)(g) and not with s. 68 and are being invoked in an attempt to
equate the "something else" other than depreciable property in the
former section with the "something else" other than "any
property" in the latter section: see Canadian Propane Gas & Oil
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, 73 DTC 5019 (F.C.T.D.) As is
explained by Estey J. in R. v. Malloney's Studio Ltd., [1979] 2
S.C.R. 326, s. 20(6)(g) allowed for precisely the type of allocation for
which the Crown is arguing in the present case. Estey J. said at p. 332:  In the opening portions of
rule (g), provision is made for the allocation of so much of the
consideration as can reasonably be regarded as being in part the consideration
for the disposition of depreciable property and for the allocation otherwise of
that part of the consideration which can be reasonably regarded as having been
paid for "something else". The rule therefore applies to the
situation where the taxpayer has disposed of two types of property, first
depreciable property and secondly, something else.     4. Recapture of Capital Cost Allowances  28.              It was strongly argued by the Crown that
if the interpretation of s. 68 articulated by Heald J. in the court below is
affirmed in this Court and the section found to be inapplicable to this
transaction, then the legislative policy of including "recaptured"
capital cost allowances in the taxpayer's income will be completely defeated.
The Crown submits that the position adopted by Pratte J. in Matador, supra,
reflects a longstanding approach to transactions such as the one in issue here
and that Parliament has relied on this approach being maintained since no
legislation has been introduced to achieve the effect of the former s. 20(6)(g).
Accordingly, if s. 68 is construed as not applying to transactions like the
present one then, it is submitted, there will be a void in the otherwise
complete legislative scheme dealing with the depreciation of capital property
and recapture of capital cost allowances.   30.              Upon receiving proceeds of disposition of
depreciated property the taxpayer must "recapture" any amount written
off of the property as capital cost allowance over the years before calculating
any capital gain on the property. Section 13(1) of the Act requires that any
recaptured amount be included in the computation of the taxpayer's ordinary
income since it was deducted from income in the first place under s. 20(1)(a).
So long as the proceeds of disposition are greater than the undepreciated
capital cost of the property (i.e. the point to which the property has
been depreciated through the deduction of annual capital cost allowance) there
will be some recaptured capital cost to be included in the taxpayer's income in
the year of disposition. If the proceeds of disposition are greater than the
adjusted cost base (i.e. the initial capital cost) of the property then,
of course, the recaptured amount brought into ordinary income will be the total
of all capital cost allowances deducted over the years and the amount by which
the proceeds exceed the adjusted cost base will be characterized under s. 38(a)
as a taxable capital gain.   5. Conclusions  1. Section 68 of the Income Tax Act on its plain meaning applies
only to transactions in which there has been a disposition of property and
something else other than property. That is not the case here.  2. The legislative history of s. 68 and its place within the scheme of
the Act reinforce this plain meaning. Despite some similarity in language
between the former s. 20(6)(g) and s. 68, the latter is not the
successor of the former.                        Appeal dismissed.                     Solicitor for the appellant: Roger Tassé, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the respondents: Birnie, Sturrock
& Bowden, Vancouver.   