Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 622  Shell Canada Limited  Appellant/Respondent                                                                       on
cross-appeal  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                             Respondent/Appellant                                                 on
cross-appeal  and  Canadian Pacific Limited and
Her Majesty The Queen            Interveners  Indexed as:  Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada  File No.:  26596.  Hearing and judgment:  June 14, 1999. Reasons delivered:  October 15, 1999.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Income Tax – Income
from business – Deductions – Interest – Taxpayer entering
into debenture agreements with foreign lenders to borrow NZ dollars – NZ
dollars used by taxpayer to purchase US dollars pursuant to forward exchange
contract with foreign bank – Interest on debentures payable
semi-annually at market rate – Whether s. 20(1)(c)(i) of Income Tax
Act allows taxpayer to deduct from its income all of semi-annual interest
payments made to lenders under debenture agreements – If so, whether
s. 67  or former s. 245(1)  of Income Tax Act applicable to reduce
deduction to  amount that would have been paid if US dollars had been borrowed
directly – Income Tax Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .),
ss. 20(1) (c)(i), 67  – Income Tax Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63,
s. 245(1).  Income Tax – Income
or capital gain – Net foreign exchange gain – Whether net foreign
exchange gain taxable as income or as capital gain.  In 1988, Shell required approximately US$100 million
for general corporate purposes.  To get the money at the lowest possible
after-tax cost, first, it entered into debenture agreements with three foreign
lenders borrowing NZ$150 million at the market rate of 15.4 percent per annum. 
Shell was required to make 10 semi-annual interest payments of NZ$11.55
million.  The principal was to be returned to the lenders in 1993.  Second,
Shell entered into a forward exchange contract with a foreign bank, pursuant to
which it used the NZ$150 million to purchase approximately US$100 million.  The
forward exchange contract also allowed Shell to  exchange a specified amount of
US dollars for NZ$11.55 million on each day that a semi-annual payment to the
lenders was due, and to exchange another specified amount of US dollars for
NZ$150 million when the time came to repay the principal to the lenders.  The
exchange rates in the forward exchange contract were established by reference
to the forward exchange rates for NZ dollars for the period of the loan.  When computing its income for tax purposes, Shell
relied on s. 20(1) (c) of the Income Tax Act  and deducted the
interest, calculated at the rate of 15.4 percent per annum, that it had paid
under the debenture agreements.  For its 1993 taxation year,  Shell reported a
capital gain of approximately US$21 million.  The Minister of National Revenue
reassessed Shell for the 1992 and 1993 taxation years on the basis that it was
only permitted to deduct interest at the rate it would have paid had it
borrowed US dollars, i.e., 9.1 percent per annum.  The claimed capital gain for
the 1993 taxation year was also reassessed as being on income account.  The Tax
Court of Canada set aside the Minister’s reassessment.  The Federal Court of
Appeal allowed the Minister’s appeal but held that Shell could claim the net
foreign exchange gain on capital account.  Shell appealed to this Court on the
interest rate issue and the Minister cross-appealed on the capital gain issue.  Held:  The appeal should be allowed.  The cross-appeal should be
dismissed.  (1)  Appeal  Shell was entitled to deduct from its income all of
its semi-annual payments of interest made to the lenders under the debenture
agreements during the relevant taxation years.  Section 20(1) (c)(i) of
the Income Tax Act  allows taxpayers to deduct from their income interest
payments on borrowed money that is used for the purpose of earning income from
a business or property.  The provision has four elements:  (1) the amount must
be paid in the year or be payable in the year in which it is sought to be
deducted; (2) the amount must be paid pursuant to a legal obligation to pay
interest on borrowed money; (3) the borrowed money must be used for the purpose
of earning non-exempt income from a business or property; and (4) the amount
must be reasonable, as assessed by reference to the first three requirements.  Here, the four elements are met.  First, the amounts
paid by Shell to the lenders were actually paid during the years in which they
were sought to be deducted. Second, Shell had a legal obligation to make the
semi-annual payments to the lenders under the debenture agreements.  Third,
there is a sufficiently direct link between the borrowed money and the current
eligible use.  In this case, the NZ$150 million that Shell borrowed from the
lenders was directly used for the purpose of producing income from its business. 
It does not necessarily matter if the borrowed funds are commingled with funds
used for another purpose, provided that the borrowed funds can in fact be
traced to a current eligible use.  Fourth, under s. 20(1) (c), a
taxpayer is entitled to deduct the lesser of (1) the actual amount paid or, (2)
a reasonable amount in respect of “an amount paid . . . pursuant to a
legal obligation to pay interest on . . . borrowed money used for the
purpose of earning income from a business or property”.  Here, the borrowed
money that was used for the purpose of earning income was the NZ$150 million at
15.4 percent – the market rate for a loan of NZ dollars in 1988 for a five-year
term.  Where an interest rate is established in a market of lenders and
borrowers acting at arm’s length from each other, it is generally a reasonable
rate.  Courts must be sensitive to the economic realities of
a particular transaction, rather than being bound to what first appears to be
its legal form.  There are, however, caveats to this rule.  First,
absent a specific provision of the Act to the contrary or a finding that they
are a sham, the taxpayer’s legal relationships must be respected in tax cases. 
Recharacterization is only permissible if the label attached by the taxpayer to
the particular transaction does not properly reflect its actual legal effect. 
Second, it is well established that a searching inquiry for either the
“economic realities” of a particular transaction or the general object and
spirit of the provision at issue can never supplant a court’s duty to apply an
unambiguous provision of the Act to a taxpayer’s transaction.  Where the
provision at issue is clear and unambiguous, its terms must simply be applied.  Courts must be cautious before finding within the
clear provisions of the Act an unexpressed legislative intention.  Absent a
specific provision to the contrary, it is not the courts’ role to prevent
taxpayers from relying on the sophisticated structure of their transactions,
arranged in such a way that the particular provisions of the Act are met, on
the basis that it would be inequitable to those taxpayers who have not chosen
to structure their transactions that way.  Where the applicable provision has its own internal
reference to “reasonableness”, as does s. 20(1)(c)(i), s. 67
of the Act could not apply without distorting the plain meaning of the more
specific provision.  Indeed, if a deduction is “reasonable” within the meaning
of s. 20(1) (c)(i), it is difficult to see how it would not also be “reasonable”
within the meaning of s. 67.  Because even the broadest interpretation of the former
s. 245(1) of the Act does not apply to limit Shell’s deductions, it is
unnecessary in this appeal to determine conclusively the proper interpretation
to be given to it.  In any event, on the broad test for the former
s. 245(1)  developed by the Federal Court of Appeal, Shell’s decision to
deduct its interest payments to the lenders at the rate of 15.4 percent per
annum cannot be impugned.  First, deducting the interest at that rate is not
contrary to the object and spirit of s. 20(1) (c)(i).  Second, the
deductions were based on transactions that were in accordance with normal
business practice.  Third, there was a bona fide business purpose for
the debenture agreements that gave rise to the deductions in issue.  (2) Cross-appeal  The US$21 million net foreign exchange gain should be
taxed as a capital gain.  Whether a foreign exchange gain arising from a
hedging contract should be characterized as being on income or capital account
depends on the characterization of the debt obligation to which the hedge
relates.  Shell entered into the foreign exchange contract in order to hedge
with US dollars the market risk on the debenture agreements, which were denominated
in NZ dollars.  The gain on the debenture agreements was characterized as being
earned on capital account and so therefore should the gain on the foreign
exchange contract.  Cases Cited  Considered:  Bronfman
Trust v. The Queen, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32; Tennant v. M.N.R., [1996] 1
S.C.R. 305; Canada v. Fording Coal Ltd., [1996] 1 F.C. 518, leave to
appeal denied, [1996] 3 S.C.R. viii; Canada v. Central Supply Co. (1972)
Ltd., [1997] 3 F.C. 674, leave to appeal denied, [1997] 3 S.C.R. vii;  referred
to:  Canada Safeway Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1957]
S.C.R. 717; Reference as to the Validity of Section 6 of the Farm Security
Act, 1944 of Saskatchewan, [1947] S.C.R. 394, aff’d [1949] A.C. 110; Mohammad
v. The Queen, 97 D.T.C. 5503; Canada v. Irving Oil Ltd., [1991] 1
C.T.C. 350; Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R.
298; Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312; Friesen v. Canada,
[1995] 3 S.C.R. 103; Alberta (Treasury Branches) v. M.N.R., [1996] 1
S.C.R. 963; Canderel Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 147; Royal Bank
of Canada v. Sparrow Electric Corp., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411; Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; Duha Printers
(Western) Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 795; Neuman v. M.N.R.,
[1998] 1 S.C.R. 770; Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336;
Canada v. Mara Properties Ltd., [1995] 2 F.C. 433; The Queen v. Nova
Corporation of Alberta, 97 D.T.C. 5229; Produits LDG Products Inc. v.
The Queen, 76 D.T.C. 6344; The Queen v. Alberta and Southern Gas Co.,
[1978] 1 F.C. 454; Tip Top Tailors Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue,
[1957] S.C.R. 703; Alberta Gas Trunk Line Co. v. M.N.R., [1972] S.C.R.
498; Columbia Records of Canada Ltd. v. M.N.R., [1971] C.T.C. 839; Beauchamp
(H.M. Inspector of Taxes) v. F. W. Woolworth plc., [1989] B.T.C. 233; Friedberg
v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 285; Ikea Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R.
196.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income Tax Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 9(1) , (3) , 18(1) (b),
20(1) (c)(i), 67 .  Income Tax Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, s. 245(1) [rep. & sub. 1988,
c. 55, s. 185].  Authors Cited  Broadhurst,
David G. “Income Tax Treatment of Foreign Exchange Forward Contracts, Swaps,
and Other Hedging Transactions”, in Report of Proceedings of the Forty-First
Tax Conference.  Toronto:  The Foundation, 1990.  Hogg, Peter W., and Joanne E.
Magee.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law, 2nd ed. Scarborough: 
Carswell, 1997.  Ruby, Stephen S. “Recent Financing
Techniques”, in Report of Proceedings of the Forty-First Tax Conference. 
Toronto:  The Canadian Tax Foundation, 1990.   APPEAL and CROSS-APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal
Court of Appeal, [1998] 3 F.C. 64, [1998] 2 C.T.C. 207, 157 D.L.R. (4th) 655, 223
N.R. 122, 98 D.T.C. 6177, [1998] F.C.J. No. 194 (QL), allowing in part the
Minister’s appeal from a decision of the Tax Court of Canada, [1997] 3 C.T.C.
2238, 97 D.T.C. 395, [1997] T.C.J. No. 285 (QL), which allowed the taxpayer’s
appeal from the Minister’s reassessment.  Appeal allowed and cross-appeal
dismissed.  Alnasir Meghji, Ronald B. Sirkis, Gerald A. Grenon and Edward Rowe, for the appellant/respondent on
cross-appeal.  S. Patricia Lee and Harry
Erlichman, for the respondent/appellant on cross-appeal/intervener.  Michael E. Barrack and Gabrielle
M. R. Richards, for the intervener Canadian Pacific Limited.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1             
McLachlin J. – This appeal
by Shell Canada Limited (“Shell”) and the cross-appeal by the Minister of
National Revenue (the “Minister”) require the Court to consider the proper
income tax treatment of a sophisticated corporate financing arrangement.  At
the conclusion of the hearing, the Court allowed Shell’s appeal and dismissed
the Minister’s cross-appeal, with reasons to follow for both decisions.  These
are those reasons.  I.  Facts  2             
In 1988, Shell required approximately $100 million in United States
currency (“US$”) for general corporate purposes.  To get the money it required
at the lowest possible after-tax cost, Shell embarked upon a complex financing
scheme that proceeded in two stages.  First, Shell entered into debenture
purchase agreements (the “Debenture Agreements”) with three foreign lenders,
pursuant to which it borrowed approximately $150 million in New Zealand
currency (“NZ$”) at the market rate of 15.4 percent per annum.  Shell was
required to make payments of NZ$11.55 million to the foreign lenders on
November 10 and May 10 of each year until 1993.  The principal of NZ$150
million was to be returned to the foreign lenders on May 10, 1993.  3             
Second, Shell entered into a forward exchange contract (the “Forward
Exchange Contract”) with Sumitomo Bank Ltd. (“Sumitomo”), pursuant to which it
used the NZ$150 million it had borrowed from the foreign lenders to purchase
approximately US$100 million.  That US$100 million was then used in Shell’s
business.  The Forward Exchange Contract between Shell and Sumitomo also
allowed Shell to, (1)  exchange a specified amount of US$ for NZ$11.55 million
on each day that a semi-annual payment to the foreign lenders was due, and (2)
to exchange another specified amount of US$ for NZ$150 million when the time
came to repay the principal to the foreign lenders.  4             
The exchange rates in the Forward Exchange Contract were established by
reference to the forward (or “future”) exchange rates for NZ$ for the period of
the loan, i.e., how much it would cost to purchase NZ$ when Shell required it
in the future.  Because of the declining value of the NZ$ at the time, the
forward value (in US$) of the NZ$150 million Shell was required to repay the
foreign lenders in 1993 was expected to be less than the current (or “spot”)
value (in US$) of the same NZ$150 million when Shell borrowed it in 1988. 
Shell accordingly expected to realize a foreign exchange gain when it closed
out the Forward Exchange Contract and repaid the principal to the foreign
lenders using the devalued NZ$.  5             
Shell also knew that the difference between the spot exchange rate and
the forward exchange rate as between two currencies precisely reflects the
difference between their current interest rates over the period of the loan. 
The amount of the foreign exchange gain Shell expected to earn would therefore
reflect the difference between the interest rates for the two currencies for
the period of the Debenture Agreements.  Accordingly, by agreeing to buy NZ$ in
the future at the lower forward exchange rate, Shell not only was able to
“hedge” its exposure to the market fluctuation of the NZ$, but was also able to
effectively bring the rate of interest it was paying for the NZ$ down to
approximately the rate of interest it would have had to pay for US$.  6             
The Debenture Agreements and the Forward Exchange Contract all closed on
May 10, 1988.  Shell was only obligated to abide by the former if the latter
also closed.  While it seems that the foreign lenders received from Sumitomo
the NZ$ that they paid to Shell, which in turn sold the same NZ$ back to Sumitomo
in exchange for US$, Shell was not aware of the source of the foreign lenders’
funds until after Shell had committed itself to entering the Debenture
Agreements.  All of the contracts closed properly, and all the funds changed
hands as planned.  7             
The trial judge made a number of specific findings about the Debenture
Agreements and the Forward Exchange Contract.  He found, inter alia,
that Shell’s decision to enter into these arrangements was based on its
expectation that it would be able to deduct from its income the interest paid
on the Debenture Agreements and that the foreign exchange gain would be taxed
on capital account.  Taxing the foreign exchange gain on capital account would
be an advantage for Shell because, (1) only 75 percent of the gain would be
taxable, rather than 100 percent as would be the case were it included on
income account, and (2) the gain could be used to offset some of Shell’s
existing capital losses.  The trial judge further found that Shell would not
have entered into the Debenture Agreements in the absence of the Forward
Exchange Contract, that none of the transactions was a sham, and that if Shell
had simply borrowed US$ at a market rate of interest, it would have paid 9.1
percent per annum instead of the 15.4 percent per annum it had paid for the
NZ$.  8             
When computing its income for tax purposes for the years 1988 to 1993
inclusive, Shell relied on s. 20(1) (c) of the Income Tax Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (the “Act ”), and deducted the interest,
calculated at the rate of 15.4 percent per annum, that it had paid to the
foreign lenders under the Debenture Agreements.  For its 1993 taxation year,
the year in which the Forward Exchange Contract was closed out and the
principal was repaid to the foreign lenders under the Debenture Agreements,
Shell reported a capital gain of approximately US$21 million.  9             
The Minister objected and issued formal reassessments for the 1992 and
1993 taxation years.  By these reassessments,  Shell was only permitted to
deduct interest at the rate it would have paid had it borrowed US$, i.e., 9.1
percent per annum over a five-year term, because, according to the Minister, it
was only the US$ -- not the NZ$ -- that were directly used in its business. 
The claimed capital gain for the 1993 taxation year was also reassessed as
being on income account.  10         
The Tax Court of Canada allowed Shell’s appeal from the Minister’s
reassessment.  The Minister was then partly successful in his appeal to the
Federal Court of Appeal, which held that Shell could only claim the limited
interest rate deduction suggested by the Minister but could however claim the
net foreign exchange gain on capital account.  Shell now appeals to this Court
the Federal Court of Appeal’s decision on the interest rate issue.  The
Minister cross-appeals the Federal Court of Appeal’s disposition of the capital
gain issue.  11         
The interveners are parties in another appeal before this Court:  Canadian
Pacific Ltd. v. The Queen, S.C.C., File No. 27163*.  
Because of the similarities between that case and the one now before this
Court, these parties were granted leave to intervene in this appeal.  II.  Statutory
Provisions  12         
Income Tax Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)  9. (1) Subject to this Part, a taxpayer’s
income for a taxation year from      a business or property is the taxpayer’s
profit from that business or property for the year.  .
. .  (3) In this Act , “income from a property” does not
include any capital gain from the disposition of that property and “loss from a
property” does not include any capital loss from the disposition of that
property.  20. (1) Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a),
(b) and (h), in computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year
from a business or property, there may be deducted such of the following
amounts as are wholly applicable to that source or such part of the following
amounts as may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto:                                                            . . .  (c) an amount paid in the year or payable in respect of the year
(depending on the method regularly followed by the taxpayer in computing the
taxpayer’s income), pursuant to a legal obligation to pay interest on  (i)  borrowed money used for the purpose of earning income from a
business or property (other than borrowed money used to acquire property the
income from which would be exempt or to acquire a life insurance policy),                                                            . . .  or a reasonable amount in respect thereof, whichever is the lesser;  67.  In computing income, no deduction shall
be made in respect of an outlay or expense in respect of which any amount is
otherwise deductible under this Act , except to the extent that the outlay or
expense was reasonable in the circumstances.   Income Tax
Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63   245. (1) In computing income for the
purposes of this Act , no deduction may be made in respect of a disbursement or
expense made or incurred in respect of a transaction or operation that, if
allowed, would unduly or artificially reduce the income.   III.  Judgments
Below  A.  Tax
Court of Canada, [1997] 3 C.T.C. 2238  13         
Christie A.C.J.T.C. began by observing that it is open to a taxpayer to
structure its affairs to secure tax benefits.  Tax considerations are part of the
commercial and economic reality within which business decisions are made.  He
also rejected (at para. 20) what he called the “foundation stone” of the
Minister’s argument, namely that the effect of Shell’s arrangements was that
the Debenture Agreements and the Forward Exchange Contract were merged into one
for tax purposes.  In the absence of clear judicial or statutory authority,
Christie A.C.J.T.C. held that it was not open to him to recharacterize a
taxpayer’s distinct legal relationships.  14         
With respect to the deductibility of Shell’s interest payments to the
foreign lenders, Christie A.C.J.T.C. held that the rate of 15.4 percent per
annum was a market rate and, as such, was “reasonable” within the meaning of s.
20(1) (c)(i) of the Act .  The fact that the NZ$ were immediately
exchanged for US$ before being applied to general corporate purposes did not
deprive the NZ$ of its character as borrowed money used for the purpose of
earning income from a business.  Shell was therefore entitled to deduct the
interest at the rate of 15.4 percent per annum.  15         
The Minister also relied on s. 67 and former s. 245(1)  of the Act . 
Christie A.C.J.T.C. rejected the argument that s. 67  could operate to reduce
the permissible rate of deductible interest when that rate had already been
found to be reasonable within the meaning of s. 20(1) (c)(i).  For the
same reason, neither did he see any scope for the application of former s.
245(1) , which addressed deductions that “unduly or artificially” reduced a
taxpayer’s income.  Even if s. 245(1)  could operate to reduce a deduction
otherwise permitted by the Act , he held that it did not apply here.  Shell’s
transactions were not contrary to the object and spirit of s. 20(1) (c)(i)
and the evidence showed that they were in accordance with normal business
practice.  16         
With respect to the gain realized in 1993, Christie A.C.J.T.C. concluded
that, generally, an agreement to borrow a specified amount of funds for a fixed
period of five years for the purpose of earning income is to be regarded as a
capital transaction.  There was no reason to hold otherwise in this case.  If
there were two gains – one on the Debenture Agreements and one on the Forward
Exchange Contract – he held that they should be treated similarly.  Christie
A.C.J.T.C. allowed Shell’s appeal from the Minister’s reassessment.  B.  Federal
Court of Appeal, [1998] 3 F.C. 64  17         
The Minister appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal.  After reviewing
the origins of s. 20(1) (c)(i) and its predecessor provisions, Linden
J.A. concluded that Parliament intended “to restrict the deduction [of
interest] to those amounts that were reasonable and which reflected the
economic realities of the situation” (para. 31).  Here, that amount was 9.1
percent per annum, the rate at which US$ were directly available to Shell.  18         
Linden J.A. held that there were four elements of s. 20(1) (c)(i). 
To be deductible, (1) the amount must be paid or payable in the year in which
it is deducted; (2) it must be paid pursuant to a legal obligation to pay
interest on borrowed money; (3) the borrowed money must be used for the purpose
of earning income from a business or property; and (4) the amount must be
calculated at a reasonable rate.  Shell’s attempted deduction satisfied only
the first criterion.  19         
Linden J.A. concluded that the second condition had not been met. 
Considering that he was not “constrained by contract theory” (para. 59) and
that the important consideration was “not what the parties agree to, nor what
their intent is” (para. 59), he held that the Debenture Agreements and the
Forward Exchange Contract had to be considered together to determine whether
the amounts Shell sought to deduct were actually “interest”.  In his view, the
real “interest” amounts could only be identified after reducing the putative
interest payments by an amount equal to the foreign exchange gain created by
the discounted forward rate on the NZ$, amortized over the term of the loan. 
On this approach, he concluded that Shell’s deductions were not entirely
interest: that portion exceeding 9.1 percent per annum must have been a
repayment of principal.  20         
Neither had the third condition been met, held Linden J.A: “[l]ooking
realistically at the substance of the situation, there was no use and purpose
other than the avoidance of taxation for borrowing NZ$” (para. 60).  This, he
concluded, was not an eligible use.  Because only the US$ were used to earn
eligible income, s. 20(1) (c)(i) permitted only the deduction of interest
calculated at the rate of 9.1 percent per annum.  21         
Shell’s attempted deduction also failed to satisfy the fourth
condition.  While it was reasonable for the foreign lenders to charge 15.4
percent per annum on the loan of the NZ$, Linden J.A. held that it was not
reasonable for Shell to pay that rate.  The only money used for an eligible
purpose was the US$, held Linden J.A., and the reasonableness of the deduction
must be assessed on that basis: “Shell should be in the same position as a
taxpayer who borrowed US$ directly.  That interest rate was then 9.1%” (para.
63).   In Linden J.A.’s view, this fourth criterion was a type of
“anti-avoidance” tool that should be used to prevent a taxpayer from
artificially reducing its tax payable.  In his opinion, that was what had
happened here.  22         
Given his conclusion with respect to s. 20(1) (c)(i), Linden J.A.
did not have to address s. 67  or s. 245(1) .  23         
Turning to whether the gain realized in 1993 was earned on income or
capital account, Linden J.A. concluded that there were two gains.  One gain was
earned on the Forward Exchange Contract because the forward exchange rate set
by the Forward Exchange Contract was lower than the spot rate of exchange for
converting US$ into NZ$ in 1993.  The second gain arose on the Debenture
Agreements because the 1993 value of the NZ$150 million that Shell repaid to
the foreign lenders was less than the value of the NZ$ it had borrowed in
1988.  Linden J.A. held that Christie A.C.J.T.C. correctly concluded that the
character of a foreign exchange gain is determined by the nature of the
underlying transaction.  Here, the underlying transactions – the Debenture
Agreements and the Forward Exchange Contract –  were capital in nature, and so
therefore must be the gains.  He noted that the Minister had indicated that
adjustments would be made to the amount of the taxable foreign exchange gain to
reflect his success on the interest rate issue.  24         
Stone J.A. wrote concurring reasons, addressing only the Minister’s
alternative argument that s. 245(1)  applied to Shell’s transactions in the
event that s. 20(1) (c)(i) did not reduce the effective rate of interest
to 9.1 percent per annum.  He rejected this submission, holding that the
transactions were not contrary to the object and spirit of s. 20(1) (c)(i),
that they were in accordance with normal business practice, and that they had a
bona fide business purpose, namely the acquisition of capital for a
legitimate business use.  IV.  Issues  25         
There are two main issues on Shell’s appeal.  First, does s. 20(1) (c)(i)
of the Act  allow Shell to deduct from its income all of the semi-annual
interest payments it made to the foreign lenders under the Debenture
Agreements?  Second, if so, does either s. 67  or the former s. 245(1)  of the
Act  apply to reduce the deduction to the amount that would have been paid if
US$ had been borrowed directly?  26         
The issue on the Minister’s cross-appeal is whether the approximately
US$21 million foreign exchange net gain that Shell earned should be taxed as
part of Shell’s income, or taxed as a capital gain.  V.  Analysis  A.     Does Section 20(1)(c)(i) Allow Shell to
Deduct from Its Income All of the Payments It Made to the Foreign Lenders Under
the Debenture Agreements?  1.        How Should Section 20(1)(c)(i)
Be Applied to this Case?  27         
I propose to first outline how s. 20(1)(c)(i) seems to apply to
this case, before turning to consider the objections made by the Minister and
accepted by the Federal Court of Appeal.  28         
Section 20(1)(c)(i) allows taxpayers to deduct from their income
interest payments on borrowed money that is used for the purpose of earning
income from a business or property.  It is an exception to s. 9 and s. 18(1)(b),
which would otherwise prohibit the deduction of amounts expended on account of
capital, i.e., interest on borrowed funds used to produce income: Canada
Safeway Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1957] S.C.R. 717, at pp.
722-23, per Kerwin C.J., and at p. 727, per Rand J.; Bronfman
Trust v. The Queen, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32, at p. 45, per Dickson C.J. 
The provision has four elements: (1) the amount must be paid in the year or be
payable in the year in which it is sought to be deducted; (2)  the amount must
be paid pursuant to a legal obligation to pay interest on borrowed money; (3)
the borrowed money must be used for the purpose of earning non-exempt income
from a business or property; and (4) the amount must be reasonable, as assessed
by reference to the first three requirements.  29         
The first element is clearly met.  No one disputes that the amounts paid
by Shell to the foreign lenders were actually paid during the years in which
they were sought to be deducted.  30         
 The second element is also met.  Shell had a legal obligation to make
the semi-annual payments to the foreign lenders under the Debenture
Agreements.  Those semi-annual payments constituted “interest”, or “the return
or consideration or compensation for the use or retention by one person of a
sum of money, belonging to, in a colloquial sense, or owed to, another”: Reference
as to the Validity of Section 6 of the Farm Security Act, 1944 of Saskatchewan,
[1947] S.C.R. 394, aff’d [1949] A.C. 110 (P.C.).  As between Shell and the
foreign lenders, there is no indication that the semi-annual payments were
anything but consideration for the use, for five years, of the NZ$150 million
that Shell had borrowed.  It was not a synthesized US$ loan from the foreign
lenders to Shell:  Shell actually received the NZ$150 million from the foreign
lenders under the Debenture Agreements and paid real interest in consideration
for its use.  31         
The third element -- that the borrowed money is used for the purpose of
earning non-exempt income from a business or property -- has likewise been
met.  This element focuses not on the purpose of the borrowing per se,
but rather on the taxpayer’s purpose in using the borrowed money.  As
Dickson C.J. stated in Bronfman Trust, supra, at p. 46, “the
focus of the inquiry must be centered on the use to which the taxpayer put the
borrowed funds”.  Dickson C.J. further specified that it is the current use of
the borrowed money that is relevant and that the provision generally “requires
tracing the use of borrowed funds to a specific eligible use”: Bronfman
Trust, supra, at p. 53.  The deduction is therefore not available
where the link between the borrowed money and an eligible use is only
indirect.  Interest is deductible only if there is a sufficiently direct link
between the borrowed money and the current eligible use: Tennant v. M.N.R.,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 305, at paras. 18-20, per Iacobucci J.  Furthermore, it does
not necessarily matter if the borrowed funds are commingled with funds used for
another purpose, provided that the borrowed funds can in fact be traced to a
current eligible use.  32         
Here, Shell borrowed NZ$150 million from the foreign lenders and
immediately exchanged it for approximately US$100 million before applying it to
its business.  This exchange did not alter the basic character of the funds as
“borrowed money”.  Money is fungible.  The US$100 million was simply the NZ$150
million transformed into a different currency which, although it changed its
legal form and its relative value, did not change its substance.  It remained
money.  The value it represented simply changed from being denominated in New
Zealand currency to being denominated in United States currency.  Viewed thus,
it is apparent that all of the NZ$150 million that Shell borrowed from the
foreign lenders was borrowed money currently and directly used for the purpose
of producing income from Shell’s business.  The direct link between the
borrowed money and the activity calculated to produce income can hardly be
compared to the indirect use at issue in Bronfman Trust, supra.  33         
The mere fact that an exchange had to occur before usable money was
produced is not particularly significant.  Except where the borrower is a money
trader, borrowed money can rarely itself produce income.  It must always be
exchanged for something, whether it be machinery or goods, which then produces
income.  The necessity of such an exchange does not mean that the eventual
production of income is an indirect use of the borrowed money.  If a direct
link can be drawn between the borrowed money and an eligible use, the third
criterion is satisfied.  That is clearly the case here.  34         
The fourth element – that the amount sought to be deducted must be the
actual amount paid or “a reasonable amount in respect thereof” –  has not
previously been the subject of comment by this Court.  It is clear, however,
from the structure of s. 20(1)(c), that the phrase refers to the
entirety of s. 20(1)(c)(i).  Therefore, the taxpayer is entitled to
deduct the lesser of, (1) the actual amount paid or, (2) a reasonable amount in
respect of “an amount paid . . . pursuant to a legal obligation to pay interest
on . . . borrowed money used for the purpose of earning income from a business
or property”.  Here, the borrowed money that was used for the purpose of
earning income was the NZ$150 million.  At trial, Christie A.C.J.T.C. found
that the market rate for a loan of NZ$ in 1988 for the five-year term specified
in the Debenture Agreements was 15.4 percent per annum.  That is the rate Shell
paid.  Where an interest rate is established in a market of lenders and
borrowers acting at arm’s length from each other, it is generally a reasonable
rate: Mohammad v. The Queen, 97 D.T.C. 5503 (F.C.A.), at p. 5509, per
Robertson J.A.; Canada v. Irving Oil Ltd., [1991] 1 C.T.C. 350 (F.C.A.),
at p. 359, per Mahoney J.A.  The fourth criterion is accordingly
satisfied.  35         
On this analysis, Shell was entitled to deduct from its income all of
its semi-annual payments of interest to the foreign lenders during the relevant
taxation years.  2.        The Minister’s Objections  36         
The Minister objects to this application of s. 20(1)(c)(i).  He
makes two principal arguments.  First, he submits that because only the US$
were used for the purpose of earning income from a business, Shell is only
entitled to deduct as “interest” those amounts relating to the US$.  This
amount, he argues, must be calculated by reference to the rate of 9.1 percent
per annum, the rate applicable to a borrowing of US$ in 1988.  Second, the
Minister argues that the phrase “a reasonable amount in respect thereof” in s.
20(1)(c)(i) must be interpreted as referring to a reasonable amount to
pay for a loan of the US$ which were actually used to produce income.  That, he
again submits, must be calculated at the rate of 9.1 percent per annum.  The
Minister also makes a subsidiary argument that the borrowed funds for which
interest was paid at a rate exceeding 9.1 percent per annum were actually being
used to produce a capital gain, not eligible income from a business or property
as required by s. 20(1)(c)(i).  These arguments found favour with the
Federal Court of Appeal.  With respect, however, they cannot prevail when
examined in light of the approach this Court has consistently taken when
interpreting the Act  in general and s. 20(1) (c)(i) in particular.  37         
These arguments rest on the view that only the US$ were used to produce
income from a business or property.  As discussed above, that is incorrect. 
The fact that the NZ$ can be directly traced to an income-producing use in
accordance both with the text of s. 20(1)(c)(i) and with this Court’s
decisions in Bronfman Trust, supra, and Tennant, supra,
deprives these arguments of any foundation.  38         
Furthermore, these submissions arise from a fundamental misapprehension
of the scope of s. 20(1)(c)(i) and the principles against which it
should be interpreted.  Both the Minister and the Federal Court of Appeal seem
to suggest that s. 20(1)(c)(i) invites a wide examination of what Linden
J.A. referred to (at para. 44) as the “economic realities” of a taxpayer’s
situation.  Underlying this argument appears to be the view that taxpayers are
somehow disentitled from relying on s. 20(1)(c)(i) if the structure of
the transaction was determined by a desire to minimize the amount of tax
payable.  39         
This Court has repeatedly held that courts must be sensitive to the economic
realities of a particular transaction, rather than being bound to what first
appears to be its legal form: Bronfman Trust, supra, at
pp. 52-53, per Dickson C.J.; Tennant, supra, at para. 26, per
Iacobucci J.  But there are at least two caveats to this rule.  First,
this Court has never held that the economic realities of a situation can be
used to recharacterize a taxpayer’s bona fide legal relationships.  To
the contrary, we have held that, absent a specific provision of the Act  to the
contrary or a finding that they are a sham, the taxpayer’s legal relationships
must be respected in tax cases.  Recharacterization is only permissible if the
label attached by the taxpayer to the particular transaction does not properly
reflect its actual legal effect: Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada,
[1998] 2 S.C.R. 298, at para. 21, per Bastarache J.  40         
Second, it is well established in this Court’s tax jurisprudence that a
searching inquiry for either the “economic realities” of a particular
transaction or the general object and spirit of the provision at issue can
never supplant a court’s duty to apply an unambiguous provision of the Act  to a
taxpayer’s transaction.  Where the provision at issue is clear and unambiguous,
its terms must simply be applied:  Continental Bank, supra, at
para. 51, per Bastarache J.;  Tennant, supra, at para. 16,
per Iacobucci J.; Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312, at pp.
326-27 and 330, per Iacobucci J.; Friesen v. Canada, [1995] 3
S.C.R. 103, at para. 11, per Major J.; Alberta (Treasury Branches) v.
M.N.R., [1996] 1 S.C.R. 963, at para. 15, per Cory J.  41         
 It is my respectful view that by paying insufficient attention to these
very important principles, the Minister and the Federal Court of Appeal fell
into error.  First, the Federal Court of Appeal effectively recharacterized 
for tax purposes Shell’s legal relationship with the foreign lenders.  Indeed,
Linden J.A. held that, when the Forward Exchange Contract between Shell and
Sumitomo was considered alongside the Debenture Agreements between Shell and
the foreign lenders, “[t]he higher interest rate coupled with the discounted
forward rate created a blended payment of interest and principal” (para. 58). 
With respect, this ignores the actual relationship between Shell and the foreign
lenders, a relationship to which Sumitomo was not a party.  As between Shell
and the foreign lenders, the semi-annual payments were entirely “interest”,
paid in consideration for the loan of NZ$150 million.  That characterization
cannot be changed by whatever other legal relationships Shell may have
concluded with third parties, or indeed by anything that Shell did with the
borrowed funds after receiving them from the foreign lenders.  42         
 It is no doubt true that Shell was able to recoup its higher interest
expenses, paid to the foreign lenders, by agreeing with Sumitomo to purchase
NZ$ in the future at a discount.  This arrangement allowed it to earn a foreign
exchange gain and, when the transactions were considered together, to equalize
the interest rate in the Debenture Agreements to the prevailing market rate for
a loan of US$.  Yet, as has been demonstrated above, the words of s. 20(1)(c)(i)
are very clear.  A taxpayer is entitled to deduct a reasonable amount of
interest paid on borrowed money used for the purpose of earning eligible income
from a business or property.  Shell’s legal relationship with the foreign
lenders comes within those criteria and, as such, Shell is entitled to the
benefit of s. 20(1)(c)(i).  43         
Second, it is my respectful view that the Federal Court of Appeal’s
misplaced reliance on “economic realities” caused it to stray from the express
terms of s. 20(1)(c)(i) and supplement the provision with extraneous
policy concerns that were said to form part of its purpose.  The Act is a
complex statute through which Parliament seeks to balance a myriad of
principles.  This Court has consistently held that courts must therefore be
cautious before finding within the clear provisions of the Act  an unexpressed
legislative intention: Canderel Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 147, at
para. 41, per Iacobucci J.;  Royal Bank of Canada v. Sparrow Electric
Corp., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411, at para. 112, per Iacobucci J.; Antosko,
supra, at p. 328, per Iacobucci J.  Finding unexpressed
legislative intentions under the guise of purposive interpretation runs the
risk of upsetting the balance Parliament has attempted to strike in the Act .  44         
Although the terms of s. 20(1)(c)(i) are clear, the Federal Court
of Appeal seems to have discerned in the Act  an intention that courts, to be
fair to less sophisticated taxpayers, should be alert to preventing taxpayers
from using complex transactions designed to minimize their tax liability.  It
was said that courts should somehow look through transactions and impose tax
according to their true economic and commercial effects.  There are some obiter
statements in some cases that may be said to support this view: Bronfman
Trust, supra, at p. 53, per Dickson C.J.; Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at p. 576, per
Estey J.  45         
However, this Court has made it clear in more recent decisions that,
absent a specific provision to the contrary, it is not the courts’ role to
prevent taxpayers from relying on the sophisticated structure of their
transactions, arranged in such a way that the particular provisions of the Act 
are met, on the basis that it would be inequitable to those taxpayers who have
not chosen to structure their transactions that way.  This issue was
specifically addressed by this Court in Duha Printers (Western) Ltd. v.
Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 795, at para. 88, per Iacobucci J.  See also
Neuman v. M.N.R., [1998] 1 S.C.R. 770, at para. 63, per Iacobucci
J.  The courts’ role is to interpret and apply the Act  as it was adopted by
Parliament.  Obiter statements in earlier cases that might be
said to support a broader and less certain interpretive principle have
therefore been overtaken by our developing tax jurisprudence.  Unless the Act 
provides otherwise, a taxpayer is entitled to be taxed based on what it
actually did, not based on what it could have done, and certainly not based on
what a less sophisticated taxpayer might have done.  46         
Inquiring into the “economic realities” of a particular situation,
instead of simply applying clear and unambiguous provisions of the Act  to the
taxpayer’s legal transactions, has an unfortunate practical effect.  This
approach wrongly invites a rule that where there are two ways to structure a
transaction with the same economic effect, the court must have regard only to
the one without tax advantages.  With respect, this approach fails to
give appropriate weight to the jurisprudence of this Court providing that, in
the absence of a specific statutory bar to the contrary, taxpayers are entitled
to structure their affairs in a manner that reduces the tax payable: Stubart,
supra, at p. 540, per Wilson J., and at p. 557, per Estey
J.; Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336, at para. 8, per
McLachlin J.; Duha, supra, at para. 88, per Iacobucci J.; Neuman,
supra, at para. 63, per Iacobucci J.  An unrestricted application
of an “economic effects” approach does indirectly what this Court has
consistently held Parliament did not intend the Act  to do directly.  47         
The Federal Court of Appeal’s overriding concern with tax avoidance not
only coloured its general approach to this case, but may also have led it to
misread the clear and unambiguous terms of s. 20(1)(c)(i) itself.  In
his reasons, Linden J.A. emphasized that Shell only decided to borrow NZ$ from
the foreign lenders because it sought to take advantage of the higher interest
rate applicable to NZ$.  Yet, as Dickson C.J. made clear in Bronfman Trust,
supra, at p. 46, the reason for a particular method of borrowing
is irrelevant to a proper consideration of s. 20(1)(c)(i).  The issue is
the use to which the borrowed funds are put.  It is irrelevant why the
borrowing arrangement was structured the way that it was or, indeed, why the
funds were borrowed at all.  48         
The fact that Shell structured its transactions so that it could take
advantage of the various provisions of the Act  is therefore of no moment.  It
was fully entitled to do so.  Shell borrowed NZ$ for the purpose of using them
to produce eligible income from a business or property and is accordingly
entitled to the deduction provided by s. 20(1) (c)(i).  B.  Does
Section 67 or Former Section 245(1) Apply to this Case?  49         
If s. 20(1)(c)(i) does not apply to restrict Shell to deducting
interest at the rate of 9.1 percent per annum, the Minister argues that s. 67
and the former s. 245(1) apply to reduce the deduction to the amount that would
have been paid if US$ had been borrowed directly.  However, neither provision
supports the Minister’s position.  1.        Section 67  50         
Section 67  of the Act  provides that:  67.  In computing income, no deduction shall
be made in respect of an outlay or expense in respect of which any amount is
otherwise deductible under this Act , except to the extent that the outlay or
expense was reasonable in the circumstances.  The Federal
Court of Appeal did not address s. 67  and Shell made no submissions to this
Court with regard to it.  The Minister submits that the only amount “reasonable
in the circumstances” is the amount that Shell would have had to pay if it had
borrowed US$ directly.  The argument seems to be the same one that was made
with respect to s. 20(1)(c)(i), i.e., it is suggested that the only
money used for the purpose of producing income was the US$.  I note that the
Minister did not press this point in argument before the Court.  51         
Having already held that the NZ$ actually were used for the purpose of
earning eligible income, it follows that I do not accept the premise of the
Minister’s argument.  Furthermore, it seems to me that Parliament intended s.
67  to apply primarily to those deductions claimed under the provisions of the
Act  that do not have their own internal limiting clauses: see also P. W. Hogg
and J. E. Magee, Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law (2nd ed. 1997),
at pp. 244-45.  A common example is the case where a taxpayer seeks to pay
unreasonably  high rents or salaries to non-arm’s-length persons.  Another
example might be unreasonably high business travelling expenses.  Where the
applicable provision has its own internal reference to “reasonableness”, as
does s. 20(1) (c)(i), s. 67  could not apply without distorting the plain
meaning of the more specific provision.  Indeed, if a deduction is “reasonable”
within the meaning of s. 20(1) (c)(i), I have difficulty seeing how it
would not also be “reasonable” within the meaning of s. 67 .  2.        Section 245(1)  52         
The Minister also relies on the former s. 245(1).  Section 245(1) read
as follows:  245.  (1)  In computing income for the
purposes of this Act , no deduction may be made in respect of a disbursement or
expense made or incurred in respect of a transaction or operation that, if
allowed, would unduly or artificially reduce the income.    This provision
has been repealed and replaced by a new “General Anti-Avoidance Rule” effective
September 13, 1988: S.C. 1988, c. 55, s. 185.  Because the Debenture Agreements
and the Forward Exchange Contract were entered into prior to that time,
however, it is only the former s. 245(1) that applies to this case.  53         
The Minister does not say that Shell “artificially” reduced its income. 
Rather, he claims that allowing Shell to deduct interest expenses at the NZ$
rate of 15.4 percent per annum would “unduly” reduce its income.  This argument
again rests on the submission that it was the US$ that were used for producing
eligible income, not the NZ$.  Because I reject the Minister’s argument on that
point, it follows that I cannot accept his related submissions on s. 245(1).  54         
In a series of recent cases, the Federal Court of Appeal has considered
the proper meaning to be given to s. 245(1):  Canada v. Fording Coal Ltd.,
[1996] 1 F.C. 518, leave to appeal denied, [1996] 3 S.C.R. viii;  Canada v.
Central Supply Co. (1972) Ltd., [1997] 3 F.C. 674, leave to appeal denied,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. vii.  In Central Supply, supra, at p. 691, Linden
J.A. summarized the three factors to be answered under the recommended approach
to s. 245(1): (1) whether the deduction sought is contrary to the object and
spirit of the provision in the Act , (2) whether the deduction is based on a
transaction which is not in accordance with normal business practice, and (3)
whether there was a bona fide business purpose for the transaction.  He
observed that these three factors apply even where the deduction is otherwise
permitted by a specific provision of the Act .  55         
I note that the Federal Court of Appeal has not always taken this
approach to the former anti-avoidance provisions of the Act :  see Canada v.
Mara Properties Ltd., [1995] 2 F.C. 433, at pp. 437-38, per Marceau
J.A., and at p. 452, per McDonald J.A. (dissenting), appeal allowed on
other grounds, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 161; Fording Coal, supra, at pp.
541-44, per McDonald J.A. (dissenting); Central Supply, at pp.
712-16, per McDonald J.A. (dissenting); The Queen v. Nova Corporation
of Alberta, 97 D.T.C. 5229, at p. 5236, per McDonald J.A.  Indeed,
particularly with respect to its emphasis on whether there was a “bona fide
purpose” for the transaction, the approach adopted in Fording Coal, supra,
and Central Supply, supra, appears to run against the grain of
some of the Federal Court of Appeal’s earlier interpretations of this provision
and its predecessors: Produits LDG Products Inc. v. The Queen, 76 D.T.C.
6344, at p. 6349, per Pratte J.A.; The Queen v. Alberta and Southern
Gas Co., [1978] 1 F.C. 454, at pp. 462-63, per Jackett C.J.; Irving
Oil, supra, at p. 360, per Mahoney J.A.  See also, Stubart,
supra, at pp. 569-70, per Estey J.  56     
The Minister submits that the factors developed in Fording Coal, supra,
and Central Supply, supra, apply only when it is claimed that the
deductions are “artificial”, not when they are said to be “undue”, as in the
case on appeal.  Although the matter is not entirely free from doubt, a review
of the Federal Court of Appeal’s reasons in those cases does not support such a
constrained interpretation of the test.  Indeed, it was certainly the
understanding of Stone J.A. in the Federal Court of Appeal, the only member of
the panel who expressed an opinion on this point, that those factors apply to
s. 245(1) in its entirety.  I agree that this is what the Federal Court of
Appeal likely intended in Fording Coal, supra, and Central
Supply, supra.  I hasten to add that I should not be taken as
necessarily agreeing that the three factors are the appropriate interpretive
tools with which to understand s. 245(1).  Because even the broadest
interpretation of s. 245(1) does not apply to limit Shell’s deductions,
however, it is not necessary in this appeal for this Court to determine
conclusively the proper interpretation to be given to s. 245(1).  57     
Applying the factors set forth by the Federal Court of Appeal suggests
the following analysis in this case.  First, deducting the interest paid to the
foreign lenders at the rate of 15.4 percent per annum is not contrary to the
object and spirit of s. 20(1)(c)(i).  In Bronfman Trust, supra,
Dickson C.J., held at p. 45, that the purpose of this provision is “to
encourage the accumulation of capital which would produce taxable income”; see
also, Tennant, supra, at para. 16, per Iacobucci J. 
Allowing Shell to deduct its interest payments at the actual rate that was paid
to the foreign lenders in exchange for the NZ$150 million that was then used
for the purpose of producing income is not contrary to the object and spirit of
s. 20(1)(c)(i).  To the contrary, it fulfills its purpose.  58         
Second, the deductions were based on transactions that were in accordance
with normal business practice.  At trial, Christie A.C.J.T.C. accepted that
this was so, noting in addition that the “fact that business transactions may
be regarded as convoluted does not, of course, mean that they are abnormal”
(para. 31).  Stone J.A. agreed, holding that “[i]n choosing to borrow the funds
in NZ$ rather than US$ the respondent took into account the overall tax impact
of the transaction, and this is a common business concern” (para. 5).  Before
this Court, evidence was adduced demonstrating that this form of international
interest rate arbitrage is commonly done, even by non-taxable governmental
entities.  When coupled with the fact that the Debenture Agreements provided
Shell with money that satisfied its need for capital, the conclusion that they
reflected normal business practice is unavoidable.  59         
The third factor to consider, according to the Federal Court of Appeal,
is whether Shell entered the Debenture Agreements for a bona fide
business purpose.  Certainly, Shell structured its transactions this way
because it wanted to borrow the necessary funds at the lowest possible
after-tax cost.  The Minister contends that this was not a bona fide
business purpose.  Even if it could be said that acquiring funds at the lowest
possible after-tax cost is not a bona fide business purpose – a
proposition on which I need express no opinion – another purpose clearly lay in
Shell’s need to borrow the NZ$ as part of its plan to acquire funds for
business purposes.  Therefore, even granting the Minister’s point for the sake
of argument, there was “a bona fide business purpose” for the Debenture
Agreements that gave rise to the deductions in issue.  The third criterion is
satisfied.  60         
On the broad test for the former s. 245(1) developed by the Federal
Court of Appeal, Shell’s decision to deduct its interest payments to the
foreign lenders at the rate of 15.4 percent cannot be impugned.  It is
accordingly unnecessary to decide whether the Federal Court of Appeal has
correctly ascertained Parliament’s intention in passing the provision, which,
it must be repeated, has now been repealed and replaced by a new anti-avoidance
tool.  61         
For these reasons, this Court allowed Shell’s appeal and held that the
s. 20(1)(c)(i) allowed it to deduct the entirety of the interest
payments made by it to the foreign lenders under the Debenture Agreements.  C.     Is Shell’s Net Foreign Exchange Gain
Taxable as Income or as a Capital Gain?  62         
The issue on the Minister’s cross-appeal is whether the approximately
US$21 million net foreign exchange gain that Shell realized through the
Debenture Agreements and the Forward Exchange Contract should be included in
its income for tax purposes, or whether it should be taxed as a capital gain.  In
the event that he was unsuccessful in arguing that the amount of Shell’s
interest payments exceeding 9.1 percent per annum should be disallowed, the
Minister argued in the alternative that the net foreign exchange gain should be
included in Shell’s income.  The Court dismissed the Minister’s cross-appeal,
holding that the net foreign exchange gain should be taxed on capital account.  63         
Because transactions must be reported in CDN$ for income tax purposes,
foreign exchange gains or losses may arise when a business engages in
transactions denominated in a foreign currency.  Although they generally agree
that, in this case, Shell earned a net foreign exchange gain through the
Debenture Agreements and the Forward Exchange Contract, the Minister and Shell
disagree on how best to describe it.  The Minister simply contends that, in
1988, Shell borrowed the equivalent of US$100 million from the foreign lenders
but, in 1993, because of the Forward Exchange Contract, was able to repay the
loan using only US$79.5 million.  This, it says, gave rise to a gain of
approximately US$21 million, which of course must be converted into CDN$ for
tax purposes.  64         
Shell, on the other hand, submits that there were two gains, which
together yield the same net result as the Minister’s approach.  One gain arose
on the Debenture Agreements because, while Shell borrowed the equivalent of
US$100 million in 1988, it took the equivalent of only US$81.5 million to repay
it in 1993 (assessed by reference to the market rate for NZ$ in 1993). 
However, it did not actually cost Shell US$81.5 million to repay the principal
to the foreign lenders because it had hedged its risk through the Forward
Exchange Contract.  A second gain therefore arose on the Forward Exchange
Contract in 1993 because, while it would have cost US$81.5 million to purchase
NZ$150 million at the market rate, Shell was able to rely on the discounted
rate agreed upon in 1993 to reduce its own cost of the NZ$150 million to
US$79.5 million.  Thus, it claims it earned a gain on the Forward Exchange
Contract of US$1.98 million.  Combining the two gains leads to a net foreign
exchange gain of approximately US$21 million, which again would have to be
converted into CDN$ for tax purposes.  65         
At trial, Christie A.C.J.T.C. held that it did not matter whether there
were one or two gains because, even if there were two, both should be taxed on
the capital account.  For the Federal Court of Appeal, Linden J.A. held that
there were two gains.  Indeed, it seems to me that Shell is correct, i.e, that
there were two gains arising from two transactions, which only created a net
gain of approximately US$21 million when combined:  see S. S. Ruby, “Recent
Financing Techniques”, in Report of Proceedings of the Forty-First Tax
Conference (1990), at pp. 27.3 to 27.6.  In light of the prevailing market
rate for NZ$ in 1993, one gain arose on the repayment of the NZ$150 million to
the foreign lenders under the Debenture Agreements, and a smaller gain arose on
the closing out of the Forward Exchange Contract with Sumitomo.  The net result
is the same as that yielded by the Minister’s suggested interpretation, but
this view recognizes that Shell entered into two distinct transactions with two
separate arm’s-length parties, which in turn gave rise to two foreign exchange
gains.  66         
Parenthetically, I note that there may be another way to interpret the
closing out of the Forward Exchange Contract: Ruby, supra, at p. 27.12 ;
D. G. Broadhurst, “Income Tax Treatment of Foreign Exchange Forward Contracts,
Swaps, and Other Hedging Transactions”, in Report of Proceedings of the
Forty-First Tax Conference (1990), 26:1.  Shell’s approach requires one to
view this transaction as a disposition of US$ to Sumitomo in exchange
for NZ$150 million.  Any foreign exchange gain or loss is then calculated by
comparing the rate established in the Forward Exchange Contract with the spot
market rate for NZ$ in 1993.  However, it is also possible to view the
transaction as an acquisition of NZ$150 million for US$79.5 million. 
That purchase price -- calculated according to the exchange rate established in
the Forward Exchange Contract -- would constitute Shell’s cost base for the
NZ$150 million.  When Shell used that NZ$150 million to repay the foreign
lenders under the Debenture Agreements, Shell’s cost base for those funds could
then be assessed against their spot market value at the time of repayment to
determine whether Shell had realized a foreign exchange gain or loss on the
Forward Exchange Contract.  This would be in addition to any foreign exchange
gain or loss Shell would earn on the repayment of the principal to the foreign
lenders under the Debenture Agreements.  67         
Because Shell immediately used the NZ$150 million from Sumitomo to
discharge its obligations to the foreign lenders, however, the spot market rate
for NZ$ and the amount of Shell’s gain on the Forward Exchange Contract is the
same regardless of which approach is taken.  It follows that the amount of the
foreign exchange gain is also the same.  It is therefore unnecessary on this
appeal to decide which interpretation of the transaction is preferable.  68         
The issue here is whether the foreign exchange gains were received by
Shell on income account, in which case they are taxable in full, or whether
they were received on capital account, in which case only three-quarters would
be taxable.  The characterization of a foreign exchange gain or loss generally
follows the characterization of the underlying transaction: Tip Top Tailors
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1957] S.C.R. 703, at p. 707, per
Locke J., and at p. 712, per Rand J.; Alberta Gas Trunk Line Co. v.
M.N.R., [1972] S.C.R. 498, at p. 505, per Martland J.; Columbia
Records of Canada Ltd. v. M.N.R., [1971] C.T.C. 839 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 845, per
Gibson J.; Hogg and Magee, supra, at p. 344.  Thus, if the underlying
transaction was entered into for the purpose of acquiring funds to be used for
capital purposes, any foreign exchange gain or loss in respect of that
transaction will also be on capital account.   70         
Whether a foreign exchange gain arising from a hedging contract should
be characterized as being on income or capital account depends on the characterization
of the debt obligation to which the hedge relates.  As noted, Shell entered
into the Forward Exchange Contract in order to hedge with US$ the market risk
on the Debenture Agreements, which were denominated in NZ$.  Indeed, Shell
would not have entered into the Debenture Agreements in the absence of the
Forward Exchange Contract.  The gain on the Debenture Agreements was
characterized as being earned on capital account and so therefore should the
gain on the Forward Exchange Contract.  Both gains were earned on capital
account and three-quarters of them are taxable when realized.  71         
Against these conclusions, the Minister argues that the income nature of
the net foreign exchange gain is illustrated by the fact that Shell amortized
it over the term of the Debenture Agreements for its non-tax financial
accounting; that the net gain was related to the current payment of interest,
which is an income expense pursuant to s. 20(1)(c)(i); that Shell was
acting like a trader; and that the net gain did not arise fortuitously but
rather was the result of a carefully executed plan. 72         
To a large extent, the Minister’s submissions reflect his consistent
view that there was a single gain arising from a synthesized transaction
through which Shell was able to repay a loan of US$100 million with only
US$79.5 million.  Yet it is significant that there were actually two gains,
arising from distinct transactions with separate arm’s-length parties, which
only together yielded a net foreign exchange gain of US$21 million.  The
Minister does not make this distinction so, once again, I cannot accept the
premise of his argument.  Nor are the Minister’s other arguments persuasive.  73         
First, the manner in which Shell recorded the net foreign exchange gain
for its non-tax financial accounting is not determinative of the proper tax
treatment.  This Court has frequently held that accounting practices, by
themselves, do not establish rules of income tax law: Canderel, supra,
at paras. 32-37, per Iacobucci J.  At any rate, non-tax financial
accounting is generally designed to reflect the overall economic position of
the entire corporation.  Section 20(1) (c)(i) of the Act , in contrast,
applies to the tax treatment of specific transactions.  It therefore should not
be surprising that the same transaction may properly be assessed differently
for different purposes: see generally Friedberg v. Canada, [1993] 4
S.C.R. 285, at p. 286, per Iacobucci J.  74         
Second, the mere fact that the gains are related to the interest
expenses incurred under the Debenture Agreements, which s. 20(1) (c)(i)
allows Shell to deduct from its income, does not mean that the net foreign
exchange gain should also be considered on income account.  The Minister bases
this argument on this Court’s decision in Ikea Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1
S.C.R. 196, where a tenant-inducement payment was held to be so directly
related to the taxpayer’s rental payments that it should also be considered on
income account.  However, Ikea does not assist the Minister.  Shell did
not receive any payment from either the foreign lenders or Sumitomo to
reimburse it for any expense it had paid.  Furthermore, it is important to
underline that interest expenses on money used to produce income from a
business or property are only deemed by s. 20(1) (c)(i) to be
current expenses and, in the absence of that provision, would be considered to
be capital expenditures: Canada Safeway, supra, per Rand
J., at p. 727.  This Court was not invited on this appeal to revisit this
characterization of such interest expenses: they therefore remain capital
expenses which s. 20(1) (c)(i) deems to be deductible from Shell’s gross
income notwithstanding the general prohibition of such capital deductions in s.
18(1).  Accordingly, even if the general analysis in Ikea applied to
this case, it would tend to support the conclusion that the gains should be
treated as being on capital account.  75         
Third, the Minister’s argument that Shell was acting like a trader in
borrowing NZ$ through the Debenture Agreements and exchanging them for US$
through the Forward Exchange Contract cannot succeed.  Shell was acquiring
money to use in its business.  That was the purpose of the Debenture Agreements
and the Debenture Agreements prompted the need for the Forward Exchange Contract. 
In no sense was Shell engaged in an “adventure in the nature of trade”.  76         
Fourth, it is not particularly relevant that the net foreign exchange
gain did not arise fortuitously but rather arose as a result of Shell’s
deliberate contractual obligations.  As noted, the proper tax treatment of a
foreign exchange gain on both the initial borrowing and any related hedge
transaction is to be assessed in light of the characterization of the
underlying debt obligation.  Transactions giving rise to debt obligations
obviously do not have to be speculative to be capital in nature.  It follows
that foreign exchange gains do not have to arise from speculative transactions
in order to be taxed as capital gains.  In this case, for example, the
underlying debt obligation recorded in the Debenture Agreements was entered
into for the purpose of raising funds for use in Shell’s business.  Neither it
nor the related hedge transaction lose that characteristic simply because they
were deliberate and organized.  77         
For these reasons, the Court dismissed the Minister’s cross-appeal and
held that the net foreign exchange gain realized by Shell upon the repayment of
the NZ$150 million to the foreign lenders and the closing out of the Forward
Exchange Contract was received on capital account.  VI.  Conclusion  78         
At the conclusion of the hearing of this appeal, the Court allowed
Shell’s appeal and dismissed the Minister’s cross-appeal.  The matter is
therefore referred back to the Minister of National Revenue for reconsideration
and reassessment in accordance with the judgment of the Tax Court of Canada. 
Shell shall have its costs in this Court and in the courts below.  Appeal allowed with costs. Cross-appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant/respondent on
cross-appeal:  Bennett Jones, Calgary.  Solicitor for the respondent/appellant on
cross-appeal/intervener:  The Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener Canadian Pacific
Limited:  McCarthy Tétrault, Toronto.  *          On November 10, 1999, Canadian Pacific Ltd. v. The
Queen was remanded to the Federal Court of Appeal to be dealt with in
accordance with the present judgment.  