 Bell Canada v. Consumers' Assoc. of Canada, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 190  Bell Canada        Appellant;  and   File No.: 17676.  1985: April 25; 1986: February 28.  Present: McIntyre, Lamer, Wilson, Le Dain and La Forest JJ.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal                       Held: The appeal should
be dismissed.   Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited   Electrical Power Control
Act, 1977 (Nfld.), c. 92, s. 14(1).  Municipal and Public
Utility Board Act, 1926 (Man.), c. 33, s.
55.   Public Utilities Board Act, R.S.A. 1970, c. 302, s. 60.                        Bernard Courtois
and David Kidd, for the appellant.                     K. J. MacDonald
and John S. Tyhurst, for the respondent the Consumers' Association of
Canada.                       The judgment of the Court was delivered by                                                                         I  3.                Bell Canada challenged the taxation
order on the ground that because of the arrangements for the remuneration of
counsel who represented the interveners and for the payment of other expenses
of the interventions, the taxation order had the effect of awarding costs for
expenses that were not actually incurred by the interveners and thus violated
the principle of indemnification or compensation applicable to the award of
legal costs by courts.   5.                The costs were allowed by the taxing
officer and confirmed by the Commission on the general ground that they fell
within the criteria adopted by the Commission in the exercise of its discretion
to award costs to interveners in rate hearings in order to encourage informed
public participation in such hearings.  6.                The Federal Court of Appeal unanimously
held that the Commission had not erred in law in dismissing the appeal from the
taxation order, but the members of the panel differed in their reasons. The
majority (Ryan J. and Kelly D.J.) held that the principle of indemnification or
compensation applied to an award of costs by the Commission, but that the
record did not establish that there had been a violation of that principle in
the costs awarded to the respondents. Urie J. held that while the principle of
indemnification or compensation was a relevant consideration in the exercise of
the Commission's discretion to award costs, the Commission was not limited by
that principle but could award costs on a broader basis to ensure effective
participation in its hearings. He held that the court should not interfere with
the exercise of the Commission's discretion to award costs in this case because
it had not been exercised on wrong principles.                                                                      II  7.                To understand the principles, as applied
to the facts of this case, on which the Commission exercised its discretion, it
is necessary to refer at some length to the reasons of the Commission and the
taxing officer.   In the case of rate
hearings, the Commission has concluded that costs may be awarded against an
applicant, when the intervener meets the criteria set out in s. 52 of the Draft
Rules, and subject to the circumstances of each case. These criteria were
developed following a consideration of the factors used by the Alberta Public
Utilities Board and the Ontario Energy Board, two agencies which have adopted a
similar practice. Costs will only be available to interveners who have
participated in a responsible way, and have contributed to a better
understanding of the issues by the Commission. As noted above, costs will not
be available to interveners who already have funding from government or other
sources that would in the Commission's opinion enable them to participate in
the case.                      52.(1)
In any proceeding under this Part, the Commission may award costs against the
applicant to any intervener who                     (a) has
a substantial interest in the outcome of the proceeding, or represents the
interests of a substantial number or class of subscribers,                     (b) has
participated in a responsible way,                     (c) has
contributed to a better understanding of the issues by the Commission, and                     (d)
does not have sufficient financial resources available to enable it to
prosecute its interest adequately, having regard to the financial implications
of the application for the intervener, or, where the intervener represents the
interests of a group or class of subscribers, for each member thereof, and the
intervener requires the assistance provided by costs to do so.  10.              Subsection 52(5) of the Draft Rules should
also be noted:                     52. ...                     (5)
Costs awarded under this section shall be taxed by the General Counsel of the
Commission or by such officer as may be appointed by the Commission, and shall
not exceed those necessarily and reasonably incurred by the intervener in
connection with its intervention and, where the Commission has prescribed a
scale of costs, shall not exceed the amounts so prescribed.                                                                  2. Awards                                       (a) The Consumers' Association
of Canada   In the Commission's view,
the Consumers' Association of Canada represented not only the interests of the
Association's membership but also those of Bell Canada subscribers generally.
The C.A.C., through its counsel, Mr. G. Kane, and its expert witness, Dr.
Gordon, contributed to a better understanding of a number of relevant issues
including that of the relationship between Bell Canada and its subsidiaries.    Uncontested affidavit
evidence submitted by the CAC established that: (a) no portion of the
membership fees of this Association are allocated to participation in rate
hearings; and (b) counsel to the CAC is not a full time employee of the
Association. These facts have convinced the Commission that the wording
employed in the award of costs to the CAC was inappropriately narrow in scope.                                                                 2. Awards                                                                      ...      The Commission
accordingly awards costs to NAPO et al (except for ACCQ which did
not request costs).                      44. (1)
In any proceeding under this Part, the Commission may award costs to be paid by
the regulated company to any intervener who                     (a)
has, or is representative of a group or class of subscribers that has, an
interest in the outcome of the proceeding of such a nature that the intervener
or group or class of subscribers will receive a benefit or suffer a detriment
as a result of the order or decision resulting from the proceeding;                     (b)
has participated in a responsible way; and                     (c)
has contributed to a better understanding of the issues by the Commission.                                                                      ...                     (6)
Costs awarded under this section                     (a)
shall be taxed by the General Counsel of the Commission or by such officer as
may be appointed by the Commission;                     (b)
shall not exceed those necessarily and reasonably incurred by the intervener in
connection with its intervention; and                     (c)
where the Commission has prescribed a scale of costs based on prevailing market
rates, shall not exceed the amounts so prescribed.    Some light is perhaps thrown on the view which he took of the
application of the principle of indemnification by the following passage in his
order:    It is clear that there was
never any obligation flowing from NAPO et al to either PIAC or Mr. Roman for
their services. If the subject of costs was ever discussed between counsel and
these interveners, the understanding was merely that if costs should happen to
be awarded, they would be given by the interveners to the PIAC. This
understanding is reflected in the terms of reference of the PIAC. According to
Mr. Roman, any such bill, in the absence of an award of costs, would simply
have had to be written off as an uncollectible debt, a practice which he
submitted would accomplish nothing and would not be conducive to good client
relations.  18.              In the result, the taxing officer
concluded that the disputed allowance of counsel fees to CAC and counsel fees
and disbursements to NAPO et al. fell within the criteria established by
the Commission for the award and taxation of costs to interveners.   The Commission considers
that the active participation of established organizations such as CAC and NAPO
et al in regulatory proceedings is desirable in view of their continuing
interest and knowledge base in the field. In the Commission's view, the
adoption of Bell's argument concerning double recovery would in effect mean
that only ad hoc organizations could expect to obtain awards of costs
from the Commission. Such organizations would not likely have the base for
informed participation upon which established organizations such as CAC and
NAPO et al can build their specific interventions. Such organizations are
called upon to intervene in a number of regulatory proceedings and the
Commission has concluded that the taxing officer did not err in principle when
he interpreted the Commission's direction to take into account government
funding as a direction to deduct from awards of costs only funds specifically
designated for the 1978 Bell rate case.                                                                      ...  In the Commission's view,
the application of the principle of indemnification upon which Bell relies
would not be appropriate in regulatory proceedings before it. In the
Commission's opinion, the proper purpose of such awards is the encouragement of
informed public participation in Commission proceedings. It would inhibit
public interest groups from developing and maintaining expertise in regulatory
matters if, in order to be entitled to costs, they had to retain and instruct
legal counsel in the manner appropriate to proceedings before the courts in
civil matters. On the other hand, no useful purpose would be served by
requiring public interest groups artificially to arrange their affairs, by
means, for instance, of forgivable debts or bonus accounts, in order to avoid a
restrictive interpretation of the term "costs".  The Commission concluded:  The Commission therefore
finds that the taxing officer did not err in principle in awarding counsel fees
to CAC and costs to NAPO et al.                                                                      III  20.              The issue is whether the award and
taxation of costs for counsel fees to CAC and for counsel fees and
disbursements to NAPO et al. on the basis and in the circumstances
indicated in the decisions of the Commission and the taxation order fell within
the proper exercise of the discretion with respect to costs conferred on the
Commission by s. 73 of the National Transportation Act as follows:                     73. (1) The costs of and incidental to any proceeding before the
Commission, except as herein otherwise provided, are in the discretion of the
Commission, and may be fixed in any case at a sum certain, or may be taxed.                     (2) The
Commission may order by whom and to whom any costs are to be paid, and by whom
they are to be taxed and allowed.                     (3) The
Commission may prescribe a scale under which such costs shall be taxed.                      2. (1) In this Act, and in any Special Act as hereinafter defined in so
far as this Act applies,                                                                      ...  "costs" includes
fees, counsel fees and expenses;  22.              Counsel for the appellant contended that
the principle on which that discretion must be exercised is that "costs
are an indemnity to a party for the expenses to which the party has been put as
a result of the litigation or proceeding in question". As authority for
the principle of indemnification he cited, among others, the case of Ryan v.
McGregor (1925), 58 O.L.R. 213 (C.A.), in which Middleton J.A. said at p.
216:                     The
fundamental principle is thus clearly stated by Baron Bramwell in the case of Harold
v. Smith (1860), 5 H. & N. 381, 385: "Costs as between party
and party are given by the law as an indemnity to the person entitled to them:
they are not imposed as a punishment on the party who pays them, nor given as a
bonus to the party who receives them. Therefore, if the extent of the
damnification can be found out, the extent to which costs ought to be allowed
is also ascertained."   It does not, as I see it,
follow that in assessing costs in a rate proceeding, the Commission is bound to
follow precisely the same rules as would a taxing master assessing costs in
litigation in the courts. Allowances would have to be made for differences in
the purposes of the two quite different processes and in the practices and
procedures followed in each. I am of opinion, however, that the term
"costs", as used in section 73, does carry with it, as an essential
aspect, the element of compensation or indemnification for expenses incurred in
a proceeding. The Commission would thus have been in error if, in its Reasons
for dismissing the appeal to it, it meant to reject the proposition that
indemnification is an essential purpose in an award of costs under section 73
of the Act.  24.              Ryan J. found, however, applying Re
Eastwood, [1974] 3 All E.R. 603 (C.A.), respecting the taxation of costs
for the services of a salaried solicitor and Armand v. Carr, [1927]
S.C.R. 348, respecting the entitlement of an insured to costs for solicitors
instructed by the insurer to act for him, in the absence of an agreement
excluding his liability for such costs, that the record did not establish a
violation of the principle of indemnification as applied by the courts in the
award of counsel fees to CAC and counsel fees and disbursements to NAPO et
al.  25.              On the application of the principle of
indemnification to the award of costs by the Commission pursuant to s. 73 of
the Act, Urie J. expressed himself as follows:                      The
principal issue in this appeal is whether the meaning to be ascribed to the
word ["costs"] as it appears in the Act should be the meaning given
it in ordinary judicial proceedings in which, in general terms, costs are
awarded to indemnify or compensate a party for the actual expenses to which he
has been put by the litigation in which he has been involved and in which he
has been adjudged to have been a successful party. In my opinion, this is not
the interpretation of the word which must necessarily be given in proceedings
before regulatory tribunals.                      I use
the word "necessarily" because I have no doubt that an element
which may be considered by the tribunal in determining the entitlement of a
party appearing before it to costs, is whether or not the party has incurred
liability for expenses for the purpose of its appearance before the tribunal.
It is not, however, in my view, either the only or a necessary element. As has
been said on other occasions, the proceedings before the Commission in a rate
fixing hearing are not adversarial in nature; there is no lis inter
partes. The purpose of a hearing in such a proceeding is to obtain
meaningful reaction from concerned and interested parties affected by the rate
fixing, whether adversely or positively. Such parties may or may not have
incurred actual, measurable expenses, such as counsel fees, in providing input
to the proceedings and yet have contributed in a very real fashion to a better
understanding by the Commission of some of the issues involved in the proposed
rate structure. Such contributions to a better understanding of the issues should,
as I see it, be encouraged and rewarded. If this is so, obviously such
encouragement cannot be based solely on indemnification for actual costs
incurred. It is at this point that the Commission's discretion as to who is
deserving of an award of costs, as to the elements to be considered and the
principles to be applied in the award, is exercised in any of the ways
contemplated by section 73.  26.              Courts of appeal in three provinces have
held that in the exercise of the discretion to award costs under provisions in
essentially the same terms as s. 73 of the National Transportation Act
regulatory tribunals were not bound by the principles and rules governing the
award of costs in the courts, although the application of the principle of
indemnification would not appear to have been directly in issue in these cases.
In Northern Engineering & Dev. Co. v. Philip, [1930] 3 D.L.R. 387, a
majority of the Manitoba Court of Appeal (Prendergast C.J.M., Trueman and
Dennistoun JJ.A.) held that whether a party who had successfully opposed an
application before the Municipal and Public Utility Board to vary a building
restriction was entitled to costs was not governed under s. 55 of The
Municipal and Public Utility Board Act, 1926 (Man.), c. 33, which was in
essentially the same terms as s. 73 of the National Transportation Act,
by the principles applicable to the award of costs by the courts. Trueman J.A.,
speaking for the majority, said at p. 390:                      Proceedings
before the board belong to a different category and are necessarily dealt with
from a point of view that has no place in litigation between parties. The
status and risks of suitors in an action are fixed by practice and authority.
No rule has been laid down by the board that persons appearing by counsel
before the board shall, subject to the board's discretion, have costs in event
of their success or pay costs in event of their failure. Whether such a rule
should be adopted or not is a matter wholly for the board. In the meantime, the
matter is left by s. 55 in the board's absolute discretion, untrammelled by the
principles which necessarily control the discretion of the Court or a Judge.
See Local Government Bd. v. Arlidge [1915] A.C. 120.  Robson J.A., dissenting, with whom Fullerton J.A. concurred, said with
reference to the word "discretion" in s. 55 of the Act: "I
construe this as meaning in the same sense as costs are in the discretion of a
Court. The discretion must be exercised in accordance with legal principle."                       In the
factum of the appellants a number of cases were noted dealing with the
discretion exercisable by Courts in the matter of costs of litigation, as well
as statements propounded in texts on the subject. I do not find them
sufficiently appropriate to warrant discussion. Such costs are influenced by
Rules of Court, which in some cases provide block tariffs, and in any event are
directed to lis inter partes. We are here concerned with
the costs of public hearings on a matter of public interest. There is no
underlying similarity between the two procedures, or their purposes, to enable
the principles underlying costs in litigation between parties to be necessarily
applied to public hearings on public concerns. In the latter case the whole of
the circumstances are to be taken into account, not merely the position of the
litigant who has incurred expense in the vindication of a right.  28.              In Newfoundland & Labrador Hydro v.
Newfoundland & Labrador Federation of Municipalities (1979), 65 A.P.R.
317, 24 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 317, the Board of Commissioners of Public
Utilities of Newfoundland awarded costs in a fixed sum to the Newfoundland
& Labrador Federation of Municipalities as interveners in the hearing of an
application by Newfoundland & Labrador Hydro for an increase in rates.
Hydro attacked the award of costs on the ground, among others, that the amount
was excessive and that the costs should have been taxed on a party and party
basis. Section 14(1) of The Electrical Power Control Act, 1977 (Nfld.),
c. 92, conferred a discretion on the Board with respect to costs in essentially
the same terms as s. 73 of the National Transportation Act, and like it,
expressly conferred the power to award costs in a fixed sum. In the course of
rejecting Hydro's contention, Furlong C.J.N. said at p. 320: "I can find
no support for bringing in the Rules as to costs in this court to proceedings
before independent bodies." Gushue J.A., with whom Morgan J.A. concurred,
said at p. 425: "The manner in which the costs are arrived at, and
awarded, is a matter strictly within the discretion and competence of the
Board, and this Court has no jurisdiction to interfere with that discretion,
unless of course improperly exercised. The fact that a litigant in a court
proceeding is subject to various rules relating to costs is of no relevance
here."                      In my
view, the word "costs" in section 73 of the National
Transportation Act must, as argued by the appellant, be given its normal
legal meaning according to which the costs of a proceeding are the costs
incurred by the parties or participants in that proceeding and do not include
the expenses of the tribunal before which the proceedings are brought. I do not
see any reason to give it a wider meaning. I am confirmed in this opinion by
the fact that much of the language used in section 73 is normally used in
association with court costs. I have in mind the phrase "costs of and
incidental to all proceedings" (which is found in section 50 of the
English Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act, 1925, 15 &
16 Geo. 5, c. 49), the reference to the possibility that costs be fixed at a
sum certain or taxed and that the Commission prescribe a "scale" (in
the French text: "tarif") of costs. If another interpretation
were to prevail, the Commission would have the right to force the utility
companies which the law obliges to appear before it to defray part of its
expenses. This, in my opinion, would be contrary to the general policy of the National
Transportation Act following which the expenses of the Commission are to be
paid out of public funds rather than by the utility companies that are subject
to its jurisdiction.                      Appeal dismissed.                     Solicitor for the appellant: E. E. Saunders, Hull.                     Solicitor for the respondent the Consumers'
Association of Canada: K. J. MacDonald,
Ottawa.     