  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Canada, 2011 SCC 36, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 635 Date: 20110715 Docket: 33422  Between: Canada
Trustco Mortgage Company Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Rothstein
and Cromwell JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 55)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 56 to 85) Deschamps J. (Binnie, Rothstein and
  Cromwell JJ. concurring)  McLachlin C.J. (Fish and Abella JJ.
  concurring)    Canada
Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Canada, 2011 SCC 36, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 635 Canada
Trustco Mortgage Company                                                             Appellant v. Her Majesty
The Queen                                                                              Respondent Indexed as:  Canada Trustco
Mortgage Co. v. Canada 2011 SCC 36 File No.:  33422. 2010:  December 10; 2011:  July 15. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, Deschamps, Fish, Abella,
Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. on
appeal from the federal court of appeal                     The
tax debtor M owed tax to the federal government.  The Minister of National
Revenue became aware that cheques payable to M were being drawn on his trust
account and deposited in a joint account owned by M and a third party.  Each of
the cheques drawn on the trust account was payable to M and delivered to the
appellant, Canada Trustco Mortgage Company (the “Bank”), with an instruction to
deposit the funds in the joint account.  This instruction was given by writing
“Dep to” and the account number on the back of the cheque.                     The
Minister issued three requirements to pay to the Bank as per s. 224  of the
Income Tax Act  (“ITA ”).  The Bank disputed its liability and the
Minister assessed the Bank for the amounts of the cheques for failing to comply
with the three requirements to pay.  The Tax Court of Canada dismissed the
Bank’s appeal and the Federal Court of Appeal upheld the Tax Court decision.                     Held
(McLachlin C.J. and Fish and Abella JJ. dissenting):  The
appeal should be allowed, the lower courts’ decisions set aside and the
assessments vacated.                     Per
Binnie, Deschamps, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.: The Bank was at no
point liable to pay M the proceeds of the cheques.  The fact that a person is
designated as payee on the face of a cheque does not on its own mean that a bank
is liable to make a payment to the person.  A drawee is answerable to the
drawer.  The question is to whom the drawee may make the payment.  What is on
the back of the cheque — the instructions or the endorsement — is crucial to
this question. In this case, the instructions were to deposit the cheques into
the joint account.  The Bank’s liability to pay monies to M personally cannot
be confused with its liability to pay monies to the holders of the joint
account.  There were no instructions that made the monies payable to M.                     In
this case, the cheques were neither expressed to be payable to
bearer nor endorsed in blank.  After the cheques had been delivered to the Bank
for deposit into the joint account, M was no longer in possession of them, was
not entitled to them and was therefore not their holder.  Once the Bank received
the cheques for deposit and credited them to the joint account, it acquired the
rights of a holder in due course pursuant to s. 165(3)  of the Bills of
Exchange Act  (“BEA ”) and was under a contractual obligation to the
holders of the joint account to present the cheques for payment.  In crediting
the joint account, sending the cheques to a third party for clearing, and
receiving the proceeds, the Bank was acting on the basis of its contractual
relationship with the holders of the joint account and not on behalf of M personally. 
When the Bank debited the trust account the next day, it was not making a
payment to M or to an agent acting for him alone.  The Bank owed no money to M,
as it was acting as the collecting bank for its customers, the holders of the
joint account.  It did not collect the proceeds of the cheques as agent for the
payee, M.                     A
banker’s obligation arises out of the debtor-creditor relationship created when
a bank account is opened.  The payee of a cheque is not a party to this
contractual relationship, and the mere fact of being a payee does not entail
such a relationship with the drawee.  A cheque operates neither as an
assignment of funds in the hands of the payee nor as an assignment of funds in
the hands of the drawee.  In and of itself, a cheque imposes no obligation on a
drawee bank to the payee.  There is a distinction between delivery of a cheque
for deposit and presentment for payment.  It is clear from the rules applicable
to presentment that the drawee bank’s obligation — to make payment to the
holder of the cheque — is to the drawer only and that this obligation is
triggered only when the cheque is presented to it.  It is also clear that,
except as provided in the BEA , the drawee is obliged, as between itself
and the drawer, to disburse the funds only upon presentment of the bill by the
holder — the person who is entitled to receive them — or by the holder’s agent. 
Viewed either from the angle of M being the payee or from that of the Bank being
the drawee, the mere fact that cheques payable to M were delivered to the Bank  for
deposit did not make the latter liable to make a payment to the former within
the meaning of s. 224(1)  of the ITA .                     Regardless
of the fact that the cheques were deposited into a joint account, the Bank was
liable to M alone when it decided to honour the cheques.  Once funds are
irrevocably deposited in a joint account, they become the property of joint
account holders jointly under the terms of their banking contract and cannot be
garnished by the Minister because they are no longer the sole property of the
tax debtor.  However, it does not follow that the Minister could not intercept
funds in transit before they arrived in the joint account.  A requirement to
pay in s. 224(1)  intercepts funds while they are in transit.  Before the
funds arrive in the joint account and while the funds are being transferred,
the drawee bank is only liable to make a payment to the payee of the cheque.  The
other joint account holder had no right to the funds before they arrived in the
account.  It is only M’s status as payee that matters for the purpose of
triggering s. 224(1) , in the presence of a joint account. Cases Cited By Deschamps J.                     Referred
to:  National Trust Co. v. Canada (1998), 162 D.L.R. (4th) 704; Foley
v. Hill (1848), 2 H.L.C. 28, 9 E.R. 1002; Joachimson v. Swiss Bank Corp.,
[1921] 3 K.B. 110; Bank of Montreal v. M.N.R., [1992] 1 C.T.C. 2292; Boma Manufacturing Ltd. v. Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce,
[1996] 3 S.C.R. 727; J.C. Creations Ltd. v. Vancouver City Savings Credit
Union, 2004 BCCA 107, 236 D.L.R. (4th) 602; Westboro Flooring &
Décor Inc. v. Bank of Nova Scotia (2004), 241 D.L.R. (4th) 257; B.M.P. Global Distribution Inc. v. Bank of Nova Scotia, 2009 SCC 15, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 504; Schroeder v. Central Bank of
London (1876), 34 L.T. 735; Thomson v. Merchants Bank of Canada (1919),
58 S.C.R. 287; Schimnowski Estate, Re, [1996] 6 W.W.R. 194; Capital
Associates Ltd. v. Royal Bank of Canada (1976), 65 D.L.R. (3d) 384, aff’g (1973),
36 D.L.R. (3d) 579; Boyd v. Emmerson (1834), 2 Ad. & E. 184, 111
E.R. 71. By McLachlin C.J. (dissenting)                     B.M.P. Global
Distribution Inc. v. Bank of Nova Scotia, 2009 SCC 15, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 504;
National Trust Co. v.
Canada (1998), 162 D.L.R.
(4th) 704; Foley v. Hill
(1848), 2 H.L.C. 28, 9 E.R. 1002; Schroeder v. Central Bank of London
(1876), 34 L.T. 735; Thomson v. Merchants Bank of Canada (1919), 58
S.C.R. 287; Schimnowski Estate, Re, [1996] 6 W.W.R. 194; Westminster Bank Ltd. v. Hilton (1926), 43 T.L.R. 124; Boma
Manufacturing Ltd. v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, [1996] 3 S.C.R.
727; Macdonald v. Tacquah Gold Mines Co. (1884), 13 Q.B.D. 535; Hirschorn
v. Evans, [1938] 2 K.B. 801; Westcoast Commodities Inc. v. Chen
(1986), 55 O.R. (2d) 264. Statutes and Regulations Cited Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .), s. 224 . Authors Cited Ellinger, E. P., Eva Lomnicka and Richard Hooley.  Modern
Banking Law, 3rd ed.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 2002. Goode, R. M.  “When is a cheque paid?”, [1983] J. Bus. L. 164. Ogilvie, M. H.  Bank and Customer Law in Canada.  Toronto:
 Irwin Law, 2007. Ziegel, Jacob S., Benjamin Geva and R. C. C. Cuming. Commercial
and Consumer Transactions:  Cases, Text and Materials, 3rd ed., vol. II,
Negotiable Instruments and Banking, by Benjamin Geva.  Toronto:  Emond
Montgomery, 1995.                     R. Paul
Steep and Thomas N. T. Sutton, for the appellant.                     Wendy Burnham and Michael Lema, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of Binnie, Deschamps, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. was delivered by [1]                             
Deschamps J. — Few jurists thrive on exploring the mechanisms rooted in the Bills
of Exchange Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. B-4  (“BEA ”); most find them
technical and tedious. Important as electronic transactions have become in an
increasingly paperless world, cheques are still popular bills of exchange that
are processed daily in a multitude of transactions across Canada based on
recognized mechanisms. The arguments accepted by the courts below disregard
those mechanisms. If accepted, their interpretation would require a bank to
which a third party has made a demand for payment to determine not only whether
its customer is liable to pay the third party, but also whether the payee is
liable to do so. No reason was advanced for imposing such an obligation. For
the following reasons, I am of the view that the bank in this case was at no
point liable to pay the tax debtor the proceeds of the cheques. I would allow
the appeal with costs throughout. [2]                             
Section 224  of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”), provides that the Minister of National
Revenue may require a person who is, or will be within one year, liable to make
a payment to a tax debtor to instead pay the money the person owes the tax
debtor to the Receiver General (“requirement to pay”). The Minister’s authority
to issue a requirement to pay in appropriate circumstances is not in dispute.
The issue in this appeal is whether a bank that receives a cheque payable to the
tax debtor for deposit in an account held jointly by that debtor and a third
party becomes liable to make a payment to the tax debtor. [3]                             
The facts are uncontested. At the relevant time,
the appellant, Canada Trustco Mortgage Company (“Trustco”), was authorized to
offer financial services in Canada. The parties have described Trustco as a
bank, as has the Tax Court of Canada, and for the sake of convenience, I will
also refer to it as a bank. [4]                             
Cameron Clyde McLeod was a practising member of
the Law Society of British Columbia. For the purposes of his law practice, he
maintained a trust account with Trustco at the latter’s King George Highway
branch in Surrey, B.C. In addition, he and another lawyer, Herbert Maier, held
a joint account at the same branch. Each of the accounts was governed by an
agreement. [5]                             
Mr. McLeod owed tax to the federal government.
The Minister became aware that cheques payable to Mr. McLeod were being drawn
on the trust account and deposited in the joint account. The Minister issued
three requirements to pay to Trustco. According to these requirements, Trustco
was to pay to the Receiver General moneys otherwise payable to Mr. McLeod. In
response to the requirements to pay, Trustco disputed its liability on the
ground that it was “not indebted to the [taxpayer] alone”. [6]                             
Each of the cheques on which the claim is based
was issued during the period of effectiveness of the requirements to pay, was
drawn on the trust account, was payable to Mr. McLeod and was delivered to
Trustco with an instruction to deposit the funds in the joint account. This
instruction was given by writing “Dep to” and the account number on the back of
the cheque. Although the evidence is silent as to the identity of the person or
persons who delivered the cheques and gave the instructions to deposit them,
neither the authority to do so of the person or persons in question nor the
legitimacy of Trustco’s receipt of the cheques for deposit is at issue. Trustco
credited the joint account, sent the cheques to a third party for collection,
processing and settlement — the third party’s stamp appears on the back of the
cheque filed as a sample — and, on the following day, debited the trust
account. [7]                             
The Minister assessed Trustco for the amounts of
the cheques for failing to comply with the three requirements to pay. Trustco
filed notices of objection. After they were rejected, it appealed to the Tax
Court of Canada. [8]                             
I will pause here to underscore the various
capacities in which the parties in this appeal interacted, capacities that must
not be conflated. A bank’s relationship with a customer is based on a contract
made up of both implied and express terms; I will elaborate on this below.
Where a cheque is involved, the parties’ rights and obligations are also
governed by the BEA . In most transactions involving cheques, a bank acts
in only one capacity, that is, as either the drawee, the negotiating bank or
the collecting bank, and the bank’s customer acts as either the drawer or the
holder of a cheque. In this case, Trustco acted at times as the collecting bank
and at other times as the drawee. Mr. McLeod acted variously as the drawer (he
was the holder of the trust account), as the payee of the cheques (the cheques
were made out to him) and as one of the two holders of the joint account. [9]                             
It is also important to point out that the
respondent, Her Majesty The Queen (hereinafter referred to as “Canada”) made
two significant concessions at trial (2008 TCC 482, [2009] 1 C.T.C. 2264, at
para. 11): (a)               the requirements to pay do
not apply to funds on deposit in the trust account, and Trustco accordingly had
no obligation to remit funds on deposit in the trust account; and (b)               the requirements to pay do
not apply to funds in the joint account, and Trustco accordingly had no
obligation to remit funds on deposit in the joint account. [10]                         
Since Canada’s position does not rest on funds
being held in the trust account or in the joint account, the question becomes
whether Trustco was liable to make payments to the tax debtor, Mr. McLeod,
because of the fact that he was named as the payee of the cheques.  To answer
this question, Trustco’s obligations must be examined in the two capacities in
which it acted, as mentioned above: (1) as the collecting bank and (2) as the
drawee of the cheque. [11]                         
Little J. dismissed Trustco’s appeal. He applied
the test from National Trust Co. v. Canada (1998), 162 D.L.R. (4th) 704
(F.C.A.), to determine whether s. 224(1)  of the ITA  had been triggered. 
He asked whether Trustco was “liable” to make a payment and whether the amount
would be “payable” to a tax debtor within a year. The need to “stop [the
analysis] before considering that it was cheques that were presented to the
bank” was pivotal to his reasoning (para. 20). He focussed on the “repayment”
of the funds in the trust account (para. 12 (emphasis in original)). [12]                         
Little J. considered that the proceeds of the
cheques were “payable” to Mr. McLeod because the debtor-creditor relationship
between Trustco and Mr. McLeod required the former to repay the funds deposited
in the trust account to the account holder on demand (para. 22). In his view,
Trustco’s liability arose when Mr. McLeod “presented the bank with the cheques”
(para. 28). This led Little J. to conclude that he did not need to examine the
fact that the moneys had actually been transferred from the trust account to
the joint account (para. 30). [13]                         
In addition, although he acknowledged that the
“writing [of] a cheque is not by itself a withdrawal”, Little J. found that the
situation was different once “the cheque is presented to the bank” (para. 31).
He took into consideration the fact that Mr. McLeod was not only the payee but
also the drawer and that as the drawer he was in a position to enforce the
payment because of the debtor-creditor relationship that existed between
Trustco and himself (ibid.). Little J. recognized — and he noted that
Canada had conceded the point — that a bank is not liable to the payee of a
cheque (para. 39). However, in his view, Trustco remained liable to pay the
cheques to Mr. McLeod in his capacity as holder of the trust account. He
accepted Canada’s submission that Mr. McLeod was the bearer of the cheque
(para. 41). [14]                         
The Federal Court of Appeal found that no
“palpable or overriding error” had been made and unanimously upheld Little J.’s
decision (2009 FCA 267, 2009 DTC 5171 (p. 6205), at para. 1). [15]                         
Trustco argues that the trial judge failed to
differentiate between a demand for repayment of funds deposited in an account
and the delivery of a cheque for deposit. In its view, it was liable only — as
drawee — to pay funds out of the trust account upon proper presentment for
payment by the holder of the cheque. At no point was it liable to make a
payment to Mr. McLeod, the tax debtor. [16]                         
Canada contends that there is no distinction
between presentment of a cheque to the drawee for the payment of cash to Mr.
McLeod and presentment of a cheque for deposit to the joint account. Its
position is that when Mr. McLeod delivered the cheques to Trustco and
instructed it to pay the amounts into the joint account, he acted as payee,
creditor, drawer and depositor, but that his role as depositor is irrelevant. [17]                         
Canada’s contention implies that Trustco became
liable to make a payment to Mr. McLeod when it accepted the cheque for deposit.
To determine whether Trustco is liable to make a payment to the Receiver
General, it will be necessary to review the relevant legal relationships. I.    Analysis [18]                         
The analysis of a bank’s relationship with its
customers must begin with the seminal case of Foley v. Hill (1848), 2
H.L.C. 28, 9 E.R. 1002:                     The relation between a Banker and Customer, who
pays money into the Bank, is the ordinary relation of debtor and creditor . . .
. . . .                            .
. . I am now speaking of the common position of a banker, which consists of the
common case of receiving money from his customer on condition of paying it back
when asked for, or when drawn upon, or of receiving money from other parties,
to the credit of the customer, upon like conditions to be drawn out by the
customer, or, in common parlance, the money being repaid when asked for,
because the party who receives the money has the use of it as his own, and in
the using of which his trade consists, and but for which no banker could exist,
especially a banker who pays interest. [pp. 1002 and 1008] [19]                         
Implicit in the debtor-creditor relationship is
the bank’s obligation to repay the funds deposited in the account when its
customer demands payment. In the case at bar, Trustco is a party in two
separate contractual relationships: the first is in connection with the trust
account and the second with the joint account. Having conceded that it cannot
attach funds in either of these accounts, Canada cannot rely merely on the
debtor-creditor relationships that arose from the fact that funds were at some
point in time held in them. Canada accordingly focusses on the fact that
cheques were made to the order of Mr. McLeod, the tax debtor, which narrows the
issues and makes it necessary to review the obligations a bank must meet upon
receipt of a cheque for deposit and upon presentment of a cheque drawn on it. A.      Obligation of the Collecting Bank [20]                         
Counsel for Canada argues that the best way to
view the receipt of the cheques for deposit is to break the transactions down
into two steps: at the first, Mr. McLeod demanded to be paid as payee of the
cheques and also demanded, as drawer, that the amounts be repaid out of funds
owed to him in relation to the trust account; at the second, he instructed
Trustco to deposit the funds into the joint account. In other words, notional
payments were made to Mr. McLeod before the funds were deposited into the joint
account. [21]                         
This approach disregards the instructions to
deposit the funds into the joint account. The evidence shows that the cheques
were initially received at the branch with instructions to deposit the funds
into the joint account, not that Mr. McLeod, as drawer, demanded that payments
be made to him as payee. The evidence is also clear that the cheques were
credited to the joint account before being sent for clearing and before the
funds were debited from the trust account. At no point did Trustco actually
make a payment to Mr. McLeod. [22]                         
The argument of counsel for Canada also
disregards the nature of the instrument used by the parties: a cheque. A cheque
is an instrument that embodies both common law and statutory concepts. This
means that both the statute governing the instrument — the BEA  — and the
common law must be taken into consideration. [23]                         
The argument accepted by the Tax Court judge
that Mr. McLeod was the bearer of the cheque (para. 41) is inconsistent with
the definition of the term “bearer” in the BEA , according to which a
bearer is a specific type of holder, namely “the person in possession of a bill or note that is
payable to bearer” (s. 2  BEA ). To be payable to
bearer, a cheque must be expressed to be so payable, or the only or last
endorsement on it must be an endorsement in blank (s. 20(3)  BEA ). In
this case, the cheques were neither expressed to be payable to bearer nor
endorsed in blank. After the cheques had been delivered for deposit into the
joint account, Mr. McLeod was no longer in possession of them, was not entitled
to them and was therefore not their holder. [24]                         
More importantly, Canada’s approach and the Tax
Court judge’s interpretation disregard the capacity in which Trustco acted. 
The receipt by a bank of a cheque for deposit carries with it obligations
grounded both in the common law and in the banking agreement. Professor Ogilvie
describes the bank’s legal position in such a situation as follows:                     When a customer, the payee of a cheque, deposits
a cheque or other instrument in an account with the customer’s bank, that bank
takes on the role of collecting bank, which involves presenting the cheque for
payment through the clearing system to the paying bank, that is, the bank of
the drawer of the cheque from whose account at the paying bank it is expected
that the cheque will be paid.                     (M.
H. Ogilvie, Bank and Customer Law in Canada (2007), at p. 288) Whereas it was in Foley
v. Hill that the House of Lords made clear that the bank is under an
implied contractual duty to honour cheques drawn by its customers, it was in Joachimson
v. Swiss Bank Corp., [1921] 3 K.B. 110, that the duty to collect the
proceeds of a cheque was characterized as one of the common law incidents of
the banking contract: “The bank undertakes to receive money and to collect
bills for its customer’s account” (p. 127). (See also Ogilvie, at p. 288.)
Professor Goode adds that when the customer is silent about what is expected
from the bank, the bank may be presumed to act as a collecting bank: R. M.
Goode, “When is a cheque paid?”, [1983] J. Bus. L. 164, at p. 164. [25]                         
For the collecting bank’s duty to its customer
to be triggered, there must be a properly payable cheque and no suspicious
circumstances. In undertaking to collect a deposited cheque, the collecting
bank must select the collection method with reasonable care, promptly present
the deposited cheque for collection, receive payment for it and credit the
customer’s account or, if applicable, give notice of dishonour (B. Crawford, The
Law of Banking and Payment in Canada (loose-leaf), vol. 2, at pp. 10-43,
10-46 and 10-51; E. P. Ellinger, E. Lomnicka and R. Hooley, Modern Banking
Law (3rd ed. 2002), at p. 598). [26]                         
The situation of a bank that credits its
customer’s account before actually receiving the proceeds of collection raises,
in Crawford’s words (p. 24-6), an “interesting conceptual problem”. However, as
he correctly points out, this interesting question is of no practical
importance in Canada. Section 165(3)  of the BEA  provides that a bank
which receives a cheque for deposit acquires all the rights and powers of a
holder in due course (Crawford, at p. 10-78; J. S. Ziegel, B. Geva and R. C. C.
Cuming, Commercial and Consumer Transactions: Cases, Text and Materials
(3rd ed. 1995), vol. II, at pp. 362-63). [27]                         
In the case at bar, Trustco was put in
possession of the cheques by the payee, Mr. McLeod, or by someone acting on his
behalf, with instructions to deposit them. Not only was Mr. McLeod one of the
holders of the joint account, but Trustco’s contract with the account’s holders
authorized it to accept cheques from persons who provided the account number.
It has not been suggested that the instructions to deposit the cheques were not
actually given or that there was any doubt that the payee or his agent had the
authority to give them. Since Trustco was in lawful possession of the cheques,
it can safely be concluded that, once it had received the cheques for deposit
and credited them to the joint account, it acquired the rights of a holder in
due course pursuant to s. 165(3)  of the BEA  and was under a contractual
obligation to the holders of the joint account to present the cheques for
payment. [28]                         
With some exceptions that do not apply in this
case, presentment is a precondition for payment (s. 84(1)  BEA ).
Presentment must be made by a holder (s. 84(3)  BEA ), and payment must be
made to a holder (s. 138(2)  BEA ). This mechanism rests not on formalism,
but on the internal logic of the BEA  and on the contractual relationship
of a bank with its account holders.  The manner in which cheques deposited into
bank accounts are processed is grounded in the premise that banks deal
primarily with persons who hold accounts with them and in the implicit
contractual undertaking of banks to collect the proceeds of cheques deposited
in their customers’ accounts.  In this case, Trustco collected the cheques on
behalf of Mr. McLeod and Mr. Maier jointly, not of Mr. McLeod alone. As the
Chief Justice acknowledges, there are good reasons not to confound the holders
of a joint account with a single one of its holders: M. H. Ogilvie, “Why Joint
Accounts Should Not Be Garnished — Westcoast Commodities Inc. v. Jose Chow
Chen” (1986-1987), 1 B.F.L.R. 267. This means that in the instant
case, the payee, Mr. McLeod, cannot be confused with the holders of the joint
account even though he is one of them. [29]                         
 In addition to the contract clause authorizing
Trustco to accept deposits to the joint account from any person who could
provide the account number, there was a clause to the effect that the amount of
any instrument previously cashed, negotiated or credited by Trustco and
returned unpaid or unsettled could be debited from the joint account. These
clauses are relevant to a situation in which a bank receives a cheque, credits
an account and then presents the cheque for payment. If the cheque is returned
unpaid, the collecting bank may debit its customer’s account. The clauses in
question do not support an inference that the receipt of a cheque for deposit
in the joint account would on its own suffice for Trustco to become liable to
make a payment to Mr. McLeod. [30]                         
In discharging its duties as the collecting
bank, Trustco had to be alert to suspicious circumstances. However, the fact
that cheques are drawn on a trust account is not material to the collecting
bank’s duties. As Garon T.C.C.J. pointed out in Bank of Montreal v. M.N.R.,
[1992] 1 C.T.C. 2292, it is generally not incumbent on a bank to police a trust
account (p. 2295). In crediting the joint account, sending the cheques to a
third party for clearing, and receiving the proceeds, Trustco was acting on the
basis of its contractual relationship with the holders of the joint account and
not on behalf of Mr. McLeod personally. When Trustco debited the trust account
the next day, it was not making a payment to Mr. McLeod or to an agent acting
for him alone. [31]                         
The Chief Justice expresses the opinion that
Trustco never became the holder of the cheques. With respect, the fact that the
cheques were not endorsed does not mean that Trustco did not acquire the rights
of a holder in due course which results from having received valid cheques in
good faith. Section 165(3)  of the BEA  was in fact adopted to avoid the
argument that a bank that receives for deposit a cheque bearing a restrictive
endorsement or no endorsement at all is not a holder — its purpose was not to
protect against fraudulent endorsements (see s. 67(2)  BEA ; Boma
Manufacturing Ltd. v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 727,
at paras. 76-81; J.C. Creations Ltd. v. Vancouver City Savings Credit
Union, 2004 BCCA 107, 236 D.L.R. (4th) 602; Westboro Flooring &
Décor Inc. v. Bank of Nova Scotia (2004), 241 D.L.R. (4th)
257 (Ont. C.A.)). However, the fact that Trustco had
acquired the rights and powers of a holder in due course of the cheques — as
uncontroversial as it may be — is not the reason why Trustco was not liable to
pay moneys to the tax debtor, Mr. McLeod.  The reason Trustco owed no money to
Mr. McLeod is that it was acting as the collecting bank for its customers, the
holders of the joint account. It did not collect the proceeds of the cheques as
agent for the payee, Mr. McLeod. [32]                         
The Chief Justice relies on B.M.P. Global
Distribution Inc. v. Bank of Nova Scotia, 2009 SCC 15, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 504,
in support of the proposition that, in the case at bar, Trustco, as the
collecting bank, acted as agent for the payee. B.M.P. concerned a
payment made under a mistake of fact. In it I wrote, in discussing the
equitable defence of change of position (para. 63) and the consequences on
tracing of the passage of a cheque through the clearing system (paras. 76 and
83), that the Bank of Nova Scotia, as the collecting bank, had received the
funds as agent for the payee, B.M.P.  In that case, because the payee had
instructed its bank to deposit the cheque into its own account, the distinction
in the instant case between the payee and the account holder on whose behalf
the cheque is collected did not arise. The payee and the account holder were
the same person, B.M.P. Since the contractual duty to collect the proceeds of a
cheque is owed to the customer in whose account the cheque is deposited, it
would have been more precise to say that the collecting bank acts as agent for
the person in whose account the cheque has been deposited. This choice of words
in a case dealing with mistake of fact and tracing cannot serve as a basis for
holding that a collecting bank has a contractual relationship with someone
other than the holder of the account to which the cheque is credited. [33]                         
In the case at bar, the only instructions
received were to deposit the cheques to the credit of the joint account, and it
is these instructions that triggered the duty to collect the proceeds of the
cheques. The contract that incorporates the implied term imposing on the bank
the duty to proceed to collect on the cheque is the one between Trustco and the
holders of the joint account. There is no contract between a bank and a payee
in his or her capacity as payee. [34]                         
This approach is not formalistic. No
significance is attached to the fact that the cheques were processed through
the clearing system. Trustco’s acceptance of the cheques for deposit in the
joint account could not have resulted in a liability to pay the Receiver
General: the obligation resulting from that acceptance was to the holders of
the joint account, and Canada concedes that the funds in the joint account
could not be attached. [35]                         
Canada nonetheless contends that the focus
should be on the fact that Mr. McLeod was acting in this case in his capacity
as payee and as a creditor of Trustco by virtue of his status as holder of the
trust account, and that he was demanding payment from Trustco in its capacity
as drawee. Since the Chief Justice accepts this argument, I will now explain
why it must fail. B.      Obligation of a Drawee [36]                         
Schroeder v.
Central Bank of London (1876), 34 L.T. 735 (C.P. Div.), is important to an
understanding of the nature of the obligations of a drawee bank to the payee.
In it, the payee contended that the cheque constituted an absolute assignment
of the funds in his hands and that he was therefore entitled to receive payment
from the drawee bank. The drawee bank countered that a bank on which a cheque
is drawn is under no liability to pay the holder of the cheque. The court
agreed with the bank (at p. 737):                     A
cheque is a request to pay and nothing more; it does not purport to be an
assignment, and it is impossible, therefore, to regard it as an assignment of
so much money.  The bankers hold their customer’s money on an implied contract
to pay his cheques up to the amount of his balance in their hands, for breach
of which they would be liable in damages to the drawer. But there is no
contract by the bankers with the payees of the cheque, and they can have no
remedy against the bank unless by the statute. [37]                         
This approach is consistent with the reasoning
in Foley v. Hill. A banker’s obligation arises out of the
debtor-creditor relationship created when a bank account is opened. The payee
is not a party to this contractual relationship, and the mere fact of being a
payee does not entail such a relationship with the drawee. [38]                         
For the purpose of determining whether, absent
any contractual relationship with the payee of a cheque, a drawee bank owes the
payee any duty, the definition of a cheque in the BEA  is relevant: “A
cheque is a bill drawn on a bank, payable on demand” (s. 165(1) ). A bill is
defined as follows (s. 16(1)  BEA ):                                     16. (1) A bill of exchange is an unconditional order in writing,
addressed by one person to another, signed by the person giving it, requiring
the person to whom it is addressed to pay, on demand or at a fixed or
determinable future time, a sum certain in money to or to the order of a
specified person or to bearer. [39]                         
In addition, the BEA  explicitly states
that the mere issuance of a cheque does not operate as an assignment of funds
in the hands of the drawee (s. 126  BEA ):                                       126.    A bill, of itself, does not operate as an assignment of funds in the
hands of the drawee available for the payment thereof, and the drawee of a bill
who does not accept as required by this Act is not liable on the instrument. [40]                         
These provisions, read together, mirror the
principles stated in Schroeder and incorporate them into the statute. A
cheque operates neither as an assignment of funds in the hands of the payee nor
as an assignment of funds in the hands of the drawee. It is a document by means
of which a customer orders his or her banker to pay funds the banker owes the
customer to a person or to the order of that person out of the account
specified on it. In and of itself, a cheque imposes no obligation on a drawee
bank to the payee. This interpretation is well entrenched in our law and was
accepted by Canada at trial:  Schroeder; Thomson v. Merchants Bank of
Canada (1919), 58 S.C.R. 287, at p. 298; Schimnowski Estate, Re,
[1996] 6 W.W.R. 194 (Man. C.A.), at para. 19. [41]                         
The statutory duty of a bank to pay a cheque is
governed by the rules applicable to presentment. With some exceptions, as I
mentioned above, presentment is mandatory (s. 84(1)  BEA ). The general
rule for presentment of a cheque is as follows (s. 86(1)  BEA ):                                       86. (1) Presentment of a bill must be made by the holder or by a person
authorized to receive payment on his behalf, at the proper place as defined in
section 87, and either to the person designated by the bill as payer or to his
representative or a person authorized to pay or to refuse payment on his
behalf, if with the exercise of reasonable diligence such person can there be
found. A bank may incur other
liabilities in circumstances which do not arise in the case at bar, upon
acceptance within the meaning of s. 34  of the BEA , for example. That is
not the case here. At the time of presentment, Mr. McLeod was no longer a
holder.  Only Trustco had the rights and powers of a holder in due course. [42]                         
Bank of Montreal
illustrates clearly that the duty to honour the customer’s cheque is triggered
only at the time the holder presents the cheque to the drawee for payment.  In
that case, requirements to pay had been issued to the Bank of Montreal in
relation to tax owed by a customer of the bank who held a trust account there.
The tax debtor drew cheques payable to himself on the trust account and
endorsed them in blank.  The cheques were subsequently endorsed by his wife and
presented to the Bank of Montreal for payment. Garon T.C.C.J. found, correctly
in my view, that                            [i]n
the present case the moneys payable by virtue of the two cheques in issue were
not payable to the tax debtor, since at the time of presentment of the cheques
to the bank, after the endorsement by Mrs. Lynn Morgan, Mr. Morgan was no
longer the bearer of these cheques. He was not at that point in time entitled
to receive the proceeds of the cheques. [p. 2294] [43]                         
This Court applied the same rule in Capital
Associates Ltd. v. Royal Bank of Canada (1976), 65 D.L.R. (3d) 384, aff’g
(1973), 36 D.L.R. (3d) 579 (Que. C.A.). In that case, Capital Associates Ltd.
deposited a cheque in its account at the Royal Bank. The cheque was drawn by
All-Canadian Group Distributors Ltd. on an account at the same branch of the
Royal Bank. After the cheque had been deposited, All-Canadian ordered the bank
to stop payment on it. All-Canadian’s account had not yet been debited at the
time of the stop payment order.  The Royal Bank refused payment. In the Court
of Appeal, Rivard J.A., with whose reasons this Court agreed, adopted the view
that the facts in that case should be distinguished from those of a case in
which the bank pays in cash or certifies a cheque. He explained the process as
follows (at pp. 583-84):                     [translation]
I do not accept the proposition submitted by the appellant that in depositing
the cheque with the Royal Bank, it was presenting it for payment.                            Capital,
in depositing the cheque, did not demand payment, but gave authority to the
bank to present the cheque for payment to All-Canadian. All-Canadian refused to
pay, and the bank cannot be responsible to Capital. [44]                         
Capital Associates
illustrates not only the distinction between delivery of a cheque for deposit
and presentment for payment, but also the rationale for the rules that a bank
to which a payee delivers a cheque owes no duty to that person as payee and
that it is only when the cheque is presented to the bank in its capacity as
drawee that it is requested to disburse the funds. Between the time the cheque
is issued and the time it is presented for payment, many intervening
circumstances are possible: for example, payment could be stopped as in Capital
Associates, the cheque could be negotiated to a third party, an excessive
delay could occur, or the drawer could become insolvent or incapacitated. In
general, a bank does not assume any risks that may be incurred between the time
it receives the cheque for deposit and the time it presents the cheque to the
drawee for payment.  The funds used by the drawee bank to pay the cheque are
funds of the drawer. It is the drawer who transfers funds using the cheque
mechanism. As is stated in the BEA , it is the drawer who promises that
upon presentment, payment will be made (s. 129  BEA ):                            129.     The drawer of a bill by drawing it                            (a)        engages that on due presentment it shall be accepted
and paid according to its tenor, and that if it is dishonoured he will
compensate the holder or any endorser who is compelled to pay it, if the
requisite proceedings on dishonour are duly taken; . . . [45]                         
It is clear from the rules applicable to
presentment that the drawee bank’s obligation — to make payment to the holder
of the cheque — is to the drawer only and that this obligation is triggered
only when the cheque is presented to it. It is also clear that, except as
provided in the BEA , the drawee is obliged, as between itself and the
drawer, to disburse the funds only upon presentment of the bill by the holder —
the person who is entitled to receive them — or by the holder’s agent. [46]                         
In addition, it is clear from the above
discussion that, viewed either from the angle of Mr. McLeod being the payee or
from that of Trustco being the drawee, the mere fact that cheques payable to
Mr. McLeod were delivered to Trustco for deposit did not make the latter liable
to make a payment to the former within the meaning of s. 224(1)  of the ITA . [47]                         
In her reasons in this case, the Chief Justice
relies on a comment by Prof. Ogilvie in support of the proposition that there
may be a contract between the payee and the drawee bank (Bank and Customer
Law in Canada, at pp. 288-91). With respect, I do not read Prof. Ogilvie’s
comment as supporting this broad proposition. Rather, it is in explaining the
different recourses available to a bank’s customer in respect of a delayed
payment in a scenario in which a cheque has been deposited in the payee’s
account and the accounts of both the payee and the drawer are at the same bank
that she states that the payee can bring an action in breach of contract
against the bank — in her example, the bank would have breached its duty to its
client to present the cheque within a reasonable time.  It should be noted
that, in such circumstances, the bank that causes the delay happens to be the
collecting bank — a party to the contract with the holder of the account in
which the cheque is deposited. It cannot, in my view, be inferred from Prof.
Ogilvie’s comment that there is a contractual obligation to pay the amount of a
cheque to the payee merely because the payee and the drawer are customers of
the same bank. If a bank has a contractual duty to a customer, it flows from
the fact that the customer has either given the bank instructions as the drawer
of the cheque and holder of the account from which the cheque is to be paid, or
instructed the bank to collect the cheque as the holder of the account in which
the cheque is deposited. I would add that the situation is different where, as
in the case at bar, the payee is not the sole holder of the account in which
the cheque is deposited. [48]                         
In this case, Mr. McLeod’s rights as the holder
of an account with the bank do not inform or affect his rights as payee of the
cheques.  If we assume for the sake of argument that the requirements to pay
did not exist and that Canada did not make the concessions it has made, Trustco
would, had Mr. McLeod presented the cheques at his branch for immediate payment
to himself (i.e. cashed them), have been in breach of its contractual
obligations to Mr. McLeod as the holder of the trust account had it failed to
pay.  In any event, this is not what happened.  Not only were the cheques
deposited, anonymously, to the credit of a joint account, but they had to go through
the clearance system first before being presented for payment.  Capital Associates
makes it clear that presentment for payment and deposit are not synonymous. 
This distinction is critical to the disposition of this case. [49]                         
The fact that Trustco received the cheques both
for deposit and for payment as drawee — although not simultaneously — has
complicated the resolution of the dispute. The English case of Boyd v. Emmerson (1834), 2 Ad. & E. 184, 111 E.R. 71, is one that involved facts
similar to those of the instant case. In Boyd, the plaintiff had told the cashier of a bank to place a
cheque to his credit. The same bank was the drawee. It refused to honour the
cheque, because the drawer did not have sufficient funds. Lord Denman C.J. held
that the bank was within its right to refuse the payment, because it had taken
the cheque for collection. The bank had followed its customer’s instruction to
credit the cheque to his account. As a result, the credit was subject to the
contingency of there being sufficient funds in the drawer’s account. [50]                         
Boyd, Bank of
Montreal and Capital Associates are relevant to the case at bar. The
fact that the cheques were drawn on and deposited with Trustco did not alter
Trustco’s legal position. It did not receive the cheques as drawee, and the
instructions to deposit the funds made it a collecting bank.  In that capacity,
it was not liable to pay any funds to Mr. McLeod. II.      Conclusion [51]                         
The fact that a person is designated as payee on
the face of a cheque does not on its own mean that the bank is liable to make a
payment to the person. First, a drawee is answerable to the drawer. Second, the
question is to whom the drawee may make the payment. What is on the back of the
cheque — the instructions or the endorsement — is crucial to this question. In
this case, the instructions were to deposit the cheques into the joint
account.  There were no instructions that made the moneys payable to Mr.
McLeod, the tax debtor. [52]                         
Canada cannot say that the joint account is out
of reach while at the same time treating the holders of that account as one and
the same person, namely Mr. McLeod. As Canada takes the position that it could
attach neither of the accounts, Trustco’s liability to pay moneys to Mr. McLeod
personally cannot be confused with its liability to pay moneys to the holders
of the joint account. Canada had to show either that Trustco was liable to pay
Mr. McLeod as payee, which, as I have demonstrated above, it cannot do, or that
it had the right to attach the funds deposited into the joint account, which
Canada has conceded it cannot do. [53]                         
A bank’s liability to pay can arise only under a
statute, at common law or under a contract. In this case, Canada can rely on
none of these sources. This outcome is perfectly consistent with Canada’s
concessions that it cannot attach funds in either the trust account or the
joint account, and with the fact that the funds were credited by Trustco to the
joint account, not paid to Mr. McLeod. [54]                         
To accept Canada’s position would mean that the
presentment for payment was made by the payee to the drawee before the cheques
were deposited. That is not what happened in this case. To accept that Trustco
became liable to pay Mr. McLeod would also mean that a drawee bank which
honours a cheque makes payment to the payee without determining who the holder
of the cheque is. Canada’s position is inconsistent with the fact that a bank
that accepts a cheque for deposit does not in so doing act in the capacity of a
drawee even if it also happens to be the drawee. Canada’s interpretation would
also mean that whenever demands are made by third parties, banks would have to
determine whether payees — who, when cheques are negotiated, are often not even
their customers — are liable to make payments. No such requirement exists at
common law or is provided for in the BEA . [55]                         
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set
aside the decisions of the Federal Court of Appeal and the Tax Court of Canada
and vacate the assessments with costs throughout.                     The reasons of McLachlin C.J. and Fish and
Abella JJ. were delivered by [56]                         
The Chief Justice (dissenting)
— Having read the reasons of Deschamps J., I am respectfully of the view that
the appeal should be dismissed. [57]                         
While I agree with much of Deschamps J.’s
analysis, there are two narrow points that divide us, and that lead us to a
different result in this case.  First, according to Deschamps J., when a
customer delivers a cheque to his or her bank with instructions to deposit the
funds into his or her account, the bank becomes the holder of the cheque, and
therefore any funds collected from the cheque are paid to the bank itself. In
my view, the bank does not become the holder of a cheque, but rather collects
the funds as agent for its principal: B.M.P. Global Distribution Inc. v.
Bank of Nova Scotia, 2009 SCC 15, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 504, at para. 83. [58]                         
Second, Deschamps J. relies on the alternative
argument that where funds are deposited into a joint account, as they were
here, the funds are payable to both account holders, rather than just payable
to the payee of the cheque.  I do not agree.  In my view, a “bank receives the
funds as the payee’s agent” (B.M.P., at para. 83 (emphasis
added)), and while they are in transit the funds are only payable to the
payee.  I develop these points below. [59]                         
In this appeal, Canada Trustco Mortgage Company
(the “Bank”) concedes that the only live question is whether it was liable to
make a payment to the tax debtor (“Mr. McLeod”) as a result of the cheques he
wrote to himself.  If it was, the Bank’s obligation to pay the Receiver General
was triggered, and the Bank would be liable for failure to remit the funds
pursuant to the requirement to pay. [60]                         
It is central to the analysis that follows that
we are dealing exclusively with the circumstances in which a tax debtor draws a
cheque in favour of him- or herself, and not a third party.  It is also
important to bear in mind that, in this case, the drawee bank is the same as
the collecting bank. [61]                         
I will first briefly review the applicable legal
principles.  I will then go on to explain the application of s. 224(1)  of the Income
Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”), to the facts
before us. I.       The Law A.     The Operation of Section 224(1)  of the Income Tax Act [62]                         
The operation of s. 224(1)  of the ITA 
informs the subsequent analysis, and it is necessary to understand how it works
before proceeding.  The requirement to pay provision may be restated for
present purposes as follows:                                     224. (1) Where . . . a person is . . . liable to
make a payment to another person . . . (. . . the “tax
debtor”), the Minister may . . . require the person to pay
. . . the moneys otherwise payable to the tax debtor . . .
to the Receiver General on account of the tax debtor’s liability . . . . [63]                         
There is no special, technical definition
ascribed to the precondition that the person served with the requirement to pay
be “liable” to the tax debtor.  As stated in National Trust Co. v. Canada
(1998), 162 D.L.R. (4th) 704 (F.C.A.), at paras. 46-47:                                     The ordinary meaning of the word
“liable” in a legal context is to denote the fact that a person is responsible
at law. Hence, I am in respectful agreement with McLachlin J. (as she then was)
when she stated in Discovery Trust Company v. Abbott, a case in which a
section 224(1)  requirement was served upon a trustee, that:                               . . .
the demand on third parties [a subsection 224(1)  requirement] by which the
Crown’s claim is made in this case is not confined to a debtor-creditor
relationship, as is a garnishee order; it is stated to extend to any case
where the trustee is “liable to make a payment to the taxpayer”. [Emphasis
added.]                                     It
is my respectful view, therefore, that the Tax Court Judge was wrong in law to
limit the phrase “liable to make a payment” only to situations where a
debtor-creditor relationship exists. In so doing, he precluded himself from
asking the only relevant question when one is confronted with construction of
the subsection. It is this: did the respondent have a responsibility at law to
make a payment to the tax debtor on 1 February 1994? [Text in brackets in
original.] [64]                         
Nor is there a particular construction for the
prerequisite that the funds be “payable” to the tax debtor.  Again, National
Trust Co. holds, at paras. 61-62:                                     I turn now to consider the issue
whether the proceeds were “payable” within the meaning of subsection 224(1) . In
my view this issue is governed by DeConinck, supra, and the
decision of this Court in Canada v. Yannelis where Stone J.A., for the
Court, said at 636:                                         The
word “payable” is not a term of art. Nor is it defined in the regulations. I do
not see that it was used in any special sense. In my view, therefore, it should
be interpreted in the light of ordinary dictionary
definitions . . .                                     And 638:                                        I have come to the conclusion
that the word “payable” in s. 58(8)(b)(i) [of the Unemployment
Insurance Act] refers to the point in time when vacation pay is due to a
claimant in the sense that he is entitled by his contract of employment or by
the general law to have it paid to him and his employer is under an obligation
to pay it. In other words, it is payable when a claimant is in a position at
law to enforce payment. [Text in brackets in original.] [65]                         
I take from the authorities that the person or
institution served by the Minister with a requirement to pay must have a
responsibility at law to make a payment to the tax debtor.  The scope of the
operation of s. 224(1)  is not narrowly confined, but exists wherever the tax
debtor is in a position at law to enforce payment from the party served with
the requirement to pay.  To adopt a more restrictive view of its content would
be to undermine the proper functioning of the power the provision grants the
Minister. [66]                         
With this understanding of the governing
provision in mind, I turn now to the nature of the legal relationship between
the bank and its customer and how it plays out within the parameters of s.
224(1) . B.      The Nature of the Legal Relationship Between Bank and
Customer [67]                         
The relationship between a bank and its customer
is one of creditor and debtor, where the bank is the debtor: Foley v. Hill
(1848), 2 H.L.C. 28, 9 E.R. 1002.  The duty of repayment is triggered when the
customer makes a demand for payment from the bank.  A demand for repayment may
be made for payment in cash or by cheque. [68]                         
Ordinarily, the bank on which a cheque is drawn
(the drawee bank) is under no liability to pay the payee of a cheque; its legal
obligations are owed exclusively to its customer (the drawer): Schroeder v.
Central Bank of London (1876), 34 L.T. 735 (C.P. Div.); Thomson v.
Merchants Bank of Canada (1919), 58 S.C.R. 287, at p. 298; Schimnowski
Estate, Re, [1996] 6 W.W.R. 194 (Man. C.A.), at para. 19.  This principle
is confirmed by ss. 16(1)  and 126  of the Bills of Exchange Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. B-4  (“BEA ”).  The legal relationship between the drawer and the
drawee bank arises from the banking contract between them; if the payee is not
a party to this contract, it is not in privity with the bank. [69]                         
However, where the payee and the drawer are the
same person, i.e. when an individual writes a cheque to him- or herself, the
bank is liable to the payee once the cheque is presented.  This is so because
the bank has a duty to repay its customer the funds on deposit when the
customer makes a demand: Foley.  When a customer writes a cheque to him-
or herself, seeking to draw on the funds on deposit at the bank, the bank is
under a contractual duty to pay the cheque once it is presented and once it has
ensured that it is properly payable. [70]                         
The authorities also suggest that the drawee
bank is liable to the payee if the payee is also a customer at the same bank. 
In such cases, there is a contract between the payee and the drawee bank.  As
stated by M. H. Ogilvie, “[w]here the drawer and payee are customers of the
same bank, the payee can sue directly in breach of contract, as well for a
delay in collection” (Bank and Customer Law in Canada (2007), at p.
291). C.  Is a Deposited Cheque Payable
to the Payee/Customer or to the Bank? [71]                         
 According to the Bank, once the cheques were
deposited, they were no longer “payable” to Mr. McLeod, but “were now payable
to the Bank pursuant to subsection 165(3)  of the Bills of Exchange Act ”
(Factum, at para. 51).  The Bank argues that once a cheque is delivered to a
bank for collection, the bank becomes the holder of the cheque, and any payment
made on the cheque is made to the bank alone.  Consequently, s. 224(1) of the ITA 
cannot be triggered, because the Bank is never liable to make a payment to
the payee (Mr. McLeod), but only to itself as intermediary.  The reasons of
Deschamps J. accept this proposition. With respect, I cannot. [72]                         
In my view, the appellant misstates the
relationship between a bank and its customer who deposits a cheque.  First, a
bank that collects the funds from a deposited cheque receives the funds as
agent for the customer (the payee):  B.M.P.; see also Westminster
Bank Ltd. v. Hilton (1926), 43 T.L.R. 124 (H.L.), at p. 126.  This involves
two transactions.  The funds are initially “credit[ed] . . . to its
principal”, the payee/customer: B.M.P., at para. 77, per
Deschamps J.  The bank then “receive[s] them back under the banking contract” (ibid.). 
The fact that these transactions follow one on the other does not change the
conclusion that, legally, they are two distinct episodes.  As such, a deposited
cheque is payable to the customer when it is deposited; at no time is the
cheque payable to the bank. [73]                         
In B.M.P. (at para. 83), this Court
argued against employing a formalistic analysis to describe transactions
through the clearing system, stating that                     the
clearing system should be a neutral factor . . . .  I
prefer to assess the traceability of the asset after the clearing process and
not see that process as a systematic break in the chain of possession of
the funds.  Just as the collecting bank receives the funds as the payee’s
agent, the clearing system is only a payment process. [Emphasis added.] Where a customer draws a
cheque in favour of him- or herself and deposits that cheque into another
account, we should attach no significance to the fact that the moneys pass
through a clearing process and the fact that a bank handles the funds as agent
for its customer. [74]                         
Second, s. 165(3) of the BEA  does not
establish that the bank becomes a holder of the cheque.  Rather, that
provision establishes:                                     165. . . .                            (3)      Where
a cheque is delivered to a bank for deposit to the credit of a person and the
bank credits him with the amount of the cheque, the bank acquires all the
rights and powers of a holder in due course of the cheque. [75]                         
There is an important distinction between an
actual holder of a cheque to whom the cheque is payable, and merely acquiring
“all the rights and powers of a holder in due course”.  This distinction was
underlined by the majority in Boma Manufacturing Ltd. v. Canadian Imperial
Bank of Commerce, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 727, at paras. 69-70, per Iacobucci
J., and by B. Crawford, The Law of Banking and
Payment in Canada (loose-leaf), at p. 10-83.  The narrow object of s. 165(3) was
described by Iacobucci J. in Boma as follows:                     When a
collecting bank is presented with a cheque for deposit to the credit of the
payee, the bank is entitled, essentially, to assume that it was truly the
intention of the drawer that the payee receive the proceeds of the cheque.
[para. 78] [76]                         
Subsection 165(3) sought to clear the collecting
bank from liability when it deposits fraudulent cheques.  This limited
objective is achieved by granting the collecting bank “all the rights and
powers of a holder in due course”, and does not require the bank to be actually
designated a holder in due course: Crawford, at p. 10-83.  Accordingly,
I agree with the respondent that the Bank’s use of this provision bears no
relation to its purpose and should be rejected. [77]                         
On this basis, I conclude that a deposited
cheque is payable to the payee, and at no time is it payable to the bank other
than as agent for the payee. D.     Is There Legal Significance to the Fact That the Cheques
Were Deposited Into a Joint Account? [78]                         
The reasons of Justice Deschamps further argue
that if the Bank was not itself the holder of the cheque, then the Bank was
only ever liable to the two account holders jointly.  With respect, it seems to
me that the result of the majority is wrong in law and unfortunate in its
impact. [79]                         
I agree that the Minister could not garnish
moneys once they were in the joint account.  However, it does not follow that
the Minister could not intercept funds in transit before they arrived in the
joint account.  A requirement to pay in s. 224(1)  of the ITA  intercepts
funds while they are in transit. [80]                         
Once funds are irrevocably deposited in a
joint account, they become the property of joint account holders jointly under
the terms of their banking contract.  At this point, the funds cannot be
garnished by the Minister because they are no longer the sole property of the
tax debtor: Macdonald v. Tacquah Gold Mines Co. (1884), 13 Q.B.D. 535
(C.A.); Hirschorn v. Evans, [1938] 2 K.B. 801 (C.A.); Westcoast
Commodities Inc. v. Chen (1986), 55 O.R. (2d) 264 (H.C.J.); M. H.
Ogilvie, “Why Joint Accounts Should Not Be Garnished — Westcoast Commodities
Inc. v. Jose Chow Chen” (1986-1987), 1 B.F.L.R. 267.  Professor Ogilvie identified the following rationale for the rule
against garnishment of joint accounts:                     Since all monies deposited in a joint account
are deemed to be joint property, neither joint account holder individually may
sue the bank for recovery of funds in the account.  Such an action is one
in debt . . . and the joint creditors of the bank, the joint account
holders, must sue jointly. [Emphasis added; pp. 270-71.] Since
neither joint account holder could sue the bank on his or her own for recovery
of the funds, it follows that the account cannot be garnished when only one of
the two account holders owes a debt to a third party. [81]                         
However, before the funds arrive in the joint
account and while the funds are being transferred, the drawee bank is only
liable to make a payment to the payee of the cheque.  The other joint account
holder had no right to the funds before they arrived in the account.  Mr.
McLeod could have sued the Bank on his own if the Bank failed to honour
his cheque.  Therefore, it is only the tax debtor’s status as payee that
matters for the purpose of triggering s. 224(1) , in the presence of a joint
account. [82]                         
I would add that when a requirement to pay is
issued, the Minister must indicate the identity of the tax debtor involved. 
Banks issued with a requirement to pay are thus never put in the position of
having to monitor the liabilities of unknown third parties: they are only
required to redirect payments that they are liable to make to tax debtors
specifically named by the Minister. [83]                         
I am also concerned that Deschamps J.’s view of
the legal significance of the joint account in this case may negatively impact
other areas of the law.  There are potentially dangerous repercussions of a
restrictive interpretation of garnishment powers when applied, for example, to
family maintenance.  Child and spousal support ought not be defeated by the
mere existence of a joint account. II.      Application to the Facts [84]                         
Applying this analysis to the case at bar, once
the Bank received Mr. McLeod’s cheques to himself, its liability to its
customer was triggered. The Bank was therefore contractually bound to honour
its customer’s demand to pay him.  As such, all of the requirements of s.
224(1)  were met, and the requirement to pay attached to the money in transit
between Mr. McLeod’s accounts. III.    Conclusion [85]                         
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal
with costs.                     Appeal
allowed with costs, McLachlin C.J.
and Fish and Abella JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the appellant:  McCarthy
Tétrault, Toronto.                     Solicitor
for the respondent:  Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.  