Friedberg v. Canada, [1993] 4
S.C.R. 285  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Appellant  v.  Albert D. Friedberg     Respondent  Indexed as:  Friedberg v.
Canada  File No.:  22924.  1993:  November 5.   on appeal from the federal court of
appeal   Statutes and Regulations Cited                      APPEAL from a
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (1991), 135 N.R. 61, [1992] 1 C.T.C. 1,
92 D.T.C. 6031, reversing in part a judgment of Jerome A.C.J. (1989), 25 F.T.R.
22, [1989] 1 C.T.C. 274, 89 D.T.C. 5115.  Appeal dismissed.                     Ian S.
MacGregor, Q.C.,
J. Paul Malette, Q.C., and David E. Spiro, for
the appellant.                     Barry S.
Wortzman, Q.C.,
Martin L. O'Brien, Q.C., and Thomas McRae, for the
respondent.                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered orally by                      The respondent
taxpayer traded extensively in commodity futures during the taxation years 1978
to 1981 and claimed as income tax deductions business losses arising out of
trading in gold futures on his own account.                     On the facts, the
respondent reported his losses when they were actually incurred, and his gains
when they were actually realized.  In our view, the appellant has not
demonstrated that there is any error in adopting this approach.  While the
"marked to market" accounting method proposed by the appellant may
better describe the taxpayer's income position for some purposes, we are not
satisfied that it can describe income for income tax purposes, nor are we
satisfied that a margin account balance is the appropriate measure of realized
income for tax purposes.  Similarly, while we recognize that the "lower of
cost or market" method advocated by the respondent suggests that
unincurred losses can be deducted in the calculation of income, no unincurred
losses were deducted by the respondent on the facts of this case.  Accordingly,
we need not determine the income tax validity of this implication of the
"lower of cost or market" method in this case.                     As to whether it is
appropriate to consider the loss and gain legs of a spread transaction in
isolation from one another, and as to whether s. 245(1) of the Income
Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, as amended, assists the appellant in
this case, we substantially agree with the reasons of the learned trial judge
as affirmed by Linden J.A. of the Federal Court of Appeal on these points.                     Accordingly, the
appeal is dismissed with costs.                     Judgment
accordingly.                     Solicitor for the
appellant:  John C. Tait, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the
respondent:  Shibley Righton, Toronto.  