Backman v. Canada, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 367,
2001 SCC 10  Philip Douglas Backman                                                                   Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Backman v. Canada  Neutral citation:  2001 SCC 10.  File No.:  27561.  2000:  November 10; 2001: March 1.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Income tax -- Calculation of income -- Partnership
-- Losses -- Original U.S. partners assigning partnership interest to Canadian
assignees and assignees immediately selling asset of partnership back to
original partners at loss -- Assignees subsequently purchasing one percent
interest in oil and gas property which ceased production shortly after
acquisition -- Whether valid partnership established for income tax purposes --
Whether assignees entitled to deduct partnership loss –  Whether purchase of
interest in oil and gas property established ancillary intention to carry on
business with view to profit -- Whether taking of  assignment constituted
assignees as  partners notwithstanding criteria for valid partnership.  A U.S. partnership, which was involved in the
construction of an apartment complex incurred potential losses which the
appellant and other Canadians sought to acquire for use as an income tax
deduction in Canada.  Through a series of transactions that occurred on the
same day, they became assignees of the interests of the original American
partners.  The Canadians then disposed of the apartment complex to the original
American partners, resulting in the acquisition and realization of accounting
losses to the Canadians.  These accounting losses were used as deductions in
computing the Canadians’ 1988 Canadian taxable income under s. 96 of the Income
Tax Act.  The Canadian partners also acquired a one percent interest in a
Canadian oil and gas property for $5,000.  This interest was not managed by the
Canadian partners, never produced a profit, and production ceased shortly after
the acquisition.  The taxation authorities by notice of reassessment disallowed
the claim for partnership losses.  The appellant filed a notice of objection
but the reassessment was confirmed.  Appeals to the Tax Court of Canada and
then to the Federal Court of Appeal were unsuccessful.  Both courts concluded
that the definition of a partnership  was not met in this case.  Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.  Even in respect of foreign partnerships, a taxpayer
seeking to deduct Canadian partnership losses through s. 96 of the Income
Tax Act must satisfy the definition of partnership that exists under the
relevant provincial or territorial law.  The three essential ingredients of a
partnership are (1) a business (2) carried on in common (3) with a view to
profit.  A valid partnership does not depend on the creation of a new
business.  It is sufficient that an existing business is continued. It is also not necessary to show that the partners carried on a
business for a long period of time.  A partnership may be formed for a single
transaction.  The common purpose requirement will usually exist where the
parties entered into a valid partnership agreement setting out their respective
rights and obligations as partners.  The existence of  a “view to profit” is to
be determined by an inquiry into the intentions of the parties.  To meet the
requirement, it will be sufficient for a taxpayer to show that there was an
ancillary profit-making purpose.  The determination of the existence of a view
to a profit is not a matter of strictly quantitative analysis.  The law of
partnership does not require a net gain over a determined period in order to
establish that an activity is with a view to profit.  Where a partnership is
formed with the predominant motive of acquiring a tax loss, it is therefore not
necessary to show an intention to profit by the amount necessary to recoup the
acquired losses or produce a net gain.  Finally, for a person to become a
partner by assignment, the criteria of a valid partnership must be reaffirmed
in order for the partnership to continue in its new form.  Otherwise the
partnership will continue as formerly constituted, absent an event of
dissolution.  A bare assignee will have only those rights and entitlements
provided for in the relevant statute or partnership agreement.  Here, although the partnership agreement and other
documentation indicated an intention to form a partnership, the fundamental
criteria of a valid partnership were not met.  The Canadians did not intend to
carry on business with a view to a profit.  While a partnership can be formed
only for a brief period of time, there was no continuity of a business.  Once
the Canadians acquired their interests in the alleged partnership, the
apartment complex was owned only briefly before it was sold, terminating the
former business of managing the complex.  Furthermore, there was no evidence showing
that the Canadians intended to make a profit during the term of their
involvement with that complex.  The purchase of a working interest in an
oil and gas property did not establish an ancillary intention
to carry on business with a view to a profit.  Although the documentary
evidence indicated an intention to form a partnership in that property, there
was no evidence that the alleged partnership or its agents expended anything
other than nominal time, attention or labour on the project and did not incur
any liabilities to other persons in respect of it.  Cases Cited  Considered:  Continental
Bank Leasing Corp. v. Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 298, rev’g [1996] 3 F.C. 713;
distinguished:  Spire Freezers Ltd. v. Canada, [2001] 1 S.C.R.
391, 2001 SCC 11; referred to:  Will-Kare Paving &
Contracting Ltd. v. Canada, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 915, 2000 SCC 36; Economics
Laboratory (Canada) Ltd. v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 1208; Gordon v. The Queen,
[1961] S.C.R. 592; Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336; Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3
S.C.R. 622; Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312; Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; Tara Exploration and
Development Co. v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 6370.  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Partnership Act, 1890 (U.K.), 53 &
54 Vict., c. 39.  Partnership Act, R.S.A. 1980, c. P-2, s.
34.  Partnerships Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 370,
s. 5.   Authors Cited  Black, Henry Campbell.  Black's
Law Dictionary, 6th ed.  St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing
Co., 1990.  Canada.  Department of National
Revenue, Taxation.  Interpretation Bulletin IT-90, “What is a Partnership?”,
February 9, 1973.  Lindley & Banks on
Partnership, 17th ed.  By R. C. I’Anson Banks. 
London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1995.  Manzer, Alison R.  A Practical
Guide to Canadian Partnership Law.  Aurora, Ont.: Canada Law Book
(loose-leaf updated October 2000, release 6).  Nathanson, David C.  “Tax Motive
Kills Partnership:  Spire Freezers (cf. Continental Bank)” (1999), 7 Tax
Litigation 458.  Tobias, Norman C.  Taxation of
Corporations, Partnerships and Trusts.  Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 1999.  VanDuzer, J. Anthony.  The Law
of Partnerships and Corporations.  Concord, Ont.: Irwin Law, 1997.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal,
[2000] 1 F.C. 555, 178 D.L.R. (4th) 126, 246 N.R. 309, 46 B.L.R. (2d) 225, 99
D.T.C. 5602, [1999] 4 C.T.C. 177, [1999] F.C.J. No. 1327 (QL), dismissing the
appellant’s appeal from a judgment of the Tax Court of Canada, 97 D.T.C. 1468,
[1997] T.C.J. No. 728 (QL), which found that the appellant was not entitled to
deduct partnership losses under s. 96 of the Income Tax Act.  Appeal
dismissed.  C. D. O’Brien, Q.C.,
Al Meghji and Michel Bourque, for the appellant.  Paul Malette and Naomi
Goldstein, for the respondent.   The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Iacobucci and Bastarache JJ. --
This appeal was heard with Spire Freezers Ltd. v. Canada, [2001] 1
S.C.R. 391, 2001 SCC 11,  released concurrently.  Both cases raise the basic
question of whether a valid partnership has been established for income tax
purposes.  I.  Facts  2                                  
In 1985, a limited partnership was created by U.S. residents (the
“American Partners”) under the laws of Texas, called "The Commons at
Turtle Creek Ltd." (the “Commons”).  The Commons acquired land and
constructed an apartment building on the land (the “Dallas Apartment
Complex”).  By August 1988, the cost of the land and the building far exceeded
the fair market value.  3                                  
The appellant believed that, through a series of transactions,  he could
acquire and realize a portion of the losses arising from the difference between
the original cost and the August 1988 market value of the Dallas Apartment
Complex which he could then use as a deduction in computing his Canadian
taxable income.  4                                  
In order to secure the losses, the appellant, 38 other Canadians, and an
Alberta corporation (collectively referred to as the “Canadians”), arranged to
become assignees of the interests of the original American partners in the
Commons.  5                                  
A series of transactions took place on August 29, 1988 which were
intended to secure the losses to the Canadians all according to a predetermined
closing agenda.  The transactions were intended to result in:  (a) the Canadians’ becoming partners (with 99.97 percent general
partnership interests and .03 percent limited partnership interest) in the
ongoing Commons limited partnership by assignment of partnership interests from
the American partners for a total cost of US$180,000;   (c) acquisition of a one percent interest in a Canadian oil and gas
property at a cost of C$5,000.  6                                  
Although the alleged partnership purchased an interest in the oil and
gas property, it never produced a profit and production was halted owing to
flooding shortly after its acquisition.  Later, the alleged partnership
purchased a Montana condominium, but this asset also never produced a profit.  7                                  
In the 1988 taxation year, each of the Canadians was allocated his
proportionate percentage of the loss arising from the sale of the Dallas
Apartment Complex by the Commons.  By notice of reassessment, the taxation
authorities disallowed the partnership losses claimed by the appellant. The
appellant filed a notice of objection but the reassessment was confirmed.  The
appellant appealed to the Tax Court of Canada, then to the Federal Court of
Appeal, and now to this Court.  II.  Judgments
Below 1.  Tax
Court of Canada, 97 D.T.C. 1468  8                                  
Rip T.C.C.J. found that the transactions in this case were legally
effective and not a sham, and that the tax avoidance provisions of the Act had
no application to the appeal at bar.  9                                  
The reasons for judgment of Rip T.C.C.J. are primarily concerned with
the issue of whether the Canadians became members of a valid partnership.  The
Tax Court judge concluded that the definition of a partnership requires a
relationship or an association between persons carrying on a business with a
view to profit.   He also concluded that the “sole purpose” of the Canadians in
entering into the transactions at issue was to acquire a potential tax loss. 
Relying on the since overturned Federal Court of Appeal decision in Canada
v. Continental Bank Leasing Corp., [1996] 3 F.C. 713, the Tax Court judge
found (at p. 1483) that  neither the appellant nor any of the Canadians intended anything other
than to obtain a tax loss from the venture. The purchases of the Canadian Oil
and Gas Property and the Montana Condominium were nothing more than window
dressing.  Their expectation of income from these two properties was minimal,
never even approaching the amount of the loss that they hoped to deduct from
their income.  The relationship subsisting between the Canadians was not that
of carrying on business in common with a view to profit.  The Canadians were
not associated to carry on a business for profit.  10                              
Thus, the Tax Court judge found that the Canadians were not members of a
partnership with respect to the ownership of the Dallas Apartment Complex.  
The Tax Court judge also dismissed the argument that the Canadians did not have
to meet the criteria for the creation of a partnership because they had
acquired partnership interests in an existing partnership.  He held that this
relationship must exist between partners whether they create a new partnership
or are admitted to an existing one.  Having found that the criteria of a
partnership relationship were not met in the case at bar, the Tax Court judge
concluded that the appeal should be dismissed.  2.  Federal
Court of Appeal, [2000] 1 F.C. 555  11                              
The Federal Court of Appeal (Rothstein J.A., Isaac C.J. and Décary J.A.
concurring) unanimously affirmed the result reached by the Tax Court judge. 
The Federal Court of Appeal addressed two major issues:  first, was there any
business being carried on with a view to profit which was ancillary to the
Canadians’ tax minimization objective?  Second, were the Canadians partners by
reason of the assignment of partnership interests in an existing partnership?  12                              
With regard to the first issue, the Federal Court of Appeal applied the
principles enunciated by this Court in Continental Bank Leasing Corp. v.
Canada, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 298.  They considered the evidence of the
Canadians’ intentions and conduct in relation to each of the assets owned by
the Commons at the material times.  They concluded that, after the Canadians
took up their assignments, there was no business carried on by the Commons.  In
the Federal Court of Appeal’s view, once the Canadians became members of the
Commons, all that took place was a series of transactions leading to the
disposition of the Dallas Apartment Complex and the acquisition of the Canadian
oil and gas property.  Accordingly, the Federal Court of Appeal concluded that,
unlike the facts in Continental Bank, supra, there was “no real,
albeit ancillary, profit element” (para. 26) to permit the inference that a
business was being carried on with a view to profit in order to satisfy the
definition of partnership.  13                              
With regard to the second issue, the Federal Court of Appeal held that
the entry of new persons and the departure of existing partners will be
considered to constitute the creation of a new partnership provided the
requisite components of the definition of partnership are satisfied.  Hence,
the court concluded that the taking of an assignment of partnership interest
does not obviate the need to comply with the definition of partnership, and
that the Canadians’ failure to comply with that definition rendered the alleged
partnership nothing more than a collection of co-owners of property.  III.  Analysis  14                              
As noted at the outset, the resolution of this appeal turns on the
application of principles of the law of partnership.  The principal issue is
whether the appellant was a member of a valid partnership such that he could
deduct partnership losses from his income pursuant to s. 96 of the Act.  The
secondary issue is, notwithstanding the criteria for a valid partnership,
whether the taking of an assignment constituted the appellant as a partner.  15                              
In dealing with these issues in this appeal and in Spire Freezers,
we do not find it necessary to discuss the general anti-avoidance rule that was
introduced on September 13, 1988 as the transactions in these appeals took
place before that date and are consequently not affected by the rule.  16                              
Section 96(1) of the Act provides as follows:   (a)  the partnership were a separate person resident in Canada;  (b)  the taxation year of the partnership were its fiscal
period;  (c)  each partnership activity (including the ownership of
property) were carried on by the partnership as a separate person, and a
computation were made of the amount of  (i) each taxable capital gain and allowable capital loss of the
partnership from the disposition of property, and  (ii)  each income and loss of the partnership from each other source or
from sources in a particular place,  for each taxation year of the partnership;  (d) each income or loss of the partnership for a taxation year
were computed as if this Act were read without reference to subsections
66.1(1), 66.2(1) and 66.4(1) and as if no deduction were permitted by section
29 of the Income Tax Application Rules, 1971, subsection 65(1) or
section 66, 66.1, 66.2 or 66.4;  (e) each gain of the partnership from the disposition of land
used in a farming business of the partnership were computed as if this Act were
read without reference to paragraph 53(1)(i);                                                                     .
. .  (f) the amount of the income of the partnership for a taxation
year from any source or from sources in a particular place were the income of
the taxpayer from that source or from sources in that particular place, as the
case may be, for the taxation year of the taxpayer in which the partnership’s
taxation year  ends, to the extent of the taxpayer’s share thereof; and  (g) the amount, if any, by which  (i) the loss of the partnership for a taxation year from any source or
sources in a particular case,  exceeds  (ii) in the case of a specified member (within the meaning of the
definition “specified member” in subsection 248(1) if that definition were read
without reference to paragraph (b) thereof) of the partnership in the
year, the amount, if any, deducted by the partnership by virtue of section 37
in calculating its income for the taxation year from that source or sources in
the particular place, as the case may be, and  (iii) in any other case, nil  were the loss of the taxpayer from that source or from sources in that
particular place, as the case may be, for the taxation year of the taxpayer in
which the partnership’s taxation year ends, to the extent of the taxpayer’s
share thereof.   1.      Was
the Appellant a Member of a Partnership: Was He Carrying on Business in Common
with a View to Profit?   (a) The Essential Ingredients of Partnership  17               
The term “partnership” is not defined in the Act.  Partnership is
a legal term derived from common law and equity as codified in various
provincial and territorial partnership statutes.  As a matter of statutory
interpretation, it is presumed that Parliament intended that the term be given
its legal meaning for the purposes of the Act: N. C. Tobias, Taxation of
Corporations, Partnerships and Trusts (1999), at p. 21. We are of the view
that, where a taxpayer seeks to deduct Canadian partnership losses through s.
96 of the Act, the taxpayer must satisfy the definition of partnership that
exists under the relevant provincial or territorial law.  This is consistent
with Interpretation Bulletin IT-90, “What is a Partnership?” dated February 9,
1973.  It is also consistent with the approach taken to the interpretation of
the Act by a majority of this Court in Will-Kare Paving
& Contracting Ltd. v. Canada, [2000] 1 S.C.R.
915, 2000 SCC 36, at para. 31.  It follows that even in respect of
foreign partnerships, for the purposes of s. 96 of the Act, the essential elements
of a partnership that exist under Canadian law must be present: for a similar
approach, see Economics Laboratory (Canada) Ltd. v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 1208 (T.A.B.).  18               
Each of the common law provinces has enacted its own partnership
legislation based on the Partnership Act, 1890 (U.K.), 53 &
54 Vict., c. 39.  However, partnership as a concept was recognized by the
courts of law and equity long before the enactment of that statute.  It is
perhaps not surprising that common law jurisdictions generally, and the common
law provinces of Canada in particular, define partnership as a relationship
comprised of the same three essential ingredients.  The three
essential ingredients of partnership were recently described by this Court in Continental
Bank, supra, at para. 22:  Section 2 of the [Ontario] Partnerships
Act defines partnership as "the relation that subsists between persons
carrying on a business in common with a view to profit". This wording,
which is common to the majority of partnership statutes in the common law
world, discloses three essential ingredients: (1) a business, (2) carried on in
common, (3) with a view to profit.  19               
In law, the meaning of “carrying on a business”
may differ depending on the context in which it is used.   Provincial
partnership acts typically define “business” as including “every trade,
occupation and profession”.   The kinds of factors that may be relevant to
determining whether there is a business are contained in the existing legal
definitions.  One simple definition of "carrying on trade or 
business" is given in Black's Law Dictionary (6th ed. 1990), at p.
214:  "To hold one's self out to others as engaged in the selling of goods
or services."  Another definition requires at least three
elements to be present:  (1) the occupation of time, attention and labour; (2)
the incurring of liabilities to other persons; and (3) the purpose of a
livelihood or profit:  see Gordon v. The Queen, [1961] S.C.R. 592, per
Cartwright J., dissenting but not on this point, at p. 603.  20               
The existence of a valid partnership does not depend on the creation of
a new business because it is sufficient that an existing business was
continued.  Partnerships may be formed where two parties agree to carry on the
existing business of one of them.  It is not necessary to show that the
partners carried on a business for a long period of time.  A partnership may be
formed for a single transaction.  As was noted by this Court in Continental
Bank, supra, at para. 48, “[a]s long as the parties do not create
what amounts to an empty shell that does not in fact carry on business, the
fact that the partnership was created for a single transaction is of no
consequence.”   Furthermore, to establish the carrying on of a business, it is
not necessary to show that the parties held meetings, entered into new
transactions, or made decisions: Continental Bank, supra, at
paras. 31-33.  A business may be established even in circumstances where the
sole business activity is the passive receipt of rent, as was noted by
L’Heureux-Dubé J. in Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336,
at para. 46:  Where machinery is rented out, the essential core operations may at
times be limited to accepting rental revenue and assuming the business risk and
other obligations. At any time during that period, any client could demand the
execution of any of the contractual obligations, such as fixing an engine, for
example. Where, because a rental business is fortunate enough to experience no
mechanical breakdowns or accidents during a period of time, it
"passively" accepts rental revenue and assumes business risk and
obligations, it does not necessarily follow that it is not carrying on a
business during that period. Holding otherwise would imply that rental
businesses are "intermittent", that is, that they carry on a business
only when something goes wrong in the operations. Such a proposition is
unacceptable.   22               
A determination of whether there exists a “view to profit” requires an
inquiry into the intentions of the parties entering into an alleged
partnership.   At the outset, it is important to distinguish between motivation
and intention.  Motivation is that which stimulates a person to act, while
intention is a person’s objective or purpose in acting.  This Court has
repeatedly held that a tax motivation does not derogate from the validity of
transactions for tax purposes:  Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada,
[1999] 3 S.C.R. 622;  Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312;  Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, at p. 540.   Similarly,
a tax motivation will not derogate from the validity of a partnership where the
essential ingredients of a partnership are otherwise present:  Continental
Bank, supra, at paras. 50-52.    The question at this stage is
whether the taxpayer can establish an intention to make a profit, whether or
not he was motivated by tax considerations.  For further discussion, see D.
Nathanson,  “Tax Motive Kills Partnership:  Spire Freezers (cf. Continental
Bank)” (1999), 7 Tax Litigation 458.   . . . if a partnership is formed with some other predominant motive
[other than the acquisition of profit], e.g., tax avoidance, but there
is also a real, albeit ancillary, profit element, it may be permissible to
infer that the business is being carried on "with a view of profit." 
If, however, it could be shown that the sole reason for the creation of a
partnership was to give a particular partner the "benefit" of, say, a
tax loss, when there was no contemplation in the parties' minds that a profit .
. . would be derived from carrying on the relevant business, the partnership
could not in any real sense be said to have been formed "with a view of
profit".  24               
An ancillary purpose is by definition a lesser or subordinate purpose.
In determining whether there is a view to profit courts should not adopt or
employ a purely quantitative analysis.  The amount of the expected profit is
only one of several factors to consider.  The law of partnership does not
require a net gain over a determined period in order to establish that an
activity is with a view to profit.   For example, a partnership may incur
initial losses during the start up phase of its enterprise.  That does not mean
that the relationship is not one of partnership, so long as the enterprise is
carried on with a view to profit in the future.  Therefore, where a partnership
is formed with the predominant motive of acquiring a tax loss, it is not
necessary to show an intention to profit by the amount necessary to recoup the
acquired losses or produce a net gain.  (b) The Approach to Determining Whether a Partnership Exists  25               
As adopted in Continental Bank, supra, at para. 23, and
stated in Lindley & Banks on Partnership, supra, at p. 73:
“in determining the existence of a partnership . . . regard must be paid to the
true contract and intention of the parties as appearing from the whole facts of
the case”.  In other words, to ascertain the existence of a partnership the
courts must inquire into whether the objective, documentary evidence and the
surrounding facts, including what the parties actually did, are consistent with
a subjective intention to carry on business in common with a view to  profit.  26               
Courts must be pragmatic in their approach to the three essential
ingredients of partnership.  Whether a partnership has been established in a
particular case will depend on an analysis and weighing of the relevant factors
in the context of all the surrounding circumstances.  That the alleged
partnership must be considered in the totality of the circumstances prevents
the mechanical application of a checklist or a test with more precisely defined
parameters.  (c) Application to the Facts of the Case at Bar  27               
In the case at bar, taken by themselves, the partnership agreement and
other documentation indicate an intention to form a partnership.  But that is
not sufficient because the fundamental criteria of a valid partnership must
still be met.  28               
In this case, the alleged partnership held two assets: the Dallas
Apartment Complex and a one percent working interest in an Alberta oil and gas
property.   We agree with the Federal Court of Appeal that the facts in this
case indicate that at the time they entered into the transactions at issue, the
Canadians did not intend to carry on business with a view to profit in respect
of the Dallas Apartment Complex.  Once the Canadians acquired their interests
in the alleged partnership, the apartment complex was owned only briefly before
it was disposed of in accordance with the option granted to the American
partners and according to a pre-determined closing agenda.  As was contemplated
in Continental Bank, supra, a partnership can be formed for a brief
period of time.  It was also acknowledged in that case that the parties need
not hold meetings or make decisions, and that the passive receipt of rent can
constitute a business. However, in Continental Bank, supra, the
business of the partnership was pre-existing and continued after the
partnership was formed.   In this case, there was no continuity of a business,
in fact, one of the first acts of the alleged partnership was effectively to
terminate the Commons’ former business of managing the apartment complex. 
Furthermore, there was no evidence provided to show that the Canadians intended
to make a profit during the term of their involvement with the apartment
complex.  Consequently, in the time between the entry of the Canadians and the
disposition of the Dallas Apartment Complex, the Canadians were not, judging
from all the surrounding circumstances, carrying on business in common with a
view to profit in respect of that asset.  29               
The appellant argues that he established an ancillary intention to carry
on business with a view to profit by virtue of the purchase of a working
interest in an oil and gas property.   Here, again, the documentary evidence
indicates an intention to form a partnership.  Just prior to the transactions
at issue in this appeal, the partnership agreement was amended to provide for
investment in oil and gas as one of the purposes of the partnership.  Shortly
before the scheduled withdrawal of the American partners, the alleged
partnership did purchase a one percent interest in an Alberta oil and gas
property for $5,000.  However, as discussed above, this evidence of intention
must be weighed against other factors in the context of the surrounding
circumstances relating to the oil and gas property.  In considering those circumstances,
we are not convinced that the putative partners had the necessary intention to
carry on business in common with a view to profit.  It is difficult to accept
that there was in fact a business being carried on when none of the factors
relevant to the existence of a business supports that contention.  The putative
partners did not hold themselves out to others as providers of goods or
services derived from their interest in the oil and gas property.  They had no
management duties in respect of the property.  There is no evidence that the
alleged partnership or its agents expended anything other than nominal time,
attention or labour on the project; nor did they incur any liabilities to other
persons in respect of it.  30               
Furthermore, when asked at trial, the appellant could not remember the
name of the management company that was operating the oil and gas well.  The
only evidence of an expectation of profit was a vague and self-serving
assertion at trial by the appellant of an expected return of between $1,000 and
$1,500 per year.  There was no evidence that a profit was ever realized, and no
financial statements were produced.  The one percent interest in the oil and
gas property was the sole asset of the alleged partnership and approximately
two months after it was purchased it became flooded and production was
suspended.  No other interests in oil and gas properties were ever purchased. 
Not until 18 months after the shut-down of the oil and gas property did the
alleged partnership purchase another asset, the Montana condominium.  31               
Given the above circumstances, we do not accept the appellant’s
characterization of the Canadians’ activities in respect of the oil and gas
investment as  carrying on business with a view to profit, even as an ancillary
purpose.   As stated, the time,  labour and money spent on the purchase and
holding of the interest in the oil and gas property was nominal; indeed,   it
may be that that arrangement can be viewed as co-ownership of property as found
by the Federal Court of Appeal or as an isolated event or adventure as opposed
to the carrying on of a business: see Tara Exploration and Development Co.
v. M.N.R., 70 D.T.C. 6370 (Ex. Ct.).  32               
We agree with the trial judge that the transactions at issue were not a
sham:  see Stubart Investments, supra, at pp. 545-46.  However,
the trial judge also found that the purchase of the one percent interest in an
oil and gas property was “nothing more than window dressing”.  We take that as
a finding that there was no real ancillary profit-making purpose behind the
appellant’s involvement in the oil and gas property.  Like the Federal Court of
Appeal, we agree with that finding as well.  In coming to this conclusion we do
not adopt or employ a quantitative analysis, that is, we do not base our
conclusion solely on the amount of the expected profit, although that is a
factor to consider.  In determining whether there is the necessary “view to
profit” the courts must look at all the factors that relate to carrying on
business in common with a view to profit.  33               
In contrast, the appellants in Spire Freezers, supra, made
a considerable investment in a pre-existing business which they continued to
operate after entering the partnership.  Ultimately, they acquired an asset, an
apartment building, requiring substantially more than nominal management
effort.  The common purpose requirement was met by the parties’ having entered
into a valid partnership agreement, and by the fact that they were joint owners
of the apartment building, albeit briefly. The appellants in Spire Freezers
must have entered into the transaction with a view to  profit since they were
apprised of the potential to make a profit from the  apartment building and
they clearly intended to continue that business.   In that case, the
requirements of partnership were met.  34               
In summary, it is true that the trial judge in this case did not have
the benefit of this Court’s reasons in Continental Bank, supra, and
consequently, he applied the wrong law in finding against the appellant. 
However, after applying this Court’s decision in Continental Bank,
supra, we agree that the trial judge’s finding was correct in this case. 
The appellant was not a member of a partnership because there was no business
being carried on in common with a view to profit.  2.     Does the Taking of An Assignment Obviate
the Need to Comply With the Definition?  35            
The appellant’s alternative position is that he
need not have satisfied the Continental Bank criteria because he and the
other Canadians became partners of a valid partnership by assignment of
interests in a pre-existing Texas partnership.  In this regard, the appellant
argues that Texas law governs and that under Texas law the criteria of carrying
on business in common with a view to profit is irrelevant to the continuing
validity of that partnership.  There is some dispute between the parties as to
whether this aspect of Texas law was adequately proven.  The lower courts found
that it was not because the expert witness had not turned his mind to the
question of whether the essential ingredients of a partnership were necessary.  36            
As noted above, we are of the view that, where a Canadian taxpayer seeks
to deduct partnership losses through s. 96 of the Act, the taxpayer must
satisfy the essential ingredients of a partnership under Canadian law.  Even in
respect of foreign partnerships, for the purposes of s. 96 of the Act, the
essential elements of a partnership that exist under Canadian law must be
present.  A partnership must be that entity familiar to Canadian law, it must
be more than a partnership in name only. 37            
To accede to the appellant’s alternative position would require us to
accept that, by virtue of the nature of a partnership as an independent and
continuing entity, a person is capable of becoming a partner by acquiring an
economic interest in the partnership, notwithstanding that he or she does not
possess the intention to form the definitive relationship with the other
partners. A partnership can be viewed as either an independent entity or a
relationship between individuals depending on the context in which it is
observed.   That a partnership may be considered an entity for some purposes is
clear from s. 5 of the Ontario Partnerships Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 370,
where it is prescribed that for the sake of convenience a partnership may be
referred to as a “firm” and the name under which it carries on business is
called the firm name.  Likewise, for income tax purposes, the income from the
partnership business is calculated at the firm level.  And typically, rules of
civil procedure provide for actions against a partnership to be commenced and
defended using the partnership name, and any order made against a partnership
may be enforced against the property of the partnership, as well as the
property of the partners:  J. A. VanDuzer, The Law of Partnerships and
Corporations (1997), at p. 26.  38            
Furthermore, that a partnership has some characteristics of an entity
follows from the principles of partnership law relating to the dissolution of a
partnership.  There are some statutorily established circumstances under which
the partnership is automatically deemed to be dissolved.   A court may also
intervene to order dissolution of the partnership in specified circumstances.  
Partners may also agree to dissolve the partnership upon the happening of
certain events.  Otherwise, an overt act by one of the partners is required to
terminate the partnership and end the relationship.  As well, notice to the
remaining partners and possibly other persons may be necessary: see A. R.
Manzer, A Practical Guide to Canadian Partnership Law  (loose-leaf), at
paras.  7.60, 7.70 and 7.150.  39            
However, the question before us concerns the effect of an assignment of
partnership interest, and whether an assignee becomes a partner by virtue of
such an assignment.  Under partnership law generally, an assignee of a
partnership interest does not of itself convert the assignee into a partner;
see Lindley & Banks on Partnership, supra, at pp. 556-57. 
For example, s. 34 of the Alberta Partnership Act, R.S.A. 1980,
c. P-2, sets out the rights of an assignee of a partnership interest. 
It is conspicuous that s. 34 does not grant to an assignee the full rights of
partnership, only an entitlement to share in the profits of the partnership
and, upon dissolution, the assets of the partnership.  40            
In our view, for a person to become a partner by assignment there must
be a valid partnership at the time of entry of the new partner.  In other
words, upon the entry of a new partner, the criteria of a valid partnership
must be reaffirmed in order for the partnership to continue in its new form. 
Otherwise the partnership will continue as formerly constituted, provided there
has not been an event of dissolution.  A bare assignee will have only those
rights and entitlements provided for in the relevant statute or partnership
agreement.   The law, ignoring the firm, looks to the partners composing it; any
change amongst them destroys the identity of the firm; what is called the
property of the firm is their property, and what are called the debts and
liabilities of the firm are their debts and their liabilities.  42            
A validly constituted partnership, therefore, is a continuing entity so
long as none of the statutory or contractual events of dissolution occurs and
the composition of that partnership remains the same.  A partnership agreement
may facilitate a change in the composition of a partnership by providing that
“the partnership continues” upon the entry or withdrawal of partners, but that
does not obviate the need for persons intending to enter the partnership as 
partners  to meet the essential criteria of a valid partnership.  Those
criteria are fundamental and cannot be avoided simply by contract alone.  This
result is consistent with the view that formation of a partnership does not
depend solely on contractual arrangements but must also satisfy the essential
ingredients of a partnership described by this Court in Continental Bank,
supra.  43            
Since we have already found that at the time of entering into the
transactions at issue the alleged partners did not possess the essential
ingredients of partnership as described in Continental Bank, supra,
we cannot accede to the appellant’s position on this issue. 44            
Finally, after having said this, it is important to mention that, if a
person or group of persons hold themselves out as partners in a partnership,
but subsequently claim not to be partners for failure to meet the essential
ingredients of a valid partnership, third parties dealing with such a
non-entity may well have contractual and tortious remedies against the alleged
partner(s).  Thus, third parties need not look behind representations of
partnership in order to be assured of a remedy against the alleged partners.  IV.  Disposition 45            
For the foregoing reasons, we would dismiss the appeal with costs.   Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Bennett Jones, Calgary.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The Deputy Attorney General
of Canada, Winnipeg.   