                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Imperial Oil Ltd. v.
  Canada; Inco Ltd. v. Canada, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 447, 2006 SCC 46  Date:  20061020 Docket:  30695,
  30849  Between: Her Majesty The
Queen Appellant and Imperial Oil
Limited Respondent and between: Her Majesty The
Queen Appellant and Inco Limited Respondent Teck Cominco
Limited Intervener  Coram:
McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 69)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 70 to 105)   LeBel J. (McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps and Abella JJ.
  concurring)  Binnie J. (Fish and Charron
  JJ. concurring)   ______________________________ Imperial Oil Ltd. v. Canada; Inco Ltd. v. Canada,
[2006] 2 S.C.R. 447, 2006 SCC 46  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                  Appellant  v.  Imperial Oil Limited                                                                                      Respondent   Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                  Appellant  v.  Inco Limited                                                                                                   Respondent  and  Teck Cominco Limited                                                                                    Intervener  Indexed as:  Imperial Oil Ltd. v. Canada; Inco Ltd.
v. Canada  Neutral citation:  2006 SCC 46.  File Nos.:  30695, 30849.  2006:  February 7; 2006:  October 20. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps,
Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Taxation — Income
tax — Computation of business income — Capital
losses — Discount on certain obligations — Foreign exchange
losses — Debentures issued by taxpayer companies in U.S. dollars — Appreciation
of U.S. dollar against Canadian dollar resulted in foreign exchange losses on
redemption of debt obligations — Whether s. 20(1)(f) of Income
Tax Act permits deductions from income of foreign exchange losses incurred on
redemption of debt obligations —  Whether s. 20(1)(f) limited to
deduction of original issue discounts — Whether foreign exchange
losses constitute capital losses pursuant to s. 39(2)  of Income Tax
Act — Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .),
ss. 20(1) (f), 39(2) .  Similarly, in 1989, Inco issued debentures in
U.S. dollars at a discount, later redeeming a portion of them in 2000. 
Unlike Imperial Oil, Inco had sufficient U.S. funds on hand to redeem or
purchase the debentures in the open market.  In computing its income
for 2000, Inco nevertheless deducted, under s. 20(1) (f) of the
ITA , a foreign exchange loss allegedly resulting from the purchase of
the 1989 debentures.  The Minister disallowed the deduction.  The Tax Court of
Canada confirmed the Minister’s assessment, finding that the change in the
value of the Canadian dollar during the term of the debentures had not resulted
in any realized loss or cost to Inco.  The Federal Court of Appeal, on the
basis of its earlier decision in Imperial Oil, set aside that decision
and sent the matter back to the Minister for reassessment.  Held (Binnie, Fish and
Charron JJ. dissenting):  The appeals should be allowed.  The
Minister’s assessments, as varied by the Tax Court of Canada in Imperial Oil,
should be confirmed.  Per McLachlin C.J.
and LeBel, Deschamps and Abella JJ.:  Section 20(1) (f) of the ITA 
does not permit the deduction of foreign exchange losses, which must be claimed
as a capital loss under s. 39 .  Since the purpose of s. 20(1) (f)
is to address a specific class of financing costs arising out of the issuance
of debt instruments at a discount, s. 20(1) (f) should not be
construed as a broad provision allowing for the deductibility of a wide range
of costs attendant upon financing in foreign currency, in the absence of any
mention of such costs in the text of the ITA , and despite the fact that
such costs are usually regarded as being on capital account.  The text, scheme
and context of s. 20(1) (f) indicate that the deduction is limited
to original issue discounts —  shallow discounts in para. (f)(i)
and deep discounts in para. (f)(ii).  Although the word “discount”
does not appear in s. 20(1) (f), the opening words of s. 20(1) (f)(i)
set out what is commonly accepted as the definition of a discount.  Moreover,
there is no express mention in s. 20(1)(f) of a foreign currency
exchange.  These factors suggest that the primary referent of s. 20(1) (f)
is something other than foreign exchange losses, namely, payments in the nature
of discounts.  Furthermore, the scheme of s. 20 , which provides deductions
for virtually all costs of borrowing, does not imply that foreign exchange
losses are also deductible under s. 20 .  The other costs enumerated in
s. 20  are intrinsic costs of borrowing.  Foreign exchange losses arise
only where the debtor chooses to deal in foreign currency.  They belong to a
different class than the costs referred to in s. 20 . [1] [62] [64-65] [67]   If s. 20(1)(f) applied to foreign exchange
losses, the section would  also conflict with the general treatment of capital
gains and losses in the ITA .  In particular, such an interpretation
would not properly appreciate the role of s. 39  of the ITA .  That
provision sets out a meaning of capital gains and losses and includes express
rules for the treatment of gains and losses resulting from currency
fluctuations.  Although s. 39 is a residual provision, this section is a
statement of Parliament’s intent to treat foreign exchange losses as capital
losses. [19] [66] [68]  Finally, the Federal Court of Appeal decision in Gaynor
does not support the proposition that all elements of a statutory formula must
be converted into their Canadian dollar value at the relevant time.  Converting
the amounts in the statutory formula merely simplified the method of
calculating the amount of the capital gain in that case. Gaynor did not
purport to establish a new general principle. [52]   When the relevant language of ss. 20(1) (f)
and 248(1)  of the ITA  is read in light of the statutory purpose, the
only way the “maximum total amount . . . payable on account of the
obligation” can be ascertained (as required by the definition of “principal
amount” in s. 248(1) ) is by using the exchange rate prevailing when the
obligation becomes payable.  It is at that time the “obligation” arose on the
part of the taxpayers to purchase U.S. dollars to retire their debt.  It
follows that the relevant exchange rate is the rate prevailing at the date of
redemption because it is not until that date that it is possible to determine
the maximum amount “payable on account of the obligation”.  It is thus the
redemption, not the issuance, that triggers the tax deduction.  Since the
principal amount of the obligation must be ascertained at the date of
redemption, the debentures in these cases do not meet the criteria of s. 20(1) (f)(i). 
Consequently, the taxpayers are entitled only to the deduction permitted by
s. 20(1) (f)(ii). [77] [86-87]   Cases Cited  By LeBel J.  Distinguished:  Gaynor
v. The Queen, 91 D.T.C. 5288, aff’g 88 D.T.C. 6394,
aff’g 87 D.T.C. 279; referred to:  Stubart Investments Ltd.
v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; Ludco Enterprises Ltd. v.
Canada, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 1082, 2001 SCC 62; Canada
Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601,
2005 SCC 54; Mathew v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 643,
2005 SCC 55; Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999]
3 S.C.R. 622; Tip Top Tailors Ltd. v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1957] S.C.R. 703; Eli Lilly and Co.
(Canada) Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1955] S.C.R. 745; Alberta
Gas Trunk Line Co. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1972] S.C.R. 498;
Imperial Tobacco Co. v. Kelly, [1943] 2 All E.R. 119; Bentley
v. Pike (1981), 53 T.C. 590; Pattison (Inspector of Taxes) v.
Marine Midland Ltd., [1984] 1 A.C. 362; Capcount Trading v.
Evans (1992), 65 T.C. 545; Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983]
1 S.C.R. 29.  By Binnie J. (dissenting)  Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC 54; Eli Lilly
and Co. (Canada) Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1955]
S.C.R. 745; Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999]
3 S.C.R. 622; Canada v. Canadian Pacific Ltd., [2002]
3 F.C. 170, 2001 FCA 398; Montreal Coke and
Manufacturing Co. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1944] A.C. 126,
aff’g [1942] S.C.R. 89 (sub nom. Montreal Light, Heat and Power
Consolidated v. Minister of National Revenue); Bronfman Trust v. The
Queen, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32; Tennant v. M.N.R., [1996]
1 S.C.R. 305.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Currency Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-52, ss. 3(1) , 14 .  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 3 , 9 ,
18(1) (b), 20(1) , 39 , 79 , 80 , 248  “amount”, “principal amount”.  Authors Cited  Canada. Canada Revenue
Agency. Income Tax Rulings Directorate. Advance Income Tax Ruling, No.
1999-0008753 (F), "Débentures échangeables", January 1, 2000.  Canada. Canada Revenue Agency. Income Tax Rulings
Directorate. Advance Income Tax Ruling, No. 90063-3 (E), "Exchangeable
Debenture", July 30, 1990.  Canada. Canada Revenue Agency. Income Tax Rulings
Directorate. Advance Income Tax Ruling, No. 2000-0060103 (E), "Principal
Amount of Debt Obligation", January 1, 2001.  Canada. Canada Revenue Agency. Income Tax Rulings
Directorate. Technical Interpretation, No. 9703377 (E), "Consumer Based
Loan", April 17, 1997.   Driedger, Elmer A.  Construction of Statutes,
2nd ed.  Toronto: Butterworths, 1983.  Krishna, Vern.  The Fundamentals of Canadian Income
Tax, 8th ed.  Toronto:  Carswell, 2004.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (Létourneau,
Sharlow and Malone JJ.A.), [2005] 1 C.T.C. 65,
2004 D.T.C. 6702, 327 N.R. 329, [2004] F.C.J. No. 1793
(QL), 2004 FCA 361, allowing Imperial Oil’s appeal, in part, from a
judgment of Miller J., [2004] 2 C.T.C. 3030,
2004 D.T.C. 2377, [2004] T.C.J. No. 122 (QL),
2004 TCC 207.  Appeal allowed, Binnie, Fish and Charron JJ.
dissenting.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (Décary, Nadon
and Sexton JJ.A.), [2005] 1 C.T.C. 369,
2005 D.T.C. 5109, [2005] F.C.J. No. 169 (QL),
2005 FCA 38, allowing Inco’s appeal from a judgment of
Bonner J., [2005] 1 C.T.C. 2096, 2004 D.T.C. 3586,
[2004] T.C.J. No. 531 (QL), 2004 TCC 468.  Appeal allowed, Binnie,
Fish and Charron JJ. dissenting.  Wendy Burnham and Rhonda Nahorniak,
for the appellant.  Al Meghji and Edward C. Rowe,
for the respondent Imperial Oil Limited.  Warren J. A. Mitchell, Q.C.,
and Michael W. Colborne, for the respondent Inco Limited.  Written submissions only by Wilfrid Lefebvre,
Q.C., and Dominic C. Belley, for the intervener.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Deschamps
and Abella JJ. was delivered by  LeBel J. —  I.  Introduction  1                                 
These two appeals turn on the proper interpretation of a provision of
the federal Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”),
namely s. 20(1) (f).  In general terms, s. 20(1)  permits the deduction of
various financing costs in the computation of business income.  The question is
whether s. 20(1) (f) permits the deduction of foreign exchange losses
incurred in the redemption of debt obligations or whether it is limited to the
deduction of original issue discounts.  With minor changes in the Imperial
Oil case, the judgments of the Tax Court upheld the assessments of the
Minister of National Revenue (“Minister”) which had disallowed the deduction of
the foreign exchange losses.  The Federal Court of Appeal allowed the appeals
of Imperial Oil and Inco.  For the reasons that follow, I would
reverse the Court of Appeal’s judgments and reinstate the assessments, in
accordance with the approach adopted by Miller J. in the Imperial Oil
case.  Section 20(1) (f) does not permit the deductions claimed by the
respondents, who are only entitled to claim a capital loss under s. 39  of the
ITA .  II.  Background  A.  Imperial
Oil   B.  Inco  3                                 
In 1989, Inco issued sinking fund debentures of US$150,000,000 at a
discount of 2.6% (or US$3,900,000).  It converted the discount to Canadian
dollars ($4,652,827) at the exchange rate in effect when the debentures were
issued, and deducted 20% of the converted amount as a financing expense under
s. 20(1) (e) of the ITA  in each of the taxation years 1989 to
1993.  The Minister did not challenge these deductions.  Inco receives a
substantial portion of its revenues in U.S. dollars, which it deposits in U.S.
dollar bank accounts.  The proceeds of the issuance were deposited in U.S.
dollar accounts or used to pay debts denominated in U.S. dollars.  Inco had
sufficient U.S. funds on hand in the United States to redeem or purchase the
debentures in the open market.  Between February 21 and May 9, 2000, Inco
purchased US$29,120,000 of the 1989 debentures in the open market, paying
US$29,012,850 for them.  On June 15, 2000, by mandatory and optional
payments into the sinking fund, it redeemed more of the 1989 debentures with an
aggregate face amount of US$22,500,000. In 1992, Inco issued debentures with a
face amount of US$200,000,000. Between March 3 and November 8, 2000,
Inco purchased US$21,692,000 of the 1992 debentures in the open market, paying
US$21,269,708 for them.  In computing its income for 2000, Inco deducted, under
s. 20(1) (f) of the ITA , a foreign exchange loss allegedly
resulting from the purchase of the 1989 debentures.  The Minister disallowed
the deduction and Inco appealed to the Tax Court of Canada.  III.  Judicial
History  A.  Imperial
Oil Limited  (1) Tax Court of Canada, [2004] 2
C.T.C. 3030, 2004 TCC 207  4                                 
Miller J. mostly agreed with the Minister on the outcome of the appeal
filed in the Tax Court of Canada.  However, he did not agree with any of the
interpretations of s. 20(1) (f) advanced by the taxpayer or the
Minister.  The result was that he made a minor adjustment to the assessment and
that, in the end, Imperial Oil lost their appeal.  5                                 
Miller J. began by noting that the parties agreed that s. 20(1) (f)(i)
applied rather than s. 20(1) (f)(ii).  The deduction under s. 20(1) (f)(i),
he observed, equals the lesser of the principal amount and the amount paid in
the year in satisfaction of the principal amount less the amount for which the
obligation was issued.  Miller J. added that the parties also agreed that the
exchange rate at the time of redemption applied to “the amount paid in
satisfaction” and that the exchange rate at the time of issuance applied to
“the issue amount”, but disagreed as to what rate applied to the “principal
amount”.  He concluded that no ambiguity arose if the calculation was done
entirely in U.S. dollars and only the resulting loss was converted into
Canadian dollars using the rate at the time of redemption.  In his opinion,
s. 20(1) (f)(i) was not intended to apply to foreign exchange gains
or losses.  6                                 
Miller J. rejected an interpretation of Gaynor v. The Queen, 91
D.T.C. 5288 (F.C.A.), according to which every transaction resulting in an
asset, liability, revenue item or expense must be converted into Canadian
dollars at the exchange rate in effect on the date of the transaction.   He
concluded that Gaynor applies only to computations of capital gains and
that nothing in Gaynor requires that it be applied to income
computations or dictates that the word “amount” refers to “Canadian amount”
wherever it appears in the ITA .  Miller J. distinguished capital gains,
which result from the change in the value of an asset over time, that is,
between the times of acquisition and disposition, from income expenses, which
require a snapshot at the time of payment without the measurement of a change
in value over time.  He decided that the formula under s. 20(1) (f)(i)
does not address increases or decreases in value but applies at a single point
in time and that it was therefore sufficient to convert only the resulting loss
into Canadian dollars.  He added that, if he was wrong in this respect, the
object of the section required that each amount of the formula  be converted at
the 1999 exchange rate because the “one time snapshot rate” has to be the rate
at the time of redemption (para. 46).  7                                 
Miller J. concluded that Parliament had not intended foreign exchange
losses to be deductible under s. 20(1) (f), as they pertained to the
capital element of borrowing.  He stated that s. 20(1) (f) deals with
obligations issued at less than face value and allows the discount to be
deducted at the time of payment.  In his view, foreign exchange losses incurred
in the course of borrowing are not akin to the other costs of borrowing listed
as deductible expenses in s. 20(1) .  He noted that foreign exchange losses are
not specifically identified as a capital item to be treated as a current
expense and that the other costs for which deductions are available are known
at the time of the contract and derive from the contract of origin.  Miller J.
concluded that the deduction in s. 20(1) (f) encompasses only original
issue discounts and the part of the foreign exchange loss that pertains
specifically to the deductible discounts.  On that basis, he held that
$1,548,325 was deductible under s. 20(1) (f)(i), that nothing was
deductible under s. 20(1) (f)(ii), and that there was a capital loss of
$26,283,387.  (2) Federal Court of Appeal, [2005] 1 C.T.C.
65, 2004 FCA 361  8                                 
Imperial Oil appealed and the Minister cross-appealed.  The Court of
Appeal allowed Imperial Oil’s appeal in part.  It allowed a deduction of 75% of
the foreign exchange loss under s. 20(1) (f)(ii), but refused any further
deduction.  9                                 
Sharlow J.A., for the court, concluded that the principal amount of a
debt denominated in foreign currency fluctuates with the exchange rate for the
purposes of s. 20(1) (f) and that, in the instant case, the amount
increased between the dates of issuance and redemption.  She concluded that Gaynor
was binding and that, according to it, each element of a computation under
s. 20(1) (f) must be converted into Canadian dollars at the exchange rate
prevailing at the time of the transaction in question.  She calculated the
principal amount at the time of redemption using the exchange rate on the
redemption date, and the issue amount using the exchange rate on the date of
issue, and concluded that the principal amount had increased from $102,517,158
to $129,119,689.  Sharlow J.A. concluded that a principal amount can
increase during the term of a loan if the increase is mandated by a contractual
term governing the debt, and that a foreign currency loan implicitly involves
such a contractual term.  Because a foreign currency loan is for units of
foreign currency on terms that require the same number of units of the foreign
currency to be returned at the end of the term, the effect is that the Canadian
dollar equivalent of the repayment may be more or less than the Canadian dollar
equivalent of the borrowed amount.  She found that s. 248(26)  of the ITA 
does not compel a conclusion that the principal amount was necessarily the same
at the times of issuance and redemption, because all it does is clarify s. 80 ,
and even if it were applied to s. 20(1) (f), it would merely confirm that
the original principal amount was $102,517,158.   B.  Inco
Limited  (1) Tax Court of Canada, [2005] 1 C.T.C.
2096, 2004 TCC 468  11                             
Bonner J. heard the appeal in Inco after the decision of his
colleague Miller J. in Imperial Oil.  He stated that he did not agree
with parts of Miller J.’s reasoning and wrote his own reasons for dismissing
the appeal and confirming the assessment.  12                             
Bonner J. held that s. 20(1) (f) of the ITA  did not permit
the deduction of the foreign exchange losses.  He noted that Inco had borrowed
U.S. dollars in 1989 and 1992, had either deposited the funds in U.S. dollar
accounts or used them to repay U.S. dollar debt, and had then drawn on U.S.
dollar accounts to retire the debentures.  He found that the change in the
value of the Canadian dollar during the term of the debentures had not resulted
in any realized loss or cost to Inco and that Inco was seeking to deduct what
was, in his opinion, a phantom loss.  In his view, it was impossible to imagine
that s. 20(1) (f) was intended to permit a deduction in the absence
of a realized loss or cost.  The foreign exchange fluctuations neither added to
nor subtracted from the cost of borrowing. He rejected an argument that, for
the purposes of s. 20(1) (f), the “principal amount” of a borrowing
fluctuates with exchange rates over the life of the instrument.  In his
opinion, the “principal amount” referred to in s. 20(1) (f) is the face
amount of the instrument when it is issued, which does not vary, and there is
no basis in logic for a view that the expression of that principal amount in a
foreign currency gives the Canadian dollar equivalent of the principal amount a
variable quality.  He stated that treating the principal amount as one that
fluctuates with exchange rates would include amounts in the deduction that were
never in Parliament’s contemplation.  Given his conclusion, he declined to
consider whether s. 20(1) (f) would apply to purchases of
obligations on the open market for cancellation by the debtor.  (2) Federal Court of Appeal, [2005] 1 C.T.C.
369, 2005 FCA 38  13                             
Inco’s appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal was successful.  Nadon J.A.
held that the Court had decided the relevant issues in its previous decision in
the Imperial Oil case and that the two cases could not be
distinguished.  For these reasons, he set aside the Tax Court’s decision and
sent the matter back to the Minister for reassessment.  IV.  Analysis  A.  Issues  14                             
The parties disagree on the tax treatment of foreign exchange losses
incurred upon redemption or, at least in part in the Inco case, upon
repurchase and cancellation of debentures issued in U.S. dollars.  The outcome
of the appeals turns on the interpretation of s. 20(1) (f) of the ITA ,
which permits the following deduction when computing business income:  20. (1) . . .  (f)  an amount paid in the year in satisfaction of the principal
amount of any bond, debenture, bill, note, mortgage, hypothecary claim or
similar obligation issued by the taxpayer after June 18, 1971 on which interest
was stipulated to be payable, to the extent that the amount so paid does not
exceed,  (i)  in any case where the obligation was issued for an amount not less
than 97% of its principal amount, and the yield from the obligation, expressed
in terms of an annual rate on the amount for which the obligation was issued
(which annual rate shall, if the terms of the obligation or any agreement
relating thereto conferred on its holder a right to demand payment of the
principal amount of the obligation or the amount outstanding as or on account
of its principal amount, as the case may be, before the maturity of the
obligation, be calculated on the basis of the yield that produces the highest
annual rate obtainable either on the maturity of the obligation or conditional
on the exercise of any such right) does not exceed 4/3 of the interest
stipulated to be payable on the obligation, expressed in terms of an annual
rate on  (A) the principal amount of the obligation, if no amount is payable on
account of the principal amount before the maturity of the obligation, or  (B)  the amount outstanding from time to time as or on account of the
principal amount of the obligation, in any other case,  the amount by which the lesser of the principal amount of the
obligation and all amounts paid in the year or in any preceding year in
satisfaction of its principal amount exceeds the amount for which the
obligation was issued, and  (ii) in any other case, 3/4 of the lesser of the amount so paid and the
amount by which the lesser of the principal amount of the obligation and all
amounts paid in the year or in any preceding taxation year in satisfaction of
its principal amount exceeds the amount for which the obligation was issued;  15                             
On a proper interpretation, is the deduction in this provision limited
to original issue discounts?  Should it be viewed as encompassing a broader
range of financing costs, including foreign exchange losses?  Are such losses
deductible only as capital losses under s. 39  of the ITA ?  In
these two appeals, although the parties purport to base their arguments on the
same principles of interpretation of tax statutes, their answers to these
questions and their propositions regarding the scope of s. 20(1) (f) are
in stark conflict.  16                             
The scope of the present litigation has been narrowed and clarified
since the Minister  issued his assessments.  Imperial Oil now relies solely on
s. 20(1) (f)(ii) and asks for only 75% of its currency exchange loss, as
permitted by that provision.  It no longer claims a full deduction under s.
20(1) (f)(i) or a capital loss under s. 39  for the remaining 25%. In Inco,
the Minister has abandoned the argument that the taxpayer’s currency losses are
purely notional or phantom losses.  In this appeal, the Minister’s factum raises
an issue which is specific to Inco, namely whether currency losses
incurred as a result of a repurchase of debt instruments on the open market are
deductible only under s. 39(3).  There are no real evidentiary
difficulties.  The two cases proceeded on the basis of joint statements of
facts.  In addition, in Inco, the Minister presented expert evidence
about the meanings attributed by the financial industry to some of the terms
used in s. 20(1) (f).  In essence, the two appeals raise similar issues. 
Before I turn to those issues, I will outline the statutory framework that
governs the present litigation.  B.  Statutory
Framework  17                             
Despite its undeniable — and growing — complexity, the current federal ITA 
displays some fundamental structural characteristics.  One of these
characteristics, which is provided for in s. 3 , is the distinction between
income and capital.  Capital gains are only partially brought into income for
taxation purposes.  The rules governing the computation of  income, gains and
losses are found in ss. 9  to 37 .  They include a general rule stated in s.
18(1) (b), which prohibits the deduction of capital amounts unless
another provision of the ITA  expressly authorizes such a deduction:  18. (1) In computing the income of a
taxpayer from a business or property no deduction shall be made in respect of 
. . .  (b)  an outlay, loss or replacement of capital, a payment on
account of capital or an allowance in respect of depreciation, obsolescence or
depletion except as expressly permitted by this Part;  18                             
A series of exceptions to this rule are set out in s. 20, which provides
for a broad range of deductions in respect of a variety of financing costs,
such as interest (s. 20(1) (c)), financing expenses, including
commissions to securities dealers (s. 20(1) (e)), and annual fees on
debt (s. 20(1) (e.1)).  Section 20(1) (f) is a part of this list.  19                             
Section 39 then sets out the meaning of capital gains and losses.  It
includes express rules in s. 39(2)  for the treatment of gains and losses
resulting from currency fluctuations:  39. . . .  (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), where,
by virtue of any fluctuation after 1971 in the value of the currency or
currencies of one or more countries other than Canada relative to Canadian
currency, a taxpayer has made a gain or sustained a loss in a taxation year,
the following rules apply:  (a)  the amount, if any, by which  (i)  the total of all such gains made by the taxpayer in the year (to
the extent of the amounts thereof that would not, if section 3 were read in the
manner described in paragraph (1)(a) of this section, be included
in computing the taxpayer’s income for the year or any other taxation year)  exceeds  (ii)  the total of all such losses sustained by the taxpayer in the
year (to the extent of the amounts thereof that would not, if section 3 were
read in the manner described in paragraph (1)(a) of this section, be
deductible in computing the taxpayer’s income for the year or any other
taxation year), and  (iii) if the taxpayer is an individual, $200,  shall be deemed to be a capital gain of the taxpayer for the year from
the disposition of currency of a country other than Canada, the amount of which
capital gain is the amount determined under this paragraph; and (b) the amount, if any, by which  (i) the total determined under subparagraph (a)(ii),  exceeds  (ii) the total determined under subparagraph (a)(i),
and  (iii) if the taxpayer is an individual, $200,  shall be deemed to be a capital loss of the taxpayer for the year from
the disposition of currency of a country other than Canada, the amount of which
capital loss is the amount determined under this paragraph.   20                             
In addition, s. 39(3) provides specific rules in respect of gains and
losses arising out of purchases of bonds on the open market:  39. . . .  (3) Where a taxpayer has issued any bond, debenture
or similar obligation and has at any subsequent time in a taxation year and
after 1971 purchased the obligation in the open market, in the manner in which
any such obligation would normally be purchased in the open market by any
member of the public,  (a) the amount, if any, by which the amount for which the
obligation was issued by the taxpayer exceeds the purchase price paid or agreed
to be paid by the taxpayer for the obligation shall be deemed to be a capital
gain of the taxpayer for the taxation year from the disposition of a capital
property, and  (b) the amount, if any, by which the purchase price paid or
agreed to be paid by the taxpayer for the obligation exceeds the greater of the
principal amount of the obligation and the amount for which it was issued by
the taxpayer shall be deemed to be a capital loss of the taxpayer for the
taxation year from the disposition of a capital property,  to the extent that the amount determined under paragraph (a) or
(b) would not, if section 3 were read in the manner described in
paragraph (1)(a) and this Act were read without reference to subsections
80(12) and (13), be included or be deductible, as the case may be, in computing
the taxpayer’s income for the year or any other taxation year.   C.  Positions
of the Parties  21                             
In the Minister’s opinion, s. 20(1) (f) is clear in its wording
and purpose.  It establishes a specific deduction for discounts on the issuance
of debt instruments.  The provision was never intended to address the tax
consequences of foreign exchange losses related to the issuance and redemption
of foreign currency bonds or debentures, or, in the Inco case, to the
purchase of such bonds or debentures on the open market. Section 39(2)  applies,
and it treats such losses as capital losses, which can only be set off against
capital gains.  22                             
The taxpayers, too, rely on the clarity of the wording of s. 20(1) (f). 
In their opinion, this provision, properly understood, simply means that
foreign exchange losses in respect of debt instruments are deemed to be
deductible from profits for income tax purposes.  Section 39(2)  merely plays
the role of a residual basket clause which applies only when other provisions
do not.  23                             
Whichever way we turn, therefore, this is another classic case of
interpretation of tax statutes.  What are these provisions? How do they
interrelate?  Given the nature of this problem, a brief review of the
principles of interpretation applicable to tax statutes is appropriate.  D.  Principles
of Interpretation Applicable to Tax Statutes  24                             
This Court has produced a considerable body of case law on the
interpretation of tax statutes.  I neither intend nor need to fully review it. 
I will focus on a few key principles which appear to flow from it, and on their
development.  25                             
The jurisprudence of this Court is grounded in the modern approach to
statutory interpretation.  Since Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen,
[1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, the Court has held that the strict approach to the
interpretation of tax statutes is no longer appropriate and that the modern
approach should also apply to such statutes:  [T]he words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in
their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act .
. . .  (E. A. Driedger, Construction of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983), at p.
87; Stubart, at p. 578, per Estey J.; Ludco Enterprises
Ltd. v. Canada, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 1082, 2001 SCC 62, at para. 36, per
Iacobucci J.)   26                             
Despite this endorsement of the modern approach, the particular nature
of tax statutes and the peculiarities of their often complex structures explain
a continuing emphasis on the need to carefully consider the actual words of the
ITA , so that taxpayers can safely rely on them when conducting business
and arranging their tax affairs.  Broad considerations of statutory purpose
should not be allowed to displace the specific language used by Parliament (Ludco,
at paras. 38-39).  27                             
The Court recently reasserted the key principles governing the
interpretation of tax statutes — although in the context of the “general
anti-avoidance rule”, or “GAAR” — in its judgments in Canada Trustco
Mortgage Co. v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC 54, and Mathew
v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 643, 2005 SCC 55.  On the one hand, the Court
acknowledged the continuing relevance of a textual interpretation of such
statutes.  On the other hand, it emphasized the importance of reading their
provisions in context, that is, within the overall scheme of the legislation,
as required by the modern approach.  28                             
In their joint reasons in Canada Trustco, the Chief Justice and
Major J. stated at the outset that the modern approach applies to the
interpretation of tax statutes.  Words are to be read in context, in light of
the statute as a whole, that is, always keeping in mind the words of its other
provisions:  It has been long
established as a matter of statutory interpretation that “the words of an Act are to be read in their entire
context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the
scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament”: see 65302 British Columbia Ltd. v.
Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 804, at para. 50. The interpretation of a statutory
provision must be made according to a textual, contextual and purposive
analysis to find a meaning that is harmonious with the Act as a whole. When the
words of a provision are precise and unequivocal, the ordinary meaning of the
words play a dominant role in the interpretive process. On the other hand,
where the words can support more than one reasonable meaning, the ordinary
meaning of the words plays a lesser role. The relative effects of ordinary
meaning, context and purpose on the interpretive process may vary, but in all
cases the court must seek to read the provisions of an Act as a harmonious
whole. [para. 10]   29                             
The Chief Justice and Major J. then addressed the underlying tension
between textual interpretation, taxpayers’ expectations as to the reliability
of their tax and business arrangements, the legislature’s objectives and the
purposes of specific provisions or of the statute as a whole:  As a result of the
Duke of Westminster principle (Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. Duke of
Westminster, [1936] A.C. 1 (H.L.)) that taxpayers are entitled to arrange
their affairs to minimize the amount of tax payable, Canadian tax legislation
received a strict interpretation in an era of more literal statutory
interpretation than the present. There is no doubt today that all statutes,
including the Income Tax Act , must be interpreted in a textual,
contextual and purposive way. However, the particularity and detail of many tax
provisions have often led to an emphasis on textual interpretation. Where
Parliament has specified precisely what conditions must be satisfied to achieve
a particular result, it is reasonable to assume that Parliament intended that
taxpayers would rely on such provisions to achieve the result they prescribe.
[para. 11]  (See also Mathew, at paras. 42-43.)   30                             
Keeping in mind those principles and the tension between them, our Court
must now determine the meaning of s. 20(1) (f).  The provision includes a
rough equation or mathematical formula.  The problem is understanding what
should go into this equation.  E.  Disagreement
About the Section 20(1) (f) Formula  31                             
As we have seen, s. 3  of the ITA  establishes the basic formula
for the calculation of income under the ITA .  Specifically, it sets out
the various sources of income and provides that capital gains and losses are to
be determined independently of income from sources such as employment, business
and property.  Section 9  defines income from a business as the taxpayer’s
profit from that business.  Section 9  is subject to s. 18 , which prohibits the
deduction of certain amounts in computing income from business or property. 
Section 18(1) (b) prohibits the deduction of amounts paid on account of
capital.  32                             
The respondents in both cases issued the debentures to raise financial
capital and the borrowing is accordingly on capital account.  Any costs related
to that borrowing are therefore “payment[s] on account of capital” within the
meaning of s. 18(1) (b) of the ITA  and, as such,  are not
deductible from income unless the deduction thereof is expressly permitted. 
Similarly, any foreign exchange loss on the debentures would be a payment on
account of capital because the characterization of a foreign exchange gain or
loss generally follows the characterization of the underlying transaction: Shell
Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 622, at para. 68; Tip Top Tailors
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1957] S.C.R. 703, at p. 707.  As was
mentioned above, s. 20  of the ITA  provides for a number of deductions
for capital outlays “[n]otwithstanding paragraphs 18(1) (a), (b)
and (h)”.  The instant cases turn on the proper interpretation of the
deduction encompassed by s. 20(1) (f).  Specifically, the question is
whether the deduction provided for in para. (f) is exclusively one for
original issue discounts or whether it is instead a broader deduction that
applies more generally to the capital cost of borrowing.  33                             
The formula described in s. 20(1) (f) is as follows:                                                 X
= [lesser of A or B] – [C]  where  X is the amount of the deduction; A is the principal amount of the obligation; B is all amounts paid in the year or in any preceding
year in satisfaction of the principal amount; and C is the amount for which the obligation was issued.  34                             
The parties agree that all the amounts must be converted into Canadian
dollars.  They further agree that C (the issue amount) must be converted at the
exchange rate on the date of issue (1989) and that B (the amounts actually
paid) must be converted at the exchange rate on the date of disposition (1999
and 2000).  The parties disagree about the exchange rate applicable to the
calculation of A (the principal amount).  The appellant submits that A is a
fixed amount in Canadian dollars as of the issue date, while the respondents
submit that for an obligation issued in foreign currency, the principal amount
(A) fluctuates with the exchange rate and is not fixed until the date of
disposition.  35                             
In Imperial Oil, Miller J. concluded that the calculation could
be performed entirely in U.S. dollars, with the result (X) then being converted
into Canadian dollars.  In the alternative, he stated that all the amounts
(including the issue amount) should be converted into Canadian dollars as of
the date of disposition.  The result of Miller J.’s approach is to include the
foreign exchange loss attributable to the discount amount in the s. 20(1) (f)
deduction, but to leave the whole of the foreign exchange loss on the redeemed
debentures for the computation of a capital gain or loss under s. 39 of the
Act.  At the Federal Court of Appeal, Sharlow J.A. agreed with the respondents
that all elements of the formula must be converted into Canadian dollars and
that the principal amount (A) of the obligation is not fixed until the date of
disposition.  The result of Sharlow J.A.’s approach is to include the whole of
the foreign exchange loss on the debentures in the s. 20(1) (f)
deduction.  36                             
It is interesting to note that the interpretive difficulty in the cases
at bar seems to stem primarily from the introduction of a foreign exchange
element into the statutory formula.  If the debentures had been issued in
Canadian dollars, the meaning and application of s. 20(1) (f) would be
relatively clear.  In such a case, it appears that the only clear referent of
s. 20(1) (f) would be original issue discounts — shallow discounts in
subpara. (i) and deep discounts in subpara. (ii).  When a loan obligation
denominated in foreign currency is involved, the application of s. 20(1) (f)
becomes less clear.  The Minister’s position puts a greater emphasis on
discerning Parliament’s intent, from both extrinsic and intrinsic evidence,
while the respondents’ position leans more towards a textual interpretation,
starting from the definition of “principal amount” in s. 248(1)  and the use of
that same expression in other provisions of the ITA .  While the Minister
argues that s. 20(1) (f) is limited to original issue discounts, the
respondents argue that s. 20(1) (f) was intended to cover both
discounts and other capital costs of borrowing.  37                             
In my opinion, the greatest difficulty with these appeals stems from the
fact that all parties agree, as did the Federal Court of Appeal, that Gaynor
stands for the proposition that each element of a statutory formula in the ITA 
must be converted into Canadian dollars in order to determine the amount that
may be deducted pursuant to the provision in question.  The effect of this
position would be to make it easier to roll foreign exchange gains and losses
over into other deductions, such as the s. 20(1) (f) deduction at issue
in the instant cases.  Miller J. rejected this position in Imperial Oil,
concluding that the amount referred to in s. 20(1) (f) could be
determined in foreign currency, with only the result being translated
into Canadian dollars.  If Gaynor does not compel the conversion of each
element of a statutory formula into Canadian dollars, then the interpretive
exercise is simpler and it is possible to focus more squarely on discerning
whether Parliament intended the foreign exchange losses to be deductible under
s. 20(1) (f).  38                             
To resolve this problem, I will begin by addressing a line of cases
cited by the respondent, Imperial Oil, for the proposition that foreign currency
is no different from any other commodity under Canadian tax law.  If this
proposition holds, it would strengthen the case for bringing fluctuations in
the value of foreign currency into the s. 20(1) (f) equation.  I
will then turn to a discussion of Gaynor and the related U.K. case law
examined by Miller J. in Imperial Oil.  F.  Money
as a Commodity  39                             
Imperial Oil submits that, in Canada, foreign currency does not differ
from any other commodity.  A foreign amount is unknown to Canadian law unless
it is converted into Canadian dollars.  Such a conversion is required in order
to properly interpret and apply the s. 20(1) (f) formula.  Imperial Oil
argues that a strong body of case law supports its position.  But do the cases
it cites really stand for this proposition and for the legal consequences it
draws from them?  I will now turn to the cases in question to determine what
principles can be drawn from them.  40                             
In Tip Top Tailors, the taxpayer company purchased quantities of
cloth in Great Britain.  The taxpayer’s normal practice was to pay for each lot
by purchasing sterling at the prevailing exchange rate.  In 1948, the taxpayer
foresaw that the pound sterling would be devalued and arranged for a line of
credit on a British bank account that would not have to be repaid until the end
of the year.  The taxpayer recorded the individual purchases in the Canadian
dollar amount at the exchange rate prevailing at the time of the purchases.  At
the end of the year, when the line of credit was repaid, the pound had in fact
been devalued and the taxpayer realized a profit.  The issue was whether that
profit was a capital gain or on income account.  The Court held that the debt
had been created in the course of trade and that any foreign exchange gain realized
on the debt was on income account.  41                             
The facts in Eli Lilly and Co. (Canada) Ltd. v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1955] S.C.R. 745, were analogous.  In that case, the taxpayer
company purchased goods from its U.S. parent company.  The taxpayer was billed
in U.S. dollars but did not settle the account for a number of years, entering
the amount of indebtedness for each year in its books in Canadian dollars.  In
the tax year in question, the Canadian dollar attained parity with the U.S. dollar
and the taxpayer settled the account.  The taxpayer sought to claim the
“Foreign Exchange Premium Reduction” as a capital gain.  Estey J., writing for
the majority, held that the cost of exchange arising out of fluctuations in
foreign currency is an ordinary expense in relation to foreign trade and that
it must be accounted for in the computation of income tax.  42                             
In Alberta Gas Trunk Line Co. v. Minister of National Revenue,
[1972] S.C.R. 498, the taxpayer entered into a contract for the transportation
of natural gas.  The payments the taxpayer received on that contract were
partly in Canadian dollars and partly in U.S. dollars.  The taxpayer argued
that the U.S. dollar portion of the payments were in fact part of a second
promise to indemnify the taxpayer for any losses it might incur on certain USD
amounts it had borrowed.  The Court rejected this characterization,
concluding that the USD amounts received were in payment of services rendered. 
It accordingly held that the full (i.e., Canadian dollar) value of the amounts
had to be included in income under s. 3  of the ITA .  43                             
Imperial Tobacco Co. v. Kelly, [1943] 2 All E.R. 119 (C.A.), is
analogous to the Canadian cases.  In that case, the taxpayer company was a
tobacco manufacturer that had purchased large quantities of tobacco leaf from
the United States.  In order to finance these purchases, the company had
purchased quantities of U.S. dollars sufficient to cover its U.S. dollar
purchases and expenses for the year.  When the war broke out in 1939, at the
request of the Treasury, the taxpayer stopped all further purchases of tobacco
leaf in the United States and was, as a result, left with a large holding of
U.S. dollars.  The taxpayer sold its surplus dollars to the Treasury, as it was
required to do, and realized a profit on that exchange.  44                             
The taxpayer argued that the profit was a capital gain realized on a
temporary investment in foreign currency.  The Court of Appeal disagreed,
concluding that the foreign exchange gain was directly linked to the taxpayer’s
ordinary commercial operation and that it should be included in income.  Lord
Greene, M.R., stated that the company “ha[d] sold a surplus stock of dollars
which it had acquired for the purpose of effecting a transaction on revenue account”
(p. 121).  He added that in the circumstances, the U.S. dollars functioned as a
commodity in that, like other commodities, their value in relation to sterling
was a fluctuating one.  I doubt that this observation can, as the respondent
suggests, be fairly interpreted to mean that foreign currency necessarily
has the character of a commodity.  It seems to follow from the characterization
of the foreign currency as inventory such that any profits arising out
of its sale would be on income, not on capital, account.  45                             
In my view, the above cases stand for the proposition that foreign
exchange gains and losses incurred in relation to foreign trade cannot be
separated from the underlying transaction such that the foreign exchange gain
or loss would be on capital account while the underlying transaction would be
on income account.  In such a case, the foreign exchange gain or loss is an
intrinsic element of the price received or paid for a company’s goods and must
be included in the computation of income.  Where, as in Kelly, the
underlying transaction falls through for some reason, a foreign exchange gain
that was incurred in relation to that transaction is not transformed into a
capital transaction.  The effect of converting foreign currency amounts into
Canadian dollars is simply to consider the foreign exchange gain or loss to be
on the same account as the underlying transaction.  The above cases are not of
assistance in the cases at bar, where it is common ground that but for an
express statutory provision, the foreign exchange loss would be on capital
account because the borrowing was on capital account.  The difficulty here lies
in discerning whether Parliament intended, in enacting s. 20(1) (f), to
make the capital cost of borrowing in a foreign currency deductible from
business income.  G.  Conversion
Under Gaynor v. The Queen and Related British Case Law   46                             
While both parties rely on Gaynor in seeking the proper
interpretation of s. 20(1) (f), each of them puts its own spin on
that decision.  Given the importance that appears to have been attached to the
so-called “Gaynor principle” in the courts below and in this Court, it
is worth having a good, hard look at that case.  At the same time, it will be
helpful to consider the related British cases reviewed by Miller J. in his
discussion of Gaynor in order to determine whether the “Gaynor
principle” really exists and whether it justifies the proposition that all
elements of a statutory formula in Canadian tax law must be converted into
Canadian dollars.  47                             
In Gaynor, the taxpayer was a U.S. citizen who was ordinarily
resident in Canada.  In the tax year at issue, she disposed of certain U.S.
securities and reinvested the proceeds of that disposition into other U.S.
securities.  As the proceeds were never converted into Canadian dollars, the
taxpayer calculated her capital gains using the exchange rate prevailing on the
date of disposition to convert both her adjusted cost base and the proceeds of
disposition, the result being that any gain or loss in the Canadian dollar
value of the securities was excluded from her calculation.  At the Tax Court of
Canada, Sarchuk T.C.J. rejected the argument that the foreign exchange gain or
loss should be reported only when foreign currency was  actually exchanged: 87
D.T.C. 279.  He held that capital gains and losses are by statutory definition
the difference between the adjusted cost base and the proceeds of disposition
and that each of these amounts had to be converted into Canadian dollars at the
exchange rate prevailing at the relevant time.  Sarchuk T.C.J.’s decision was
upheld by Pinard J. of the Federal Court—Trial Division (88 D.T.C. 6394) and
Pratte J.A. of the Federal Court of Appeal (91 D.T.C. 5288).  Pratte J.A.
noted that Canadian currency “is the only monetary standard of value known to
Canadian law” (p. 5289) and that both the cost of the capital asset and the
proceeds of disposition had to be expressed in Canadian dollars.  The parties
in the instant case rely on this to argue that every amount in a statutory
formula must be converted into Canadian dollars.  Miller J. disputed this view
and turned for assistance to a line of British cases dealing with the same
issue the court had grappled with in Gaynor.  48                             
In one of those cases, Bentley v. Pike (1981), 53 T.C. 590, the
facts were analogous to the facts in Gaynor.  The High Court of Justice
(Chancery Division) took the same approach to the conversion of foreign
currency amounts into sterling as the Federal Court of Appeal would take in Gaynor. 
Vinelott J. acknowledged that the taxpayer was being called on to pay capital
gains tax on a (notional) foreign exchange gain arising out of the devaluation
of sterling, but he held that this was the only justifiable approach under the
capital gains tax legislation.  49                             
In Pattison (Inspector of Taxes) v. Marine Midland Ltd., [1984]
A.C. 362 (H.L.), the taxpayer was an international banking company.  In 1971,
the taxpayer had borrowed US$15 million by issuing loan stock and had used that
money to lend U.S. dollars to its banking customers.  In 1976, the loans to its
banking customers had all been repaid (in U.S. dollars) and the taxpayer
redeemed the loan stock.  Between 1971 and 1976, the pound had depreciated such
that the sterling equivalent of the amount the taxpayer had to repay in 1976
was greater than the sterling equivalent of the amount it received in that
year.  The inspector of taxes sought to characterize that loss as a capital
loss that was not deductible in computing the taxpayer company’s profits.  He
also sought to characterize as an income profit the correlative foreign exchange
gain that the taxpayer (notionally) had realized on the loans it had made to
its banking customers.  At all material times, the taxpayer had sufficient U.S.
dollar assets to meet its U.S. dollar liabilities, and the dollars were never
converted into sterling.  The House of Lords held that there was no gain or
loss on either capital or income account, because no profit can arise from the
simple return of the very thing borrowed.  Lord Templeman explained that “a
profit or loss may be earned or suffered if a borrower changes the currency he
borrows but that profit or loss arises from the exchange transaction and not
from the borrowing” (p. 372).  Because there had been no conversion of the U.S.
dollar, there could be no profit or loss in the circumstances.  50                             
The decision in Pattison is illustrative because, as the taxpayer
had pointed out, the inspector’s position was predicated on a conversion of the
principal sums into sterling  amounts.  Without such a conversion, the amount
repaid (US$15 million) would equal the amount borrowed and there would be no
profit or loss to report in the company’s tax return.  The taxpayer argued that
only profits actually realized should be converted into their sterling
amounts.  It seems implicit that in accepting the taxpayer’s position, the
House of Lords rejected the proposition that the principal sums had to be
converted into sterling amounts.  51                             
In Capcount Trading v. Evans (1992), 65 T.C. 545 (C.A.), the
taxpayer argued that Pattison and Pike were inconsistent and that
Pattison ought to prevail such that the capital gain the taxpayer had
realized on the disposition of certain (foreign) shares could be calculated by
deducting the foreign currency cost from the foreign currency proceeds and
converting the result into sterling at the rate prevailing on the date of
disposition.  The effect would have been to exclude foreign exchange gains from
the calculation.  Nolan L.J. held that the two cases were not inconsistent
because Pattison concerned income while Pike concerned capital
gains.  H.  Implications
and Application of Gaynor and Related Cases  52                             
In my opinion, Gaynor does not support the proposition that all
elements of a statutory formula must be converted into their Canadian dollar
value at the relevant time. The implications of Gaynor are narrower than
that.  The decision was premised on the prior conclusion that the foreign
exchange gains in issue were capital gains.  Converting the amounts in the
statutory formula merely simplified the method of calculating the amount of the
capital gain in that case, which did not purport to establish a new general
principle.  The British cases I have reviewed do not lend support to such a
proposition either.  53                             
Pattison, the only one of those cases in which conversion of the
amounts at issue into sterling was not required, is distinguishable from
the other two cases in two ways.  First, the underlying assets in both Pike
and Capcount Trading were capital assets, while the underlying asset in Pattison
was (arguably, at least) on income account because the business of the taxpayer
bank was borrowing and lending money.  In the latter case, no conversion was
necessary because the measurement of income is not concerned with the
appreciation or depreciation of particular assets.  Second, in both Pike and
Capcount Trading, there was a disposition of the capital asset, while Pattison
involved a borrower-lender relationship.  Lord Templeman observed in Pattison
that where there is no disposition, but merely a return of the very thing that
was borrowed, the return cannot in itself trigger a profit or loss.  Any such
profit or loss must be rooted in an actual currency exchange transaction.  54                             
Miller J. in the Tax Court below, concluded that the U.K. cases were
consistent with Gaynor, but that the principles articulated in those
cases did not apply to the facts before him.  Specifically, he opined that
currency conversion is appropriate in the capital gains context and suggested,
citing Capcount Trading, that the conceptual basis for this distinction
may lie in the fact that a capital gain, by its very nature, involves measuring
the appreciation or depreciation of a particular asset over time, while
business income does not.  It is not immediately clear how this can be
reconciled with the line of cases discussed above.  Both Tip Top Tailors
and Eli Lilly involved the repayment of debts that were held to be on
income account, and in both cases the Court held that there had been a foreign
exchange gain on the repayment of the foreign currency debt obligation.  I
believe that this can be explained by the facts that the borrower-lender
relationship in those cases arose directly out of the purchaser-vendor
relationship and that there was an actual currency conversion (and, as a
result, an actual foreign exchange gain), such that the foreign exchange
gain was an integral part of the purchase price of the goods.  55                             
The cases at bar are analogous to Pattison in that they involve
not a disposition, but only the repayment of principal by a debtor to a
creditor.  Although they are distinguishable in that the underlying
transactions are on capital account, whereas the underlying transactions in Pattison
were on income account, I think that the analysis applicable to the
borrower-lender relationship is unique and is not necessarily affected by
whether the debt is on income or capital account.  It was rightly held in Pattison
that without a conversion of currency, the mere repayment of the principal —
the very thing that was borrowed — cannot yield a profit or a loss.  Any
appreciation or depreciation of the principal amount does not result from the
simple fact that it has been borrowed and repaid.  If there is a profit or
loss, it must arise from something other than the borrower-lender relationship per
se.  In the capital gains context, the disposition of a capital asset has
been treated in the cases as an event triggering taxation of the appreciation
or depreciation of that asset in addition to any foreign exchange
gains or losses, whether actual or notional.  In the income context, foreign
exchange gains and losses have been treated as an ordinary expense in carrying
out foreign trade such that, even when incurred in separate transactions, they
must be accounted for in determining the price paid or received for traded
goods.  In such cases, an actual disposition of inventory occurs, and
this disposition triggers a valuation in order to determine the actual price
received for it (in domestic currency).  56                             
The issue then becomes more narrowly focussed.  It will not be resolved
by finding somewhere else a specific statutory rule or judge-made principle
that would mandate the conversion of all statutory formulas in the ITA 
into Canadian dollars.  In the end, the question is still whether s. 20(1) (f)
was intended by Parliament to apply to the appreciation or depreciation of the
obligation, in which case the calculation would be analogous to the computation
of a capital gain, or whether it was intended to apply to an income expense or,
more accurately, a point-in-time expense that would, but for that section, be a
payment on account of capital.  The solution will be found in the text of
s. 20(1) (f), read in context, according to the principles of interpretation
recently reaffirmed by this Court in Canada Trustco and Mathew. 
None of the interpretive aids invoked by the parties, which I will now briefly
turn to, are determinative.  I.  Interpretive
Aids  57                             
The parties have called upon various auxiliary interpretive tools to
back up their submissions on the interpretation and scope of the statute.  The
Minister has even sought support for his position in the marginal notes, which
refer to a “discount”.  Although marginal notes are not entirely devoid of
usefulness, their value is limited for a court that must address a serious
problem of statutory interpretation.  I would be loath to rely on one for that
purpose and will return to the text of the statute itself, after considering
some additional interpretive arguments raised by the litigants.  58                             
The Minister also relies on statements made in the House of Commons at
the time of the addition of s. 20(1) (f) to the ITA , and on
Technical Notes issued by the Department of Finance to explain the addition of,
and amendments to s. 20(1) (f).  Putting aside the question of the weight
that should be given to these interpretive aids, the difficulty with the
Minister’s arguments is that although both of these sources support the view
that discounts were in the contemplation of Parliament when it enacted s.
20(1) (f), neither goes so far as to suggest that s. 20(1) (f) is restricted
to discounts.  Since this is the very restriction the respondents are
contesting, the interpretive aids invoked by the Minister are not dispositive
of the issue, although they may shed some light on Parliament’s intention.  59                             
The question of the impact of the interpretive practice allegedly
adopted by the Minister is more troubling.  Imperial Oil puts a heavy emphasis
on conflicting applications of s. 20(1) (f) by the Minister in respect of
various categories of transactions.  In particular, it raises the tax treatment
of commodity based loans to prairie farmers in the 1980s or later and the case
of a class of debt instruments known as “exchangeable debentures”: Income Tax
Rulings Directorate, Technical Interpretation No. 9703377, April 17, 1997;
Income Tax Rulings Directorate,  Advance Income Tax Ruling No. 2000-0060103, January 1, 2001. 
The appellant has offered no clear explanation why, in the Minister’s view,
s. 20(1) (f) would apply to variations in the principal amounts of
debt instruments of those classes.  However, much as they are to be deplored,
inconsistent administrative practices are not the determinative factor in
statutory interpretation.  We must nevertheless return to the statute itself
and to the scope of its application in respect of the specific transactions at
issue in these appeals (Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29, at
p. 37).  If an interpretation is wrong, it does not make law.  Estoppel by
interpretation has not yet become a recognized doctrine of statutory
construction.  60                             
In addition to Gaynor, the parties rely on a number of statutory
provisions in support of the proposition that all amounts referred to in the ITA 
must be converted into Canadian dollars.  Section 248(1)  of the ITA  defines
“amount” as “money, rights or things expressed in terms of the amount of money
or the value in terms of money of the right or thing”.  The parties rely on
that definition in conjunction with the provisions of the Currency Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-52 , to argue that wherever the word “amount” appears in the
ITA , it must refer to an amount in Canadian dollars.  Section 14  of the Currency
Act  provides that “[a]ny sum mentioned in dollars and cents in . . . any
Act of Parliament shall, unless it is otherwise expressed, be construed as
being a sum in the currency of Canada.”  Section 3(1) of the same statute
provides that the monetary unit of Canada is the dollar.  In my opinion, these
provisions do not go so far as to support the parties’ contention that wherever
the word “amount” is used in the ITA , it must refer to an amount in
Canadian dollars.  J.  Interpretation
of Section 20(1) (f)  61                             
The respondents’ argument places much emphasis on the statutory
definition of “principal amount” in s. 248(1)  of the ITA , which
contemplates the possibility that the principal amount can fluctuate (e.g.,
where an obligation is repaid in increments and “principal” refers to the
outstanding portion of the obligation).  However, that definition does not
expressly address whether or how foreign currency fluctuations are to be taken
into account in determining the “principal amount” of an obligation denominated
in foreign currency.  In my opinion, the arguments based on the use of the
phrase “maximum amount” in the definition of “principal amount” fail because
there is no indication that foreign currency conversions were in Parliament’s
contemplation when that section was drafted.  Whether foreign exchange losses
are covered by s. 20(1) (f) must be ascertained with respect to the text,
scheme and context of that provision.  62                             
Although the word “discount” does not appear in s. 20(1) (f), the
opening words of s. 20(1) (f)(i) set out what is commonly accepted as the
definition of a discount.  Moreover, there is no express mention in s. 20(1)(f)
of a foreign currency exchange.  These facts suggest that the primary
referent of s. 20(1) (f) is something other than foreign exchange
losses, namely, payments in the nature of discounts.  As a result, the
appropriate approach is to begin by determining the meaning of s. 20(1) (f)
in the context of Canadian dollar obligations, and then to consider whether
foreign currency losses are comparable such that they would also be covered by
that provision.  Where an obligation is denominated (and repayable) in Canadian
dollars, the issue of a fluctuating principal amount does not arise.  In such
cases, the formulas in s. 20(1) (f) have the effect of isolating the
difference between the face value (principal amount) of the obligation and the
amount for which it was issued (i.e., the “discount”).  Where the discount is
3% or less (i.e., a “shallow discount”), it is fully deductible from income
under s. 20(1) (f)(i), and where it is more than 3% (i.e., a “deep
discount”), it is deductible at the capital rate (75% at the relevant time for
the instant case).  In the context of debts issued and repayable in Canadian
dollars, each branch of s. 20(1) (f) has a clear application and together
they encompass what are generally referred to as original issue discounts (see
V. Krishna, The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax (8th ed. 2004), at
pp. 353 and 722).  In this context, the deduction in s. 20(1) (f) is in
respect of a point-in-time expense that is actually incurred only when the debt
is repaid — it does not encompass the appreciation or depreciation of the
principal amount over time (see reasons of Miller J. at para. 44).  63                             
The question in the case at bar is whether, where the obligation is
denominated or repaid in something other than Canadian dollars, s. 20(1) (f)
encompasses the cost of dealing in commodities or foreign currencies.  To address
this question, a closer look at the wording of s. 20(1) (f) is required. 
Section 20(1) (f)(i) applies “in any case where the obligation was issued
for an amount not less than 97% of its principal amount”, while s. 20(1) (f)(ii)
applies “in any other case”.  In its factum, the respondent Imperial Oil
concedes that the words of s. 20(1) (f)(i) describe “shallow discounts of
the principal amount of up to 3% to account for market fluctuations in the
interest rate between the time of setting the rate and the time of issue”
(Imperial Oil’s factum, at p. 8).  It argues, however, that s. 20(1) (f)(ii)
contemplates the capital cost of all borrowing (including deep
discounts) such that it encompasses the foreign exchange losses incurred in the
present case.  The question, then, is whether the opening words — “in any other
case” — of s. 20(1) (f)(ii) refer to “any case in which the obligation
was issued for an amount less than 97%” or to “any case in which the cost of
repaying the principal amount exceeds the amount for which the debt was
issued”.  64                             
In my opinion, Parliament intended s. 20(1) (f)(i) to apply to
shallow discounts.  Further, the better reading of the opening words of s.
20(1) (f)(ii) is the one that preserves a higher degree of parallelism of
expression (i.e., “any case in which the obligation was issued for an amount
less than 97%”).  This reading is consistent with the Technical Notes issued by
the Minister in 1988 (reasons of Miller J., at para. 56).  This does not
dispose of the matter, however, because if the “principal amount” can fluctuate
with the cost of repayment in Canadian dollars, then the “discount amount” can
be ascertained in relation to the value of the principal in Canadian dollars at
the time of repayment, rather than in relation to the face value of the
obligation (i.e., the term “discount” may not be limited to “original issue
discounts” but may encompass discounts that arise out of fluctuations of
commodity or currency prices over time).  To resolve this issue, it is
necessary to determine whether Parliament intended foreign exchange losses to
be covered by s. 20(1) (f) in the same way as discounts.  65                             
As the respondent Imperial Oil notes, Parliament encourages companies to
raise capital by allowing them to deduct virtually all costs of borrowing under
the provisions of s. 20(1) .  The respondent accordingly argues that a
restrictive approach to the interpretation of s. 20(1) (f) is not
warranted.  On the other hand, the appellant refers to s. 18(1) (b),
which provides that payments on account of capital may not be deducted from
business income unless the deduction thereof is expressly permitted.  Like
Miller J. and Bonner J., I am not convinced that the cost of dealing
in a foreign currency is an intrinsic cost of borrowing for the purposes of the
ITA  (see reasons of Bonner J., at para. 19).  While the other
deductions in s. 20(1)  relate to expenses that arise directly out of the
borrower-lender relationship, a foreign exchange loss is a cost of borrowing
only where the thing borrowed is foreign currency.  For this reason, I
am not persuaded by the respondents’ argument that the scheme of s. 20 , which
provides deductions for virtually all costs of borrowing, implies that foreign
exchange losses are also deductible under s. 20 .  The other costs
enumerated in s. 20  are intrinsic costs of borrowing, such as interest payments
and premiums.  Foreign exchange losses arise only where the debtor chooses to
deal in foreign currency.  They belong to a different class than the costs
referred to in s. 20 .  As a result, the scheme of s. 20 , although not
dispositive, does not assist the respondent.  66                             
If s. 20(1)(f) applied to foreign exchange losses, the section
would operate quite differently in relation to obligations denominated in
foreign currency than it does in relation to obligations denominated in
Canadian dollars.  In the context of foreign currency obligations, the
deduction would reflect the appreciation or depreciation of the principal
amount over time, whereas in the context of Canadian dollar obligations, the
deduction would reflect a point-in-time expense.  In the context of foreign
currency obligations, the s. 20(1)(f) deduction would accordingly be
available even where, as in Inco, there was no original issue discount. 
The respondents’ approach also has the effect of altering the distinction
between the two branches of s. 20(1)(f).  Where fluctuations in the
principal amount are not at issue, the distinction between the two branches is
based on the “depth” of the discount.  This is an amount that the taxpayer
fixes when the debt instruments are issued and, as a result, a differential tax
treatment can create incentives to structure obligations in a particular way. 
On the respondents’ approach, the distinction between shallow and deep
discounts is collapsed and replaced by a distinction of a different nature —
one that can be ascertained only at the time of repayment.  67                             
In my view, s. 20(1)(f) was never intended to apply to foreign
exchange losses.  As we have seen above, a number of factors, which generally
relate to the wording of the provision, are determinative in this respect. 
This interpretation best reflects the structure of the ITA  and the
intent of Parliament.  The purpose of the provision is to address a specific
class of financing costs arising out of the issuance of debt instruments at a
discount.  The interpretation advanced by the respondents in these appeals, on
the other hand, turns s. 20(1) (f) into a broad provision allowing for
the deductibility of a wide range of costs attendant upon financing in foreign
currency, in the absence of any mention of such costs in the text of the ITA ,
and despite the fact that such costs are usually regarded as being on capital
account.  68                             
The respondents’ interpretation thus conflicts with the general
treatment of capital gains and losses in the ITA .  In particular, it
indicates a failure to properly appreciate the role of s. 39 .  Although it is
true that s. 39  is a residual provision, this section is also a statement of
Parliament’s intent to treat foreign exchange losses as capital losses.  In
addition, if Inco’s submissions were correct, s. 20(1) (f) would apply to
a class of financing costs that clearly lie beyond its reach.  Section 20(1) (f)
was designed to address the consequences of repayment of the debenture, not of
its repurchase on the open market for cancellation purposes.  V.  Disposition  69                             
For these reasons, I would allow the appeals, set aside the judgments of
the Federal Court of Appeal, and confirm the Minister’s assessments, as varied
by Miller J. in the Imperial Oil case, with costs throughout.  The reasons of Binnie, Fish and Charron JJ. were delivered by  Binnie J. (dissenting) _  I.  Introduction  70                             
Canadian capital markets are of relatively modest size, and it is common
for corporations requiring significant amounts of capital to look elsewhere in
the world for financing.  Foreign lenders are prepared to give a preferred
interest rate for a debt denominated in a currency with which they are familiar
and which they consider stable, such as the U.S. dollar, a reserve currency. 
However, in the nature of things foreign currencies fluctuate in value against
the Canadian dollar.  These fluctuations are not incidental or collateral to
the foreign debt transaction but are as inherent and inescapable as if the debt
was denominated in bars of silver.  The respondent taxpayers in these cases
both issued debentures denominated in U.S. dollars, which they subsequently
retired at a time when the U.S. dollar was trading at a higher premium to the
Canadian dollar than it had at the date of issuance.  71                             
In discharging the foreign debt any adverse swing in the foreign
exchange rate since its issuance will add to the “maximum total amount . . .
payable on account of the obligation” (definition of “principal amount”:  Income
Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), s. 248(1) ) that is to be taken
into account in determining the appropriate income tax deduction of the “amount
paid in the year in satisfaction of the principal amount of any . . . debenture
. . . or similar obligation” (s. 20(1) (f)).  The Federal Court of
Appeal therefore allowed the respondent taxpayers to deduct the excess cost to
them of purchasing the requisite U.S. funds to satisfy their U.S. debenture
obligations over and above the amount in Canadian dollars received by them at the
date of issuance.  72                             
I have read the reasons of my colleague LeBel J. proposing to allow the
Crown’s appeals.  I respectfully disagree with his conclusion that the language
of s. 20(1)(f) should be read as limited to “original issue
discounts”.  As he notes, no such restriction is expressed in the section and I
would not imply it.  For the reasons that follow, I believe the taxpayers’
claim fits squarely with s. 20(1)(f) and I would dismiss the
Crown’s appeals.  II.  Analysis  A.  Overview  73                             
The Income Tax Act  is the battlefield on which over 21 million
Canadian taxpayers engage with the Minister of National Revenue (“Minister”)
and his or her various tax assessors, adjudicators and collectors.  The rules
of engagement, hammered out in countless rulings, adjudications and statutory
amendments, are immensely complex.  Issues of interpretation can be approached
with a degree of confidence that in the various detailed provisions of the Act,
Parliament can be taken at its word (or will quickly introduce an amendment if
this turns out not to be the case).  As the Court pointed out in Canada
Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC 54:  . . . the particularity and detail of many tax provisions have often
led to an emphasis on textual interpretation. Where Parliament has specified
precisely what conditions must be satisfied to achieve a particular result, it
is reasonable to assume that Parliament intended that taxpayers would rely on
such provisions to achieve the result they prescribe. [para. 11]   74                             
My colleague has fully outlined the relevant facts and background.  I
agree with him that “the question is whether the deduction provided for in
para. (f) is exclusively one for original issue discounts or
whether it is instead a broader deduction that applies more generally to the
capital cost of borrowing” (para. 32 (emphasis added)).  I note,
parenthetically, that in the course of oral argument the Court raised the
question of whether Inco’s purchase of 1992 debentures on the open market
(described by LeBel J. at para. 3) was an amount paid “in satisfaction of [its]
principal amount” within the meaning of s. 20(1)(f).  The Crown
indicated that it did not construe s. 20(1)(f) to exclude “those
repurchases” (transcript, at  p. 23).  75                             
LeBel J. and I also agree that the interpretation of the Income Tax
Act , as with any statute, must proceed on the basis of a “textual,
contextual and purposive analysis” while keeping in mind, as the Court said
when interpreting the Income Tax Act  in Canada Trustco, at para.
10, that “[w]hen the words of a provision are precise and unequivocal, the
ordinary meaning of the words play a dominant role in the interpretive process”
(a point reiterated by my colleague at para. 28).  76                             
I would add (and there seems to be no disagreement on this point as
well) that Canadian tax law knows only Canadian dollars: Eli Lilly and Co.
(Canada) Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1955] S.C.R. 745, at p.
750.  This means that for calculations required by the Income Tax Act  an
“amount” of foreign currency must at some point be converted into Canadian
dollars.  The dispute between the Minister and the taxpayers, simply put, is
whether this conversion should be done at the foreign exchange rate prevailing
at the date of issuance of the debentures (as the Minister contends) or the
foreign exchange rate at the date of redemption, when the actual cost to the
taxpayer can be ascertained (as the taxpayers contend).  77                             
We have the advantage of full and meticulous reasons from Sharlow J.A.
of the Federal Court of Appeal in the Imperial Oil case ([2005] 1 C.T.C.
65, 2004 FCA 361), adopted by a different panel of that court in the Inco
case ([2005] 1 C.T.C. 369, 2005 FCA 38).  I agree substantially with her
analysis.  When the relevant language of s.  20(1)(f) and
s. 248(1)  is read in light of the statutory purpose, the only way the
“maximum total amount . . . payable on account of the obligation” can be
ascertained is by using the exchange rate prevailing when the obligation
becomes payable.  It was at that time the “obligation” arose on the part of the
taxpayers to purchase U.S. dollars to retire their debt.  Those U.S. dollars
cost the taxpayers more Canadian dollars than would have been the case at the
exchange rate prevailing when the debentures were issued.  The extra cost of
buying the U.S. dollars payable to satisfy the requirements of the debentures
was part of the cost of the financing arising directly out of the
debtor-creditor relationship.  The source of the taxpayers’ cost was “the
obligation” they had undertaken to pay their debts on the due date in U.S.
dollars.  As it was put by Sharlow J.A.:  A foreign currency loan is the loan of a specified number of units of
foreign currency on terms that require the same number of units of that foreign
currency to be returned to the lender at the end of the term.  It is implicit
in the terms of repayment that the Canadian dollar equivalent of the repayment
may be more or less than the Canadian dollar equivalent of the amount
borrowed.  Thus, the fluctuation in the “principal amount” of the debt, as that
term is defined in the Income Tax Act , is mandated by the contractual
terms governing the debt. [para. 48]   78                             
The Crown’s argument rests on its attempt to bifurcate a single foreign
loan transaction into a “loan” contract and a “foreign exchange” loss, which is
really a variation of what the Crown unsuccessfully argued in Shell Canada
Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 622.  In that case, the Crown tried to
conflate a series of debenture agreements entered into by the taxpayer with the
taxpayer’s separate forward exchange contract.  The conflation would have
resulted in a higher tax liability than without conflation.  The Court rejected
the Crown’s argument because “absent a specific provision of the Act to the
contrary or a finding that they are a sham, the taxpayer’s legal relationships
must be respected in tax cases” (para. 39).  Here, instead of conflation
the Crown seeks to bifurcate, but whether it is bifurcation or conflation the
essential legal objection remains, namely that the Crown’s argument does not
respect the precise nature of the taxpayer’s actual legal relationships and
obligations.  79                             
My colleague LeBel J. initiates his analysis of s. 20(1)(f)
by looking at its operation in the context of a Canadian dollar debenture
(para. 36).  This reflects to some extent the Crown’s attempt to bifurcate the
transaction into a loan transaction and a foreign exchange transaction.  In the
same vein, my colleague concludes at para. 65 that:  While the other deductions in s. 20(1) relate to expenses that
arise directly out of the borrower-lender relationship, a foreign exchange loss
is a cost of borrowing only where the thing borrowed is foreign currency.
[Emphasis in original.]   In my view,
with respect, the foreign currency obligation is a cost that does
arise directly out of these debtor-creditor relationships.  The
“thing borrowed” is the very essence of the contract that defines their
relationship.  As we will see, a foreign currency loan is not the only type of
debt repayment tied to commodity prices considered under s. 20(1)(f). 
Some forms of debt are required to be repaid in the commodities themselves
(e.g.  convertible or exchangeable debentures).  In such cases, the
Minister has routinely allowed a s.  20(1)(f) deduction.  The
Minister has not (and nor should the Minister have) taken the view that
s.  20(1)(f) is limited to “original issue discounts”.  There is no
principled reason to treat foreign currency loans differently.  On this point,
I agree with the observation of Sexton J.A. in a related context:  I do not believe that it is possible to separate the currency of the
borrowed funds from the borrowing itself so as to make the denomination of the
borrowing a discrete transaction in and of itself.  It is the borrowing which
is the transaction, not the denomination of the currency.  (Canada v. Canadian Pacific Ltd., [2002] 3 F.C. 170, 2001 FCA
398, at para. 23)   80                             
Having identified the transaction as a loan in the nature of a commodity
obligation, I turn to a “textual, contextual and purposive” interpretation of
s.  20(1)(f).  B.  The
Text of the Act  81                             
The Act contains a general prohibition in s. 18(1) (b) against the
deduction of capital amounts in computing a taxpayer’s income, subject to a
number of express exceptions which are found at s. 20.  Under s. 20, various
capital amounts are effectively deemed to be income and may thus be deducted
against income from business or property rather than only against allowable
capital gains.  I agree with my colleague that unless the cost of borrowing at
issue in this case falls within the scope of s. 20, it retains its character as
a capital amount and cannot be deducted against income.  82                             
Section 20(1)(f) permits the taxpayer to deduct:  20. (1) . . . (f)  an amount paid in the year in satisfaction of the principal
amount of any bond, debenture, bill, note, mortgage, hypothecary claim or
similar obligation . . . on which interest was stipulated to be payable, to the
extent that the amount so paid does not exceed,  (i)  in any case where the obligation was issued for an amount not less
than 97% of its principal amount, and the yield from the obligation, expressed
in terms of an annual rate . . . does not exceed 4/3 of the interest stipulated
to be payable on the obligation, expressed in terms of an annual rate on  (A)  the principal amount of the obligation, if no amount is
payable on account of the principal amount before the maturity of the
obligation, or  (B)  the amount outstanding from time to time as or on account of the principal
amount of the obligation, in any other case,  the amount by which the lesser of the principal amount of the
obligation and all amounts paid in the year or in any preceding year in
satisfaction of its principal amount exceeds the amount for which the
obligation was issued, and  (ii)  in any other case, 3/4 of the lesser of the amount so paid and
the amount by which the lesser of the principal amount of the obligation
and all amounts paid in the year or in any preceding taxation year in
satisfaction of its principal amount exceeds the amount for which the
obligation was issued;   83                             
Section 20(1)(f) thus permits a deduction of the amount by which
the original issue proceeds of the debt are exceeded by the amount paid in
satisfaction of the principal amount of the debt.  In the present case, the
threshold conditions of s. 20(1)(f) are unquestionably met by the
debentures issued by both Imperial and Inco.  What remains to be determined is
whether the deduction is pursuant to s. 20(1)(f)(i) or (ii) and,
more importantly, the extent of the deduction.  Specifically, does it include
only the original issue discount (as LeBel J. finds) or does the provision
further capture the increase in the cost to the taxpayers of buying U.S.
dollars between the date the obligations were issued and the date they were
satisfied (as held by the Federal Court of Appeal)?  84                             
The repetitive use of the expression “principal amount” nine times in
the course of s. 20(1)(f) signals its importance to the analysis. 
The Crown treats it in this context as equivalent to the “face” amount of the
debenture, but that is not how Parliament has defined “principal amount” in
s. 248(1) :  248. (1) In this Act,  .
. .  “principal amount”, in relation to any
obligation, means the amount that, under the terms of the obligation or any
agreement relating thereto, is the maximum amount or maximum total amount,
as the case may be, payable on account of the obligation by the issuer thereof,
otherwise than as or on account of interest or as or on account of any premium
payable by the issuer conditional on the exercise by the issuer of a right to
redeem the obligation before the maturity thereof;  85                             
As Sharlow J.A. put it, “the question in this case becomes this: what
was the maximum amount payable on account of the debentures immediately before
they were redeemed on October 15, 1999 (disregarding interest and the
redemption premium)?” (para. 43)  86                             
It is in the nature of a contract to pay at a future date foreign
currency (or bars of silver, or any other commodity whose price is subject to
market fluctuation) that the maximum total amount actually “payable on account
of the obligation by the issuer thereof” is unknown and unknowable at the date
of issuance.  The amount that must be paid “in satisfaction of its principal
amount” (s. 20(1)(f)) may, depending on market swings, be either
higher or lower than the equivalent in Canadian dollars of the face value of
the U.S. dollar debentures at the rate prevailing at the date of issue.  The
number of Canadian dollars “payable” to buy the units of foreign currency
necessary to satisfy the contractual obligation can only be ascertained at the
date fixed for redemption.  It is the redemption not the issuance that triggers
the tax deduction.  The only time Canadian dollars are deployed “in
satisfaction of its principal amount” (to quote s. 20(1)(f)(ii)) is
the date of redemption.  It follows that the relevant exchange rate is the rate
prevailing at the date of redemption.  It is not until that date that it is
possible to determine the “maximum amount . . . payable on account of the
obligation” as required by the statutory definition of “principal amount”.  The
Crown’s interpretation, by way of contrast, is that “principal amount” should
be taken to mean the Canadian amount the taxpayers would have required
to purchase enough U.S. dollars to retire the debentures on the date of their issuance
(which, of course, was not part of the obligation the taxpayers actually
entered into).  Such a construction has nothing to do with the reality of the
taxpayers’ obligations and should, I believe, be rejected.  87                             
In light of my conclusion that the principal amount of the obligation
must be ascertained at the date of redemption, the debentures in these cases do
not meet the criteria of s.  20(1)(f)(i).  Consequently, the taxpayers
are entitled only to the deduction permitted by s.  20(1)(f)(ii).  C.  The
Minister’s Treatment of Other Commodity-Type Loans Under Section 20(1)(f)   88                             
The Crown’s argument that s. 20(1)(f) is limited to
“original issue discounts” is not only inconsistent with its text, as I have
endeavoured to show, but is also contradicted by the Minister’s acknowledged
practice of applying s. 20(1)(f) to exchangeable, convertible and
commodity-linked debt in a manner that clearly does not limit s. 20(1)(f)
to an “original issue discount”.  Ministerial practice is not binding in the
Court’s interpretation of course, but  [b]y considering administrative interpretations, the courts are merely
recognizing a real or presumed expertise.  At times, an administrative agency
may be required to interpret enactments which it has itself drafted.  Such
authentic interpretation (i.e., by the author) deserves particular
consideration.  .
. .  The rationale is obvious: usage creates
expectations, and the application of a contrary interpretation will sometimes
cause serious prejudice.  A settled interpretation, if consistent with the text
of the enactment, should not be overruled without good reason.  (P.-A. Côté, The Interpretation of Legislation in Canada (3rd
ed.  2000), at pp. 548-49)   89                             
There are a number of relevant instances of ministerial rulings under
s. 20(1)(f) in respect of commodity-based loans, one of which was
cited by Sharlow J.A. (at para. 47): in the 1980s, the Farm Credit Corporation
offered prairie farmers a favourable ten-year mortgage interest rate of 6%, but
required that the principal of the mortgage would increase to the extent that
the price of the corn and wheat grown on the land increased over those ten
years.  It was to that extent a commodity-based loan, and the Minister ruled
that  where it can be said that the taxpayer has paid an amount on account of
principal in excess of the amount for which the obligation was issued, then
paragraph 20(1)(f) would apply.  It is our view that for purposes of paragraph 
20(1)(f) the principal amount under the terms of the [commodity-based loan]
is [the] total amount paid on maturity plus the total of all payments in
satisfaction of principal paid over the life of the obligation. [Emphasis
added.]  (Income Tax Rulings Directorate, Technical Interpretation No. 9703377,
April 17, 1997)   90                             
Similarly, the Minister ruled in 1990 that where a debenture may be
exchanged at maturity for shares (called “target” shares),  [t]he Issuer would be entitled to a deduction under paragraph 20(1)(f)
of the Act with respect to the difference between the fair market value of the
Target Shares (the amount paid in satisfaction of the principal amount)
and the face amount of the debenture (the amount for which it was issued).
[Emphasis added.]  (Income Tax Rulings Directorate, Advance Income Tax Ruling No. 90063-3,
July 30, 1990)   91                             
Again, in the case of convertible debentures, i.e., where the
shares to be delivered are those of the issuing corporation, the Minister ruled
in 2000:  [translation] The
provisions of paragraph 20(1)(f) of the Act will be applicable in the event
that an Issuer is required to repay debentures following the exercise of
exchange rights of the holders . . . and that the amount which the Issuer is
required to pay [i.e., the fair market value of the shares] exceeds the
sum for which the debentures were issued (including the premium on issuance).  (Income Tax Rulings Directorate, Advance Income Tax Ruling No.
1999-0008753, January 1, 2000)   92                             
In none of these situations did the Minister take the view (nor, in my
view, was the Minister entitled to take the view) that s. 20(1)(f)
was restricted to original issue discounts.  Nor did the Minister think that
the principal amount of the obligation within the meaning of s. 20(1)(f)
should be calculated at the price prevailing at the date of issuance rather
than at the price prevailing at the date the borrower was required to buy (or
issue) the commodity to retire the obligation.  The reason is obvious.  The
“principal amount” could not be calculated until the date of payment, issuance,
or redemption because of the fluctuations inherent in commodity pricing, and it
was only on that date that the actual cost of satisfying the “obligation” could
be ascertained in Canadian dollars.  93                             
My colleague acknowledges as “troubling” (para. 59) the Minister’s
consistent position until now that s. 20(1)(f) is not
limited to original issue discounts.  In each of those other instances, the
Minister interpreted the “principal amount” as the maximum total amount payable
at the date of redemption or discharge “on account of the obligation” (s.
248(1) ) and allowed a deduction for the difference in “commodity price” between
the date of issuance and the date of payment.  94                             
I believe the Minister was correctly interpreting s. 20(1)(f)
in those other cases and is wrong now to try to read down the words to
encompass only original issue discounts.  95                             
In my view, there is no principled basis to distinguish a debt
obligation denominated in a foreign currency and the above-mentioned instances
of a debt obligation requiring repayment in, or based on the price of, a
commodity, the value of which is not known at the time of the borrowing.  96                             
Equally, as pointed out by counsel for the intervener Teck Cominco
Limited, “there is no reason justifying a treatment different between debt
obligations issued at a discount and debt obligations repaid at a premium: in
both situations the borrower has repaid more than it has borrowed” (factum, at
para. 9).  97                             
Accordingly, unless some latent ambiguity or difficulty is raised by a
consideration of the words of s. 20(1)(f) in the larger context of
the Income Tax Act  as a whole or overriding conflict with some
demonstrated legislative purpose, the conclusion of the Federal Court of Appeal
in these cases should be upheld.  D.  The
Context of the Act  98                             
I agree with my colleague that the marginal notes referring to
“discounts” relied on by the Crown are unhelpful because everyone agrees
s. 20(1)(f) applies to discounts.  The question is whether, as my
colleague says, s. 20(1)(f) is “restricted to discounts”
(para. 58 (emphasis in original)).  99                             
The Crown puts some reliance on the inter-relationship between
s. 20(1)(f) and s. 39(2) .  The latter section says in effect
that a gain or loss on capital account that is caused by a change in the value
of a foreign currency relative to Canadian currency is deemed to be a capital
gain or loss from the disposition of foreign currency.  However, by its own
terms, s. 39(2)  is confined to a residual status and applies only to the
extent that a foreign currency loss is not otherwise deductible in computing
income. As observed by Miller J. in his trial judgment in Imperial Oil:  [The Crown’s] approach however puts the cart before the horse.  In the
ordering of the Act, foreign exchange losses under subsection 39(2)  only
follow after the appropriate deduction under section 20 has been taken. So, I
do not accept that one can calculate what may seem logical under subsection
39(2)  and work back to limit a paragraph 20(1)(f) deduction.  This is not
a matter of specific provisions overriding general provisions, but is more a
matter of how the Act provides a road map for the computation of income,
primarily in section 3 .  ([2004] 2 C.T.C. 3030, 2004 TCC 207, at para. 16)   100                         
More relevant, it seems to me, is that in sections of the Income Tax
Act  dealing with specific situations such as mortgage foreclosure
(s. 79 ) and debt forgiveness (s. 80 ), Parliament has specified that
the calculations are to be based on the value of the foreign debt in Canadian
currency at the time of the issuance date.  There is no such specification in
s. 20(1) (f), which has a much broader focus and purpose, as is
shown by the Minister’s treatment of exchangeable, convertible and
commodity-based debt.  101                         
Notwithstanding these observations, I agree with my colleague LeBel J.
that there is little help to be had from other sections of the Act. In these
circumstances, subject to overall considerations of purpose, the text of
s. 20(1)(f) and s. 248(1)  provide the best guidance to
Parliament’s intent with respect to the deductibility of foreign exchange
losses in this context under the Income Tax Act .  E.  The
Purpose of the Act  102                         
My colleague concludes that s. 20(1)(f) is designed “to
address a specific class of financing costs arising out of the issuance of debt
instruments at a discount” (para. 67).  Such a narrow focus, as stated earlier,
is nowhere expressed in the Act, although it would have been a simple thing to
say so if that was Parliament’s intent.  Of relevance at this point are the
observations of McLachlin J. in Shell Canada:  . . . courts must therefore be cautious before finding within the clear
provisions of the Act an unexpressed legislative intention . . . . Finding
unexpressed legislative intentions under the guise of purposive interpretation
runs the risk of upsetting the balance Parliament has attempted to strike in
the Act. [para. 43]   103                         
On the other hand, I agree with my colleague’s observation at para. 65
that “Parliament encourages companies to raise capital by allowing them to
deduct virtually all costs of borrowing under the provisions of
s. 20(1).”  It was not always thus.  In Montreal Coke and Manufacturing
Co. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1944] A.C. 126 (P.C.), affirming
this Court’s decision, [1942] S.C.R. 89 (sub nom. Montreal Light,
Heat and Power Consolidated v. Minister of National Revenue), it was held
that costs incurred in refinancing a company’s debt (being referable to the
capital account) are not deductible against revenue for the purpose of
calculating income tax.  Parliament subsequently recognized that capital
borrowings used productively generate income, which may itself be taxed, and
are to be encouraged:  Bronfman Trust v. The Queen, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32,
at p. 45; Tennant v. M.N.R., [1996] 1 S.C.R. 305, at para. 16.
Parliament therefore enacted a series of provisions to “deem” various costs of
capital borrowings to be deductible.   Viewed in that light, the decisions of
the Federal Court of Appeal herein advance Parliament’s purpose whereas the
conclusion reached by my colleague would act as a deterrent.  With respect, it
would be counterproductive in a global economy to discourage foreign
borrowings.  Nor is there any principled reason to impose disadvantageous tax
treatment on such borrowings when compared with the treatment given to
comparable domestic borrowings such as exchangeable, convertible and commodity
linked debt.  104                         
It all comes back to the simple proposition that in Canadian tax terms
foreign currency is a commodity, and its fluctuations will inevitably carry
costs (or benefits).  Had the Canadian dollar appreciated against the U.S.
dollar in the relevant period of time, for instance, the taxpayers would have lost
the original issue discount to which they might otherwise have been
entitled.  What the taxing authority loses on the swings it will make up on the
roundabouts.  At the end of the day it will have its just desserts.  III.  Conclusion  105                         
For the foregoing reasons, I would affirm the decisions of the Federal
Court of Appeal and dismiss the appeals.  Appeals allowed with costs, Binnie,
Fish and Charron
JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant: Department of Justice, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the respondent Imperial Oil Limited:  Osler, Hoskin
& Harcourt, Toronto.  Solicitors for the respondent Inco
Limited:  Thorsteinssons, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener:  Ogilvy Renault, Montréal.   