Slattery (Trustee of) v.
Slattery, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 430  Marguerite Slattery                                                                           Appellant  v.  Doane Raymond Limited, Trustee of the
Estate of Raymond P. Slattery, a
Bankrupt                                                 Respondent  Indexed as:  Slattery
(Trustee of) v. Slattery  File No.:  22618.  1993:  March 29; 1993:  September 30.   on appeal from the new brunswick court
of appeal                      A taxpayer unable to
pay his taxes owing was petitioned into bankruptcy by Revenue Canada.  The
respondent trustee in bankruptcy commenced an action against the appellant (the
bankrupt's wife) seeking a declaration that certain assets registered in her
name were the property of the bankrupt's estate or were held in trust for that
estate.                     At trial, the
trustee sought to introduce testimony from two Revenue Canada officials who had
participated in the investigation into the bankrupt's affairs.  Appellant
argued that that testimony was barred because s. 241 of the Income Tax
Act prohibits Revenue Canada officials from disclosing information obtained
from a taxpayer for the purposes of that Act.  The trial judge ruled that this
testimony fell within the exception in s. 241(3) which provides that the
prohibition does not apply in respect of proceedings relating to the
administration or enforcement of the Act.  Both officials testified, and the
court granted the declaration in part.  The New Brunswick Court of Appeal
agreed with the trial judge's interpretation of s. 241 and dismissed the
appeal.  At issue here was whether a civil action commenced by the trustee for
a declaration that certain property is property of the bankrupt's estate is a
proceeding "relating to the . . . enforcement of" the Income
Tax Act within the meaning of s. 241(3) of the Act.                      Per Lamer C.J. and La Forest,
Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci and Major JJ.:  Section 241 involves a
balancing of competing interests:  the privacy interest of the taxpayer with
respect to his or her financial information, and the interest of the Minister
in being allowed to disclose taxpayer information to the extent necessary for
the effective administration and enforcement of the Income Tax Act and
other federal statutes referred to in s. 241(4).  Only in exceptional or
prescribed situations does the privacy interest give way to the interest of the
state.  By instilling confidence in taxpayers that the personal information
they disclose will not be communicated in other contexts, Parliament encourages
voluntary disclosure of this information.  Parliament, however, has also
recognized that the possession of personal information is useless if it cannot
be used to assist in tax collection, when required, including tax collection by
way of judicial enforcement.                     Section 241(3)
contemplates not only administrative and enforcement proceedings brought under
the Income Tax Act itself but also other proceedings.  Both the text and
the context of s. 241 buttress this conclusion.  The connecting phrases
used by Parliament in s. 241(3) ("in respect of" and
"relating to") are of the widest possible scope and suggest that a
wide rather than narrow view should be taken when considering whether a
proposed disclosure is in respect of proceedings relating to the administration
or enforcement of the Income Tax Act.  This breadth of meaning is
confirmed by the French version of the section.                     Section 222
clearly states that the Minister may resort generally to the courts to
institute civil proceedings to collect taxes as debts in addition to the
procedures specified in the Income Tax Act.  In order to take full
advantage of this power, the Minister must be able to disclose in court
otherwise confidential information in order to prove the cause of action in
debt.  Absent the ability to disclose as required to prove a debt, s. 222
would be deprived of part of its meaning.                     Glover v. Glover
(No. 1) must be
read to mean that the confidentiality provisions apply to any legal proceeding
of a civil character which is not covered by the exception provided in
s. 241(3).  Sections 241(1) and (2) apply to civil proceedings not
related to the administration or enforcement of the Income Tax Act.  Glover
does not inform the issue already set out:  the essential question is whether
or not the bankruptcy proceedings taken herein are related to the
administration or enforcement of the Income Tax Act.                     The proceedings
taken here were related to the administration or enforcement of the Income
Tax Act even though they were taken by the trustee in bankruptcy.  A
contrary interpretation is not supported by the wording of s. 241(3) and
is somewhat inconsistent with the power given to creditors in s. 38(1) of
the Bankruptcy Act.  At the policy level, the Minister should not be
inhibited from recourse to the bankruptcy process in light of the advantages
and protection that this process can entail.  If the Minister cannot disclose
confidential information in bankruptcy to prove a claim asserted, the
bankruptcy procedure will in many cases not be available for income tax
enforcement.                     The difference in
nature between bankruptcy proceedings and proceedings under s. 160, where
disclosure was admitted to be available by appellant, was not relevant.  The
important point was that disclosure made during bankruptcy proceedings was made
in respect of proceedings relating to the administration or enforcement of the
Act within the meaning of s. 241(3).  The fact that the Minister chose to
collect taxes by petitioning the taxpayer into bankruptcy did not disentitle
Revenue Canada from disclosing the confidential information.                     Arguments raising
the possibility of difficult questions as to competence and compellability were
not persuasive.                      This Court gave the
phrase "in respect of" a wide interpretation in the circumstances of
the Indian Act  as it related to taxation of personal property.  The wide
interpretation given the phrase in that context is not determinative of its
application in s. 241(3) .  The context of s. 241(3) , and
jurisprudence of this Court treating the section, suggest that the phrase
should be construed narrowly, not broadly.                     The proceedings at
issue on this appeal are not proceedings so connected to the administration of
the Act that they fall within the contemplation of the exemption in
s. 241(3).  Part XV of the Act provides the Minister of Revenue with
a system of debt collection proceedings that mirrors ordinary creditors'
remedies.  It does not, however, deal with bankruptcy, except to the extent of
providing the Minister with the power to collect money owed to a secured
creditor by a trustee in bankruptcy, notwithstanding the Bankruptcy Act. 
This legislative silence is significant.  Bankruptcy is a particular process
which has specific and salutary aims and which involves all of the creditors of
a particular debtor.  Concern for the confidentiality of information that is
not public is very much at issue.                     The proceeding at
issue here is not an action under s. 222.  The action is brought by a trustee
in bankruptcy and not by the Crown as the section appears to contemplate. 
Under s. 69 of the Bankruptcy Act, all collection proceedings are
stayed when the debtor is declared bankrupt.  Until that point the Minister
arguably may prove its debt by disclosure of information obtained for the
purposes of the Act.  But once a debtor is declared bankrupt, and a trustee in
bankruptcy has been put in place to pursue the bankruptcy, the proceeding is no
longer capable of being accurately characterized as a proceeding relating to the
administration of the Act.  The stay operates until the trustee in bankruptcy
is discharged.  The practical effect of the proceedings permitting the Minister
to realize upon an outstanding debt does not operate to make the proceeding one
relating to the administration of the Act.                     Part XV of the
Act makes no specific provision for disclosure in the context of bankruptcy. 
When the Minister has recourse to this procedure, its actions are governed by
the Bankruptcy Act and no longer by the Income Tax Act.  In so
proceeding the Minister loses the capacity to deploy the special information
gathering techniques, which accrue only by virtue of the Income Tax Act,
either to its own advantage, or to those of its fellow creditors.                     The Minister was
not permitted to disclose confidential information in the case at bar even
though a superior court judge is a person, as provided in s. 241(4)(c),
"legally entitled" to the information.  A party should not be able to
avail itself of the s. 241(4)(c) exemption if it cannot bring the
proceeding within the terms of s. 241(3).  Cases Cited  By Iacobucci J.                     Considered:  Glover v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 561, aff'g (1980), 29 O.R. (2d) 392; referred
to:  Canadian Pacific Tobacco Co. v. Stapleton (1952), 86 C.L.R. 1; Nowegijick
v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29; Diversified Holdings Ltd. v. Canada,
[1991] 1 F.C. 595.  By McLachlin J.
(dissenting)                     Nowegijick v. The
Queen, [1983] 1
S.C.R. 29; R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627; Glover
v. Minister of National Revenue, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 561, aff'g (1980), 29 O.R.
(2d) 392.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited   Income
Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952,
c. 148, s. 133.  Income
Tax Act, S.C. 1948,
c. 52, s. 121.     Income
War Tax Act, R.S.C.
1927, c. 97, s. 81(1), (2).  Income
War Tax Act, 1917,
S.C. 1917, c. 28, s. 11.   Authors Cited  Bohémier, Albert.  Faillite et Insolvabilité,
t. 1.  Montréal:  Thémis, 1992.   Chabot, Marc. 
Faillite et Insolvabilité.  Sillery, Québec:  Presses de l'Université du
Québec, 1987.  Dictionnaire
de la langue française. 
Paris:  Larousse, 1989, "traits".  Harris,
Edwin C.  Canadian Income Taxation, 4th ed.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1986.   Le
Robert Méthodique. 
Paris:  Le Robert, 1988, "avoir trait à".  The
Pocket Oxford Dictionary,
7th ed.  Edited by R. E. Allen.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1984,
"relation".  Toope,
Stephen J., and Alison L. Young.  "The Confidentiality of Tax
Returns Under Canadian Law" (1982), 27 McGill L.J. 479.                      B. A. Crane, Q.C., and Randall J.
Hofley, for the appellant.                     John R. Power, Q.C., and Michael Donovan,
for the respondent.                     The judgment of
Lamer C.J. and La Forest, Gonthier, Cory and Major JJ. was delivered by                     Iacobucci
J. -- This appeal
concerns the interpretation to be given to s. 241(3) of the Income Tax
Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (the Income Tax Act), which
permits in certain circumstances the disclosure of otherwise confidential
information obtained from a taxpayer by officials of the Department of National
Revenue.  More specifically, the appeal concerns an action by a trustee in
bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-3 , for a
declaration that certain property is the property of a taxpayer bankrupt's
estate.  The issue is whether such an action is a proceeding "relating to
the administration or enforcement of" the Income Tax Act.  I.Facts                     Raymond Slattery,
who is not a party to this action, fell into arrears in paying income tax,
resulting in a lengthy investigation by Revenue Canada.  Unable to collect the
taxes owing, Revenue Canada petitioned Slattery into bankruptcy.  The
respondent, Doane Raymond Limited (the Trustee), was appointed as trustee in
bankruptcy of the Raymond Slattery estate. In the bankruptcy, Revenue Canada
proved a claim of just over $1 million and other creditors proved claims of
over $3 million; however, since Revenue Canada is the only preferred creditor,
it appears that the assets of the estate will not be sufficient to satisfy the
claims of any other creditors.                     The trustee
commenced an action against the appellant, Marguerite Slattery, who is the wife
of the bankrupt Slattery.  The action sought a declaration that certain assets
registered in Marguerite Slattery's name were, in fact, the property of the
bankrupt's estate or were held in trust for that estate.                     At trial, the
trustee sought to introduce testimony from two Revenue Canada officials who had
participated in the investigation into Raymond Slattery's affairs.  Counsel for
Marguerite Slattery objected on the ground that such testimony was barred by
s. 241 of the Income Tax Act, which prohibits Revenue Canada
officials from disclosing information which has been obtained from a taxpayer
for the purposes of the Income Tax Act.  The trial judge ruled that the
testimony was not barred by s. 241 because it fell within the exception
contained in s. 241(3), which exception provides that the prohibition does not
apply "in respect of proceedings relating to the administration or
enforcement of" the Income Tax Act.  Both officials testified, and
the New Brunswick Court of Queen's Bench granted the declaration sought in part.                     Marguerite Slattery
appealed.  She argued that the trial judge had erred in permitting the Revenue
Canada officials to testify.  The New Brunswick Court of Appeal agreed with the
trial judge's interpretation of s. 241 of the Income Tax Act, and dismissed
the appeal.  II.Relevant
Statutory Provisions  Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, s. 241:                     241. (1)  Except as authorized by this
section, no official or authorized person shall  (a)
knowingly communicate or knowingly allow to be communicated to any person any
information obtained by or on behalf of the Minister for the purposes of this
Act or the Petroleum and Gas Revenue Tax Act ,  (b)
knowingly allow any person to inspect or to have access to any book, record,
writing, return or other document obtained by or on behalf of the Minister for
the purposes of this Act or the Petroleum and Gas Revenue Tax Act , or  (c)
knowingly use, other than in the course of his duties in connection with the
administration or enforcement of this Act or the Petroleum and Gas Revenue
Tax Act , any information obtained by or on behalf of the Minister for the
purposes of this Act or the Petroleum and Gas Revenue Tax Act .                     (2) 
Notwithstanding any other Act or law, no official or authorized person shall be
required, in connection with any legal proceedings,  (a)
to give evidence relating to any information obtained by or on behalf of the
Minister for the purposes of this Act or the Petroleum and Gas Revenue Tax
Act , or  (b)
to produce any book, record, writing, return or other document obtained by or
on behalf of the Minister for the purposes of this Act or the Petroleum and
Gas Revenue Tax Act .                     (3) 
Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply in respect of criminal proceedings, either
by indictment or on summary conviction, that have been commenced by the laying
of an information, under an Act of the Parliament of Canada, or in respect of
proceedings relating to the administration or enforcement of this Act or the Petroleum
and Gas Revenue Tax Act .                     (4)
An official or authorized person may ...  (c)
communicate or allow to be communicated information obtained under this Act or
the Petroleum and Gas Revenue Tax Act , or allow inspection of or access
to any book, record, writing, return or other document obtained by or on behalf
of the Minister for the purposes of this Act or the Petroleum and Gas
Revenue Tax Act , to or by any person otherwise legally entitled thereto.  III.Judgments
Below  1.New
Brunswick Court of Queen's Bench (Jones J.)                     The judgment of the
New Brunswick Court of Queen's Bench consists of an oral ruling during the
trial on the admissibility of testimony from the Revenue Canada officials. 
Jones J. held that the proceedings in the case at bar fell within the
exception in s. 241(3) of the Income Tax Act. In interpreting the phrase
"in respect of proceedings relating to the... enforcement of this
Act", the trial judge commented upon two possible approaches, namely, the
one set out in Glover v. Minister of National Revenue, [1981] 2 S.C.R.
561, in which the exception in s. 241(3) was held not to apply in any
legal proceedings of a civil character, and a second approach taken in Canadian
Pacific Tobacco Co. v. Stapleton (1952), 86 C.L.R. 1 (Aust. H.C.), which
was more supportive of the trustee's position.                     The trial judge
held that "relating to" in s. 241(3) has a broad meaning.  He
suggested that, although s. 241(3) does not apply to civil proceedings
unrelated to the Income Tax Act, some civil proceedings nonetheless fall
within the exemption.  He concluded that the action by the Trustee was of this
latter kind, stating:  Now
I know there can be civil legal proceedings strictly under the Income Tax Act,
nevertheless, it is my finding that on the interpretation that I make of the
words "relating to the enforcement of the Act" that -- and bearing in
mind the circumstances in this case, the fact that it is -- this is a civil
action by trustee in bankruptcy, major -- while the primary creditor is Revenue
Canada, and the purpose for which -- came out in evidence before me yesterday
morning, this action is pursued, I would find that it comes within the meaning
of s. 241.3 and I would, therefore allow the plaintiff to continue with
questions along that -- along the line which he was pursuing, or at least I
would say that Sections 241.1 and 241.2 would not apply in this
proceeding.  Accordingly, the trial judge permitted
the Revenue Canada officials to testify.  2.New Brunswick Court of Appeal (1991),
120 N.B.R. (2d) 4 (Hoyt, Ayles and Ryan JJ.A.)                     The reasons of the
court were delivered by Hoyt J.A. (as he then was).  During a brief review
of the facts, Hoyt J.A. noted the importance of the testimony given by the
Revenue Canada officials to the decision reached by the trial judge.  He also
noted that the purpose of the trustee's action was to ensure that the assets of
the estate were collected, so that the bankrupt's creditors, including Revenue
Canada, could be paid.  In determining whether such proceedings were
"proceedings relating to the administration or enforcement of this
Act", Hoyt J.A. held at pp. 11-12:  A
taxpayer who, like Mr. Slattery, circumvents tax collection procedures found in
the Act is not thereby immune from other proceedings that the Minister
may take to collect unpaid taxes and thus enforce the Act. Although Mr.
Slattery is not a defendant in this proceeding, the trial judge has found,
correctly in my view, that this situation arose because Mr. Slattery
attempted to avoid paying outstanding taxes owed to Revenue Canada by implicating
Mrs. Slattery with, it must be noted, her acquiescence.  Hoyt J.A. held at p. 12 that to
"accept the appellant's submission could prevent the Minister from
enforcing the Income Tax Act in proceedings other than those brought
specifically under that Act".  He distinguished Glover, supra,
by stating that the present action could not be characterized as a non-Income
Tax Act legal proceeding.  Although this proceeding was not instituted
under the Income Tax Act, he found it to be related to the enforcement
of that Act.                     As a result, the
Court of Appeal held that the Revenue Canada officials had properly been
permitted to testify and the appeal was dismissed.  IV.Issue                     The question raised
by this appeal is whether a civil action commenced by the trustee for a
declaration that certain property is property of the bankrupt's estate is a
proceeding "relating to the ... enforcement of" the Income Tax Act
within the meaning of s. 241(3) of that Act.  If it is, the prohibitions
contained in s. 241 of the Income Tax Act against Revenue Canada
officials' communicating or giving evidence of information obtained from the
taxpayer do not apply.  The respondent trustee in its factum also argues that
the disclosure could be permitted by the exception contained in s. 241(4)(c),
by suggesting that a bankruptcy judge is a "person otherwise legally
entitled" to such information.  As a result of my conclusion, I need not
discuss this argument further.                     An analysis of the
history of s. 241, its underlying purposes and policy, its text and context,
applicable judicial authority, and the nature of the proceedings involved
herein, leads me to conclude that the courts below were correct in their
holdings and that this appeal should be dismissed.  V.Analysis  1.  History of s. 241                     At the outset, it
is worth noting that the taxation of income in Canada has been and is based on
a self assessment and self reporting system.  Confidentiality of taxpayer
information has been an important part of our income tax collection system.                     Legislated
confidentiality of information obtained from taxpayers has moved through two
distinct stages in Canada.  The first stage began with s. 11 of the Income
War Tax Act, 1917, S.C. 1917, c. 28.  That section was a simple prohibition
against disclosure by a person employed in the service of the Crown to a
person, not legally entitled thereto, of any information obtained under the
Act.  Section 11 read as follows:                     11. No person employed in the service of
His Majesty shall communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not
legally entitled thereto, any information obtained under the provisions of this
Act, or allow such person to inspect or have access to any written statement
furnished under the provisions of this Act. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be liable on summary conviction to a penalty
not exceeding two hundred dollars.  Section 11 was re-enacted as
 s. 81 of the 1927 Income War Tax Act, R.S.C. 1927, c. 97, with the
only modification being that the section was divided into two subsections, with
the penalty portion becoming s. 81(2).  In 1948, s. 81 became s. 121
of The Income Tax Act, slight changes in wording took place, and the
subsections reverted to a consolidated form once more (S.C. 1948, c. 52).  In
1952, the last change of the first stage occurred, and s. 121 became
s. 133 in the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148.  Viewed as a
whole, this stage of legislative history is distinguishable because the extent
of confidentiality protection afforded to taxpayers by the plain language of
the statute had two features.  First, the prohibition against disclosure was
directed only at persons in the service of the Crown.  Second, the success of
that prohibition depended almost entirely upon the meaning ascribed to the
statutory phrase "a person, not legally entitled thereto", which
phrase offered the only exception to the otherwise blanket statutory
prohibition.                     The second
legislative stage began in 1966 when the confidentiality section was entirely
modified by two amendments (S.C. 1966-67, c. 47, s. 17, and S.C. 1966-67, c.
91, s. 22).  These amendments extended the general rule of non-disclosure to
everyone, and at the same time spelled out specific exceptions for prescribed situations. 
(See Stephen J. Toope and Alison L. Young, "The Confidentiality of Tax
Returns Under Canadian Law" (1982), 27 McGill L.J. 479.)  The
following is a succint summary of the 1966 amendments at p. 489:                     The
general effect of these provisions is to make the section easier to apply. 
There is now a general prohibition against release of tax information to
anyone.  The subsections which follow the general prohibition set up exceptions
to the rule, and the circumstances in which ministerial discretion may operate
seem to be clear.  The organization of the section is, in this respect, more
amenable to application by common law courts as it resembles a set of rules
rather than an abstract principle.  As will be noted again below, the 1966
amendments were described by the Ontario Court of Appeal as  "a
comprehensive code designed to protect the confidentiality of all information
given to the Minister for the purposes of the Income Tax Act" -- Glover
v. Glover (No. 1) (1980), 29 O.R. (2d) 392, at p. 396. The amendments were
initially embodied in s. 133, but in 1970, s. 133 became s. 241 of
the Income Tax Act, as it remains today.  Since then, the section has
been only slightly modified.  2.  Purposes and
Policy Underlying s. 241                     In my view,
s. 241 involves a balancing of competing interests:  the privacy interest
of the taxpayer with respect to his or her financial information, and the
interest of the Minister in being allowed to disclose taxpayer information to
the extent necessary for the effective administration and enforcement of the Income
Tax Act and other federal statutes referred to in s. 241(4).                     Section 241
reflects the importance of ensuring respect for a taxpayer's privacy interests,
particularly as that interest relates to a taxpayer's finances.  Therefore,
access to financial and related information about taxpayers is to be taken
seriously, and such information can only be disclosed in prescribed
situations.  Only in those exceptional situations does the privacy interest
give way to the interest of the state.                     As alluded to
already, Parliament recognized that to maintain the confidentiality of income
tax returns and other obtained information is to encourage the voluntary tax
reporting upon which our tax system is based.  Taxpayers are responsible for
reporting their incomes and expenses and for calculating the tax owed to
Revenue Canada.  By instilling confidence in taxpayers that the personal
information they disclose will not be communicated in other contexts,
Parliament encourages voluntary disclosure of this information.  The opposite
is also true:  if taxpayers lack this confidence, they may be reluctant to
disclose voluntarily all of the required information (Edwin C. Harris, Canadian
Income Taxation (4th ed. 1986), at pp. 26-27).                     Parliament has also
recognized, however, that if personal information obtained cannot be used to
assist in tax collection when required, including tax collection by way of
judicial enforcement, the possession of such information will be useless.  Disclosure
of information obtained through tax returns or collected in the course of tax
investigations may be necessary during litigation in order to ensure that all
relevant information is before the court, and thereby to assist in the correct
disposition of litigation.  But this necessity is sanctioned by Parliament in a
very limited number of situations.  Disclosure is authorized in criminal
proceedings and other proceedings as set out in s. 241(3).  Certain other
situations are specified in s. 241(4), which have been described by the
Ontario Court of Appeal as being "largely of an administrative
nature" (Glover v. Glover (No. 1), supra, at p. 397).  3.  The Text and Context of
s. 241(3)                     As already noted,
s. 241(3) provides, inter alia, that the confidentiality provisions
in s. 241(1) and (2) do not apply "in respect of proceedings relating to
the administration or enforcement of" the Income Tax Act.  The
appellant argues that the only proceedings covered by this exception are those
which are expressly provided for in Part XV of the Act, entitled 
"Administration and Enforcement".  The appellant's argument would
require the words in s. 241(3) to be read as meaning that the
confidentiality provisions do not apply "in respect of proceedings taken
pursuant to the administration or enforcement provisions" of the Income
Tax Act.  Neither the text nor context of s. 241 supports this
argument.                     The connecting
phrases used by Parliament in s.  241(3) are very broad.  The
confidentiality provisions are stated not to apply in respect of
proceedings relating to the administration or enforcement of the Income
Tax Act.                    The phrase "in
respect of" was considered by this Court in Nowegijick v. The Queen,
[1983] 1 S.C.R. 29, at p. 39:                     The
words "in respect of" are, in my opinion, words of the widest
possible scope. They import such meanings as "in relation to",
"with reference to" or "in connection with". The phrase
"in respect of" is probably the widest of any expression intended to
convey some connection between two related subject matters. [Emphasis added.]  In my view, these comments are equally
applicable to the phrase "relating to".  The Pocket Oxford
Dictionary (1984) defines the word "relation" as follows:  ...
what one person or thing has to do with another, way in which one stands or is
related to another, kind of connection or correspondence or contrast or feeling
that prevails between persons or things;...  So, both the connecting phrases of
s. 241(3) suggest that a wide rather than narrow view should be taken when
considering whether a proposed disclosure is in respect of proceedings relating
to the administration or enforcement of the Income Tax Act.                     This breadth of
meaning is confirmed when one examines the French version of the section.  The
French version of s. 241(3) reads as follows:  241. ...                     (3) 
Les paragraphes (1) et (2) ne s'appliquent ni aux poursuites au criminel, sur
acte d'accusation ou sur déclaration sommaire de culpabilité, engagées par le
dépot d'une dénonciation, en vertu d'une loi fédérale, ni aux poursuites ayant
trait à l'application ou à l'exécution de la présente loi... [Emphasis
added.]                     The phrase
"ayant trait à" is defined in the Larousse dictionary Dictionnaire
de la langue française (1989) as:  "Avoir trait à : avoir un rapport
avec".  The dictionary Le Robert Méthodique (1988) defines the
phrase as:  "Avoir trait à: Se rapporter à... V. Rapport".  And the
same dictionary defines the word "rapport" as meaning "Lien,
relation".  Consequently, the French version of s. 241(3) is as broad
as the English version.                     The next question
to ask considers what type of administration or enforcement proceedings are
contemplated by s. 241(3):  only proceedings brought under the Income Tax
Act itself, or both such proceedings and others?  To answer this question,
one must look first to the wording of s. 241(3).  That provision contains
no language which confines the concept of proceedings relating to  administration
or enforcement to the boundaries of the Income Tax Act.  This conclusion
is buttressed when one considers the context of s. 241.                     Section 241 is
found in Part XV of the Income Tax Act, which deals with
administration and enforcement as previously noted.  It is obvious, but the
fact must nonetheless be highlighted, that the collection of money owing to
Revenue Canada is an important part of the Act's enforcement.  This
proposition is confirmed by s. 222 of the Act which reads as follow:                     222.  All taxes, interest, penalties,
costs and other amounts payable under this Act are debts due to Her Majesty and
recoverable as such in the Federal Court of Canada or any other court of
competent jurisdiction or in any other manner provided by this Act.
[Emphasis added.]  Section 222 is a clear statement
that, in addition to the procedures specified in the Income Tax Act, the
Minister may resort generally to the courts to institute civil proceedings to
collect taxes as debts.  But, in order to take full advantage of this power,
the Minister must be able to disclose in court otherwise confidential
information in order to prove the cause of action in debt.  It must therefore
be possible to disclose such information to establish the amount owed and to
prove related matters.  Absent the ability to disclose as required to prove a
debt, s. 222 would be deprived of part of its meaning.  The absurdity of such a
result strongly suggests that the collection proceedings specified in
s. 222 are proceedings "relating to the... enforcement" of the Income
Tax Act within the meaning of s. 241(3).                     This legislative
interpretation accords with the necessary balancing of privacy and state
interests which takes place in s. 241.  Confidentiality of tax information
is necessary in order to promote the privacy interests of taxpayers and the
success of voluntary tax reporting.  But the success of the voluntary tax
reporting system will be of no import if Revenue Canada cannot effectively
collect taxes owed by taxpayers.  In order to collect taxes owed, Revenue
Canada should be able to resort to various procedures and proceedings to pursue
the amounts owed and in doing so should also be able to disclose in court the
information necessary to prove a cause of action in debt. As Décary J.A. said in
Diversified Holdings Ltd v. Canada, [1991] 1 F.C. 595 (C.A.), at p. 599:                     In
the instant case, the documents are part of a process, the collection
proceedings, which is in itself in the public domain and which involves by its
very nature the publication of information that would otherwise have remained
confidential. One cannot seize a property pursuant to a certificate which has
the force and effect of a judgment (see subsection 223(2) of the Act) without
revealing to some extent information given to the Minister.  4.  Judicial
Interpretation of s. 241                     I do not find it
necessary to discuss all the cases which were decided under s. 241's predecessor
sections or which deal with actions related to those predecessor sections. 
However, both the appellant and respondent cited, in support of their
respective positions, the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Glover
v. Glover (No. 1), supra, which was affirmed by this Court in a
short judgment (Glover v. Minister of National Revenue, supra). 
Accordingly, some comment on this case is required.                     In Glover, a
trial judge ordered Revenue Canada to disclose the address of a taxpayer who
had abducted his children in violation of a court order which granted custody
to the children's mother. The question was whether the judge who ordered
disclosure of the information was a person "legally entitled
thereto".  That  phrase had been carried over from s. 241's predecessor
provision and was restated in s. 241(4)(c) as an enumerated exception. 
The Ontario Court of Appeal set aside the trial judge's order, holding that the
judge did not come within the s. 241(4)(c) exception.                     In the
course of his reasons, MacKinnon A.C.J.O. on behalf of a unanimous court made
some general comments on the interpretation of s. 241.  He stated at p.
396 that "[s]ection 241, in my view, is a comprehensive code designed
to protect the confidentiality of all information given to the Minister for the
purposes of the Income Tax Act".  In his opinion, at p. 397,
s. 241(3) was:  ... a clear statement of parliamentary policy
that no information obtained for the purpose of the Act shall be communicated
and no official or authorized person shall be required to give evidence
relating to such information in any non-Income Tax Act civil legal
proceedings.                     The mother appealed
the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal to this Court, which dismissed the
appeal with brief reasons in which Laskin C.J. said at p. 562:                     Sympathetic
though one is inclined to be to the appellant's plight, the statutory
provisions above-mentioned for non-disclosure, in connection with any legal
proceedings of a civil character, do not give any power to a court to qualify
them, nor do the exceptions set out in s. 241(4)(c) assist the
appellant.                     I agree with the
respondent that, in Glover, the proceedings in question had no
connection whatsoever with the administration or enforcement of the Income
Tax Act.  As a result, this Court's decision must be read to mean that the
confidentiality provisions apply to any legal proceeding of a civil character
which is not covered by the exception provided in s. 241(3).  In other
words, ss. 241(1) and (2) apply to civil proceedings which are not related
to the administration or enforcement of the Income Tax Act.  In my view,
Glover does not inform the issue already set out:  the essential
question is whether or not the bankruptcy proceedings taken herein are related
to the administration or enforcement of the Income Tax Act.  As I will
now discuss, I think they are.  V.  Are the Present
Proceedings Covered by s. 241(3)?                     In determining
whether the present bankruptcy proceedings are covered by the exception in
s. 241(3) of the Income Tax Act, I think it worthwhile to note
briefly some of the features of the bankruptcy process.                     It has been stated
that among the purposes of the Bankruptcy Act are a desire to permit an
effective and fair distribution of the assets of a bankrupt person, and a
desire to protect creditors of insolvent persons.  See Houlden and Morawetz, Bankruptcy
and Insolvency Law of Canada (3rd ed. 1993), at pp. 1-3, 1-4; see
also Marc Chabot, Faillite et Insolvabilité (1987), at p. 8. 
Indeed, it has been asserted that not only are the interests of debtors and
creditors protected under the Bankruptcy Act, but so is the public
interest.  See Professor Albert Bohémier, Faillite et Insolvabilité,
vol. 1, (1992), at pp. 48-56.  Thus, there are many who would advocate
resort to bankruptcy proceedings as an effective and fair means of debt
collection.  I need not join the debate as to whether or to what extent these
assertions are true.  I will simply note that the bankruptcy process is aimed
at the proper protection of debtor, creditor and public interests.                     In the case on
appeal, the Minister of National Revenue petitioned Raymond Slattery into
bankruptcy.  Mr. Slattery filed a statement of affairs stating that he had
virtually no assets.  The trustee then commenced the present action in the
Court of Queen's Bench of New Brunswick seeking a declaration that certain
assets held in the name of the appellant, Marguerite Slattery, were in reality
property of the bankrupt's estate.                     The appellant
admits that, if the Minister through Revenue Canada had instituted proceedings
under the Income Tax Act, such proceedings would be enforcement
proceedings covered by the exception in s. 241(3).  However, the appellant
argues that because the proceedings herein were taken by the trustee, they
cannot qualify as such.  In my view, this argument fails for several reasons.                    First, the
appellant's argument is not supported by the wording of s. 241(3).   As
mentioned earlier, in my opinion the exception authorizing Revenue Canada to
disclose tax related information in proceedings is very broad; that is, it
operates in respect of proceedings relating to the enforcement of the Income
Tax Act.  The practical purpose and result of the present proceedings
will be to increase the estate of the bankrupt taxpayer, Raymond Slattery. 
The  ultimate purpose and result of these same proceedings will be the payment
of taxes owed, inasmuch as  Revenue Canada is a preferred beneficiary under the
scheme of distribution established by s. 136 of the Bankruptcy Act. 
I find it quite clear that, under the terms of s. 241(3),  such a
proceeding has a "relation" or "connection" with the
enforcement of the Income Tax Act.  Neither the fact that the bankruptcy
proceedings involve other creditors of the bankrupt, nor the fact that the
proceedings were commenced by the trustee, detracts from the
"relation" or "connection" between the proceedings and the
enforcement of the Income Tax Act.                     Second, the
appellant's argument is also somewhat inconsistent with the power given to
creditors in s. 38(1) of the Bankruptcy Act.  Section 38(1) 
provides for the following:                     38.
(1) Where a creditor
requests the trustee to take any proceeding that in his opinion would be for
the benefit of the estate of a bankrupt and the trustee refuses or neglects to
take the proceeding, the creditor may obtain from the court an order authorizing
him to take the proceeding in his own name and at his own expense and risk....  If we accept the appellant's
proposition, a potential contradiction obviously results.  That is, if a
trustee initiated proceedings, confidential information obtained by Revenue
Canada could not be disclosed in order to prove the fraudulent scheme,
whereas if the trustee refused to act and Revenue Canada took the same
proceedings, the information could arguably be disclosed.  This result
makes no sense since, in either case, the proceedings would be under the Bankruptcy
Act and would be taken in furtherance of enforcing the Income Tax Act. 
The intervention of the trustee does not change the character of the bankruptcy
proceedings, in so far as that character relates to the enforcement of the Income
Tax Act.                     Third, at the level
of policy, I see no valid reason why the Minister should be inhibited from
recourse to the bankruptcy process in light of the advantages and protection
that this process can entail.  If the Minister cannot disclose confidential
information in bankruptcy to prove a claim asserted, the bankruptcy procedure
will in many cases not be available for income tax enforcement.  Again, the
sense of this result is not apparent.                     Without wishing to
rule in any way on the matter, it is alleged that Revenue Canada had and still
has at its disposal some Income Tax Act remedies against the appellant,
which are unaffected by the stay of proceedings provided for by s. 69 of
the Bankruptcy Act, which reads as follows:                     69. (1) On the filing of a proposal made
by an insolvent  person or on the bankruptcy of any debtor, no creditor with a
claim provable in bankruptcy shall have any remedy against the debtor or his
property or shall commence or continue any action, execution or other
proceedings for the recovery of a claim provable in bankruptcy until the
trustee has been discharged or until the proposal has been refused, unless with
the leave of the court and on such terms as the court may impose.  (See D. Scott Brown, "Bankruptcy
and Income Tax: A Revenue Canada Perspective" in 1990 Conference
Report: Report of Proceedings of the Forty-Second Tax Conference, at p.
18:11).                     One of these
allegedly unaffected remedies is found in s. 160 of the Income Tax Act
which provides:                     160. (1) Where a person has, on or after
the 1st day of May, 1951, transferred property, either directly or indirectly,
by means of a trust or by any other means whatever, to  (a)
his spouse or a person who has since become his spouse,                                                                     ...                     the following rules
apply:                                                                     ...  (e)
the transferee and transferor are jointly and severally liable to pay under
this Act an amount equal to the lesser of  (i)
the amount, if any, by which the fair market value of the property at the time
it was transferred exceeds the fair market value at that time of the
consideration given for the property, and  (ii)
the aggregate of all amounts each of which is an amount that the transferor is
liable to pay under this Act in or in respect of the taxation year in which the
property was transferred or any preceding taxation year.                     D. Scott Brown, in
the article cited above, comments on the scope of s. 160 as follows (at p.
18:13):                     The
provisions of section 160 enable the minister to assess a transferee in respect
of a transfer of property that, but for that provision, would require recourse
under the settlement provisions of sections 91, 92, or 93 of the Bankruptcy
Act, or alternatively under a provincial fraudulent conveyance statute. 
Generally, section 160 provides a very effective remedy against this type of
transfer.  In fact, the result of any direct or indirect transfer to a
spouse... will be that the transferee and the transferor will be held jointly
and severally liable under section 160 to pay the lesser of (1) the difference
between the fair market value of the property and the amount paid for the
property, and (2) the amount of the tax due by the transferor in the year of the
transfer or any prior year.                     It was apparently
acknowledged by the appellant that the Minister could have used s. 160 in
an attempt to recover some of the taxes owed by Raymond Slattery, but did not
do so.  The appellant agrees that, in the context of s. 160, the Minister
could have disclosed the confidential tax information, but the appellant argues
that the bankruptcy proceedings are different in nature.  However, whether or
not they are different in nature is beside the point.  The important point is
whether or not the disclosure within the bankruptcy proceedings occurred
"in respect of proceedings relating to the administration or enforcement
of" the Income Tax Act.  The possible existence of an alternative
enforcement procedure which would clearly permit disclosure is further support
for the respondent's position.  Although the Minister chose to collect taxes by
petitioning the taxpayer into bankruptcy, in my view, this did not disentitle
Revenue Canada from disclosing the confidential information.  The disclosure
occurred in respect of proceedings which can be clearly characterized as
relating to the enforcement of the Income Tax Act within the meaning of
s. 241(3) of that Act.                     Finally, counsel
for the appellant argued that to characterize the bankruptcy proceedings as
"proceedings relating to the... enforcement of" the Income Tax Act
would open up difficult questions relating to competence and compellability as
those issues might affect Revenue Canada in a variety of possible actions.  I
find this argument unpersuasive, particularly in light of the circumstances of
this case.  Those circumstances include Revenue Canada's act of petitioning the
taxpayer into bankruptcy, the active involvement of Revenue Canada in the
bankruptcy proceedings, the collaboration between officials and the trustee,
and the reality that Revenue Canada was entitled to volunteer and did, in fact,
volunteer to disclose the otherwise confidential information in order to
enforce the Income Tax Act.  VI.Conclusion                     For the foregoing
reasons, I conclude that the proceedings taken by the trustee are
"proceedings relating to the administration or enforcement" of the Income
Tax Act as set out in s. 241(3).  Accordingly, I would dismiss the
appeal with costs.                     The reasons of
L'Heureux-Dubé, Sopinka and McLachlin JJ. were delivered by                     McLachlin
J. (dissenting) -- I have
had the benefit of reading the reasons of my colleague, Justice Iacobucci.  I
respectfully disagree with his conclusion regarding the scope of the
s. 241(3) exemption from non-disclosure of information obtained by the
Minister of Revenue for the purposes of the Income Tax Act, S.C.
1970-71-72, c. 63.                     Section 241(3)
provides that the general prohibition on disclosure of such information, as set
out in ss. 241(1) and (2), does not apply, inter alia, "in
respect of proceedings relating to the administration or enforcement of this
Act ...."  The sole question on this appeal is whether the proceedings at
issue are of this type.                     These proceedings
should be carefully described.  Raymond Slattery fell into arrears paying
income taxes.  Revenue Canada conducted a lengthy investigation into his
affairs.  They petitioned Mr. Slattery into bankruptcy.  In bankruptcy
proceedings Revenue Canada proved a claim against Mr. Slattery of over
$1,000,000.  At a subsequent trial to determine title between the appellant and
the bankrupt's estate, the trustee in bankruptcy sought to introduce testimony
from two Revenue Canada officials who had participated in the earlier
investigation of Mr. Slattery's affairs.  This testimony was admitted on the
ground that the trial was a proceeding relating to the administration or
enforcement of the Income Tax Act.  The ruling was upheld on appeal.                     My colleague
Iacobucci J. would uphold these decisions.  Focusing in part on the fact that
the trial would ultimately result in the collection of unpaid taxes, he finds
that the trial was a proceeding "relating to" the administration or
enforcement of the Act.                     In my view, the
s. 241(3) exemption applies only in the case of proceedings specifically
provided for in the Income Tax Act.  These proceedings are, for the most
part, set out in Part XV of the Act which, as the title of the Part indicates,
establishes "Administration and Enforcement" provisions.  A trial to
determine title between an individual and a trustee in bankruptcy is not a
proceeding provided for in Part XV, or elsewhere in the Act.  Accordingly, in
my view, Revenue Canada officials should have been barred from disclosing
information obtained in the course of their investigation of the bankrupt's
affairs.  The Scope of s. 241                     Iacobucci J. has
discussed the character of the provisions which govern the disclosure of
information obtained for the purposes of the Act.  He notes, at p. 444, that
"[o]nly in those exceptional situations does the privacy interest
[of citizens] give way to the interest of the state."  These words, as my
colleague notes, reflect the balance which Parliament has established between
the competing interests at play: the interest in ensuring voluntary disclosure
to the Minister of Revenue, which is served by the general rule of
confidentiality, and the state's interest the collection of tax debts.                     But having noted
the primacy of privacy concerns under the Income Tax Act, Iacobucci J.
goes on to interpret the disclosure clause of s. 241 broadly.  He finds that
the connecting phrases used in s. 241(3) are "very broad". 
Relying on Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29, he interprets
these connecting phrases to encompass proceedings which have any connection
with the administration of the Act.                     I do not share the
view that Nowegijick informs the issue.  That case does not concern
s. 241 or any of its predecessor sections.  Rather, Nowegijick
discusses the phrase "in respect of" as it is employed in s. 87
of the Indian Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-6, in relation to taxation of
personal property.  Giving the phrase the "widest possible scope" in
that context is not determinative of its application in s. 241(3). 
Instead, the context of s. 241(3), and jurisprudence of this Court
treating the section, suggests that the phrase should be construed narrowly,
not broadly.  As Wilson J. noted in R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd.,
[1990] 1 S.C.R. 627, at p. 650:  ...
the taxpayer's privacy interest is protected as much as possible since s. 241
of the Act protects the taxpayer from disclosure of his records or the
information contained therein to other persons or agencies.  [Emphasis
added.]  See also Glover v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 561, at p. 562, per Laskin
C.J.                     The structure of s.
241 subsequent to its 1966 amendment (S.C. 1966-67, c. 47, s. 17 and S.C.
1966-67, c. 91, s. 22) bears out the interpretation given the section by
Wilson J.  Prior to 1966, the Minister of Revenue was barred from disclosing
information obtained under the Act to persons "not legally entitled
thereto ...."  This phrase did not constitute a serious hurdle to
disclosure.  As noted by Stephen J. Toope and Alison L. Young, in "The
Confidentiality of Tax Returns Under Canadian Law" (1982), 27 McGill
L.J. 479, at p. 487, "the [former] section created a carte blanche
for the Minister to consider almost anyone to be `legally entitled' to the
information as long as they could show some vague need."   After 1966, the
prohibition was extended to "any person", unless a specific exemption
had been provided.  The exemptions are few, and are set out in ss. 241(3) and
(4).  Disclosure is permitted in specific criminal proceedings, in proceedings
relating to the administration or enforcement of the Act, and, by virtue of s.
241(4), as might be required to facilitate specific government programs and the
internal working of the Ministry of specific features of the Act.  In s.
241(4)(c), disclosure to persons "otherwise legally entitled
thereto" is again permitted, but the phrase is no longer the animating
concern of the section.  Rather, it must be understood as one element in a
group of narrow and particular exemptions largely administrative in nature: see
Glover v. Glover (No. 1) (1980), 29 O.R. (2d) 392, at p. 398.                     The appellant
submits that the proceedings at issue on this appeal are not proceedings
relating to the administration of the Act in which the Minister can disclose
information obtained for the purposes of the Act since they are not
specifically provided for in Part XV of the Act.  I agree with the substance of
this submission.  We are not here concerned with the capacity of the Ministry
to undertake, or to involve itself in, proceedings which may bear some
connection to the enforcement of the Act.  The concern is whether these are the
sort of proceedings which are so connected to the administration of the Act
that they fall within the contemplation of the exemption in s. 241(3) and
thereby allow the Ministry to disclose information which it has only by virtue
of special investigative powers provided for in the Act (see ss. 231.1 to
231.5).                     Part XV of the Act
provides the Minister of Revenue with a system of debt collection proceedings
that mirrors ordinary creditors' remedies.  Taxes owing may be recovered by
registering the amount in court and enforcing it as a judgment (s. 223(3)),
registering the amount as a charge on land (s. 223(5)), garnishing sums
destined to the tax debtor from third parties (s. 224(1)), deducting the amount
from or setting it off against other sums payable by the Crown to the tax
debtor (s. 224.1), seizing and selling the debtor's chattels (s. 225(1))
and prosecuting the tax debtor for offences under the Act and obtaining
compliance orders (ss. 238 and 239).  But Part XV does not deal with
bankruptcy, except to the extent of providing the Minister the power to collect
money owed to a secured creditor by a trustee in bankruptcy, notwithstanding
the Bankruptcy Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-3 : see Income Tax Act, s.
224 (1.2) (added by S.C. 1987, c. 46, s. 66).                     In the context of
Part XV this legislative silence is significant.  Bankruptcy is a particular
process with specific and salutary aims.  Above all, however, bankruptcy is a
process that involves all of the creditors of a particular debtor.  Concern for
the confidentiality of information that is not public is very much at issue.                     My colleague is of
the view that the bankruptcy process is available to the Minister by virtue of
s. 222 of the Act, which provides that the Minister may resort to a court of
competent jurisdiction to collect tax debts.  I concur in this interpretation
of the plain wording of s. 222, but I am not persuaded that the proceeding that
is at issue here is an action under s. 222.                     In the first place,
the action is not brought by Her Majesty, as the section appears to
contemplate.  It is brought by a trustee in bankruptcy.  Iacobucci J. is of the
view that this does not take the proceedings out the s. 241(3) exemption.
I disagree.  Under s. 69 of the Bankruptcy Act, all collection
proceedings are stayed once the debtor is declared bankrupt.  Until that
point the Minister arguably may prove its debt by disclosure of information
obtained for the purposes of the Act.  But once a debtor is declared bankrupt,
and a trustee in bankruptcy has been put in place to pursue the bankruptcy, the
proceeding is no longer capable of being accurately characterized as a
proceeding relating to the administration of the Act.  The stay operates until
the trustee in bankruptcy is discharged.  The trustee has a statutory duty to
take possession of the bankrupt's property.  It has a statutory power to
institute legal proceedings.  Persons in possession of a bankrupt's property
have a statutory duty to deliver it to the trustee.  (See Bankruptcy Act,
ss. 16(3), (4), 19(1), (2), and 17(1).)  The trustee is a fiduciary of the
estate of the bankrupt and institutes an action to the benefit of the state as
a whole.  The trustee does not act a mere agent of the creditors, or as an
agent of particular creditors.  In such a legal context, I do not think that it
can be said that the fact that the practical effect of the proceedings will
permit the Minister to realize on an outstanding debt suffices to make the
proceeding one that relates to the administration of the Act.                     The fact that Part
XV of the Act makes no specific provision for disclosure in the context of
bankruptcy suggests that when the Minister has recourse to this procedure, its
actions are governed by the Bankruptcy Act and no longer by the Income
Tax Act.  In so proceeding the Minister loses the capacity to deploy the
special information gathering techniques, which accrue only by virtue of the Income
Tax Act, either to its own advantage, or to those of its fellow creditors. 
The broad powers to compel appearance and disclosure which are exercisable by
the trustee in bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Act (see ss. 163  through
167) should be interpreted in light of this fact.  Information available from
public sources is not unavailable in such proceedings simply because it has
passed through the hands of Revenue Canada.  But information that issues from
the Minister, by virtue of any special investigative powers, must remain
confidential.  Section 241(4)(c)                     The respondent also
argues that the Minister was permitted to disclose confidential information in
the case at bar since a superior court judge is a person, as provided in s.
241(4)(c), "legally entitled" to the information.  In my view
the decisions of this Court and of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Glover,
supra, dispense with this argument.  The issue in those cases was
whether the judge in child custody proceedings was a "person ... legally
entitled" to the information.  The Ontario Court of Appeal, in a decision
that was affirmed in this Court, held (at p. 397) that the s. 241(4) exemptions
were administrative in nature, and that if a court could at any time by its own
order entitle itself to receive otherwise confidential taxpayer information
"it would emasculate the effect of s. 241(2) and render s. 241(3)
unnecessary".  The point of these judgments is that a party should not be
able to avail itself of the s. 241(4)(c) exemption if it cannot bring
the proceeding within the terms of s. 241(3).  I have found above that this
respondent cannot.  Disposition                     The Court of Appeal
found that the trial judge's findings in declaring some of the property of the
appellant to be the property of the bankrupt's estate depended largely upon the
testimony and evidence of the Revenue Canada officials.  This information was
gathered in the course of an investigation undertaken according to special
investigatory powers available to Revenue Canada under the Act.  Section 241
forbad its disclosure in the bankruptcy proceedings.  I would allow the appeal
and set aside the judgments below.  I would grant costs to the appellant.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Mockler, Allen & Dixon, Fredericton.                     Solicitors
for the respondent:  Palmer, O'Connell, Leger, Roderick &
Glennie, Saint John.  