 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Appellant  v.  Province of Alberta Treasury Branches                                           Respondent  and between  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Appellant  v.  Province of Alberta Treasury Branches                                           Respondent  and between  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Appellant  v.    File No.:  24056.  1995:  October 12;
1996:  April 25.  Present:  La Forest,
Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for
alberta                       The first case
involved in these appeals arose from a loan made by the respondent Alberta
Treasury Branches to a hotel operator which was secured in part by a general
assignment of book debts ("GABD").  The hotel operator was in arrears
to the Minister of National Revenue ("MNR") for unremitted GST, plus
interest and penalties.  The MNR served requirements to pay under
s. 317(3)  of the Excise Tax Act  ("ETA ") on all
possible debtors of the hotel operator.  That section provides for a form of
garnishment which enables the MNR in certain circumstances to intercept monies
owed to a tax debtor.  It applies to a "secured creditor", defined as
"a person who has a security interest in the property of another
person".  After the hotel operator made an assignment under the Bankruptcy
Act, the trustee estimated the realization of the assets of the estate
would leave a shortfall to Alberta Treasury Branches.  The Court of Queen's
Bench, in an application to determine priorities, held that the MNR had
priority by virtue of the provisions of the ETA .  In the second case, an
excavation company borrowed money from Alberta Treasury Branches and granted it
a GABD.  After the company completed certain contract work, the client held
holdback funds which were claimed by various creditors of the company,
including the MNR, to whom the company was indebted for unremitted employee
source deductions, interest and penalties.  The MNR served two requirements to
pay on the client, under s. 224(1.2) of the Income Tax Act ("ITA"),
which provides for a garnishment remedy identical to the one provided for in
the ETA .  On an application to determine priority to the monies in
question, the master decided that Alberta Treasury Branches had priority
through its GABD.  This decision was upheld on appeal.  In the third case, a
drilling company borrowed money from the respondent bank which was secured in
part by a GABD.  The company owed the MNR unremitted GST, interest and
penalties.  The MNR served requirements to pay under s. 317(3)  ETA 
on the company's trade debtors.  Another of its creditors successfully filed a
petition under the Bankruptcy Act to have the company declared a
bankrupt.  In an application to determine priority, the Court of Queen's Bench
held that the MNR had priority under the provisions of the ETA .  In all
three cases the Court of Appeal held that the lending institution had priority
over the MNR.                     Held (Iacobucci and Major JJ.
dissenting):  The appeals should be allowed.                     Per La Forest, Cory and
McLachlin JJ.:  The definition of "security interest" is broad
enough to include a GABD, and the wording of s. 224(1.2) ITA and
s. 317(3)  ETA  is sufficiently clear and unequivocal to allow a
transfer of property in the garnished funds to the MNR and to grant him a
priority in circumstances where the balance of the section applies.  Moreover,
an assignee of a GABD is a "secured creditor" within the meaning of
s. 224(1.3) ITA or s. 317(3)  ETA  because the assignee
holds a security interest "in the property of another person".  Each
assignment of book debts made in these cases provides that it is to be a
"continuing collateral security".  Further, all the assignments limit
liability to the extent of the outstanding indebtedness.  Thus, if the loan
secured by the GABD was repaid, the lending institution would have no further
interest in the assignment.  Since the assignment by its terms can be redeemed
by payment of the debt, it should not be construed as an absolute assignment. 
Neither the lending institutions nor the debtor companies by their actions gave
any indication that the institutions were the owners of the book debts.  The
lending institutions made no efforts whatsoever to realize upon the book debts
or in any way to act as "owners" of them until the debtor companies
were obviously in severe financial difficulty if not bankrupt.  Both the
wording of the documents and the actions of the parties indicate that they
regarded the assignment to be given as collateral security for the
indebtedness.  So long as the possibility of redemption exists, the GABD
remains as collateral security.                     When there is
neither any doubt as to the meaning of the legislation nor any ambiguity in its
application to the facts, then the statutory provision must be applied
regardless of its object or purpose.  However, the very history of this case
with the clear differences of opinion expressed as between the trial judges and
the Court of Appeal indicates that for able and experienced legal minds,
neither the meaning of the legislation nor its application to the facts is
clear.  Even if the ambiguity were not apparent, it is significant that in
order to determine the clear and plain meaning of the statute it is always
appropriate to consider the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act and the
intention of Parliament.  The Parliamentary intent was to confirm the
overriding right of the MNR to collect by garnishment the taxes collected which
ought to have been remitted by the debtor company to the MNR.  These amounts so
collected could be said to belong not to the collecting debtor entities but to
the government.  In those circumstances the priority granted to the MNR to
recover such funds cannot possibly be said to be expropriation without
compensation.                     The same instrument
cannot be both a "security interest" and an "absolute
assignment".  If an instrument is an absolute assignment, then since it is
complete and perfect in itself, there cannot be a residual right remaining with
the debtor to recover the assets.  Pursuant to the instruments presented in
this case the borrower retains the right to redeem the book debts once the debt
is paid off.  This right of redemption irrefutably demonstrates that the
assignment is something less than absolute.  A GABD represents a security
interest with the legal title being with the lender and the equitable title
remaining with the borrower.  This conclusion is supported by s. 63 of the
Alberta Personal Property Security Act, which stipulates the basis upon
which the right of redemption in personal property, including book debts, will
be terminated.  To conclude that a GABD results in a change of ownership as a
result of its absolute nature rather than constituting collateral security for
a debt will have serious implications.  It could result in a change in the 
ordering of priorities provided by the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act ,
the Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act  and the Canada Business
Corporations Act .  Further, it could constitute the means by which an
unscrupulous debtor company, knowingly or unknowingly abetted by a creditor
company, could so order its affairs that many other bona fide creditors
could be adversely affected.                     Per Major J. (dissenting):  A
GABD falls within the definition of "security interest" in
s. 224(1.3) ITA.  The phrase an "assignment . . . of
any kind whatever" is broad enough to encompass the absolute assignments
of book debts which are at issue in these appeals.  The lending institutions,
however, do not fall within the definition of "secured creditor"
because they do not hold a security interest "in the property of another
person".  An assignment passes title and therefore property in the book
debts is held by the lending institution and not by the tax debtor.  The
assignments in each of the three cases involved here all contain language which
makes it clear that they are immediate and absolute.  The fact that the GABD is
referred to as "continuing collateral security" in the instruments
does not make the GABD anything less than absolute.  While the tax debtor
retains an equity of redemption upon an assignment of its book debts, here the
value of the loans secured by the book debts far exceeds the value of the debts
themselves and there is thus no value in the equity of redemption.  Further, an
absolute assignment of book debts makes those book debts the property of the
assignee, and they remain the property of the assignee until the assignor
actually exercises his equitable right to redeem.  In determining whether the
book debts, once assigned, are the "property" of the assignor or of
the assignee, the court must interpret the word in its plain and ordinary sense. 
The plain and ordinary meaning of "property" is legal title and not a
contingent future equitable right to reacquire property which one does not
presently hold.  In the circumstances of these appeals, a strict reading of the
taxation statute is appropriate.  In the absence of clear and unequivocal
language, there is a presumption that proprietary rights are not to be taken
away without provision being made for compensation.  In the context of these
appeals, the interpretation urged by the MNR would have the effect of
expropriating property to which the lender is legally entitled under its
security agreement with the tax debtor.  The plain and ordinary meaning of the
statutory words simply does not bear the strained interpretation of property
that, absent the security interest, is the property of another person.  In
addition to offending the principle that extra words should not be read into a
section unless absolutely necessary, this proposed reading attempts to read in
wording which can be expressly found in another part of the same section.  If
there is an ambiguity in the meaning of the word "property", then the
specific effect of this section warrants a strict resolution of any ambiguity
in favour of the respondent lending institutions.                     Per Iacobucci J. (dissenting): 
While the general principles of statutory interpretation outlined by
Cory J. were agreed with, the general assignments of book debts in this
case were tantamount to an absolute transfer of property, as found by
Major J.  Cases Cited  By Cory J.   By Major J. (dissenting)   Statutes and
Regulations Cited        Authors Cited  Black's Law Dictionary, 6th ed.  St. Paul, Minn.:  West
Publishing Co., 1990.  Burgess,
Robert.  Corporate Finance Law, 2nd ed.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell,
1992.  Halsbury's
Laws of England, vol.
32, 4th ed.  London:  Butterworths, 1980.  Pearce, Robert A. 
"Fixed Charges over Book Debts", [1987] J. Bus. L. 18.                     APPEALS from a
judgment of the Alberta Court of Appeal (1994), 16 Alta. L.R. (3d) 1, 149 A.R.
34, 63 W.A.C. 34, [1994] 4 W.W.R. 685, 24 C.B.R. (3d) 257, 94 D.T.C. 6650,
[1995] 1 C.T.C. 75, reversing decisions of Forsyth J. (1992), 5 Alta. L.R. (3d)
141, 134 A.R. 124, [1993] 1 W.W.R. 639, 15 C.B.R. (3d) 143, and MacLeod J. and
affirming a decision of Hunt J. (1993), 9 Alta. L.R. (3d) 349, 139 A.R. 295,
[1993] 5 W.W.R. 756, [1994] 1 C.T.C. 108, 5 P.P.S.A.C. (2d) 117, concerning
priorities.  Appeals allowed, Iacobucci and Major JJ. dissenting.                     Edward R. Sojonky, Q.C., and Michael J. Lema,
for the appellant.                     Written submissions
only by J. Gary Greenan and Scott Watson, for the respondent
Province of Alberta Treasury Branches.                      The
judgment of La Forest, Cory and McLachlin JJ. was delivered by   II.                The facts giving rise to these
appeals and the decisions of the court below have been ably set out in the
reasons of Justice Major.  III.               Both the ITA and the ETA 
provide for the collection of funds due to the federal government by way of
income tax deductions from the wages of employees and for the remission of
monies owing for the Goods and Services Tax (GST).  The sections under review
provide for the recovery of monies owing from those who are responsible for the
collection and remission of income tax deductions and GST collections by way of
garnishment.  This system of collection and remission of income tax is
exceedingly important.  For example, in 1987 some 87 per cent of all personal
income tax was collected through employer’s deduction and remission.  IV.              In the cases under consideration,
the company responsible for collection and remission of income tax and GST
borrowed money from a lending institution.  To secure their indebtedness the
debtor companies made a general assignment of book debts (GABD) to the lending
institution.  If the submissions of the appellant prevail then the Government
of Canada will recover the monies which ought to be paid to it by way of
employees’ income tax or GST.  If the respondents are correct in their
position, then the lending institutions will retain the funds which have come
into their possession as a result of the GABD.  Thus the decision in this case
will have a very real significance for both the federal government and lending
institutions.  V.                In essence, s. 224(1.2) provides
a form of garnishment enabling the federal government to intercept monies owed
to tax debtors.  It is not available for the collection of income tax
generally, but is limited to the recovery of funds owing by a person or company
which has withheld monies from another person, usually an employee, for income
tax purposes pursuant to s. 153 ITA and has failed to remit the
withheld amounts to the federal government.  A similar garnishment remedy is
provided by s. 317(3)  ETA .  It is applicable in circumstances where
a company or an individual has failed to remit GST which was collected as
required by the provisions of the ETA .  VI.              Major J. has concluded that
the Alberta Court of Appeal was correct in finding that an assignee of a GABD
is not a “secured creditor”within the meaning of s. 224(1.3) ITA or
s. 317(3)  ETA  because the assignee does not hold a security
interest “in the property of another person”.  Rather, the assignee is the
owner of those book debts.  With respect I cannot agree with that conclusion. 
However I am in complete agreement with these conclusions:  1.The
definition of “security interest” is broad enough to include a general
assignment of book debts even where that assignment is absolute.  2.The
wording of s. 224(1.2) ITA as amended in 1990 is sufficiently
clear  and non-equivocal to allow a transfer of property in the garnished funds
to the Minister of National Revenue (MNR) and to grant him a priority in
circumstances where the balance of the section applies.  The Provisions of the
GABD Made in These Cases  VII.             It would be helpful first to consider
the assignment of book debts made  in these cases in order to ascertain the
apparent intentions of the parties.  The two assignments in which the Treasury
Branch was the lender provide:                     THE
PRESENT assignment and transfer shall be a continuing collateral security
to Treasury Branches for the payment of all and every present and future
indebtedness and liability of the undersigned to Treasury Branches.
. . . [Emphasis added.]  To a similar effect, the Toronto
Dominion assignment reads in part:  PROVIDED
and it is hereby distinctly understood and agreed that these presents are and
shall be a continuing collateral security to the Bank for the general
balance due at any time by the Assignor to the Bank. . . .  PROVIDED
ALWAYS and it is hereby distinctly agreed that these presents are and shall be continuing
and collateral security to the present and any future indebtedness of the
Assignor to the Bank. . . .  [Emphasis added.]  VIII.            Further, all the assignments limit
liability to the extent of the outstanding indebtedness.  Thus, if the loan
secured by the GABD was repaid the Bank or Treasury Branch would have no
further interest in the assignment.  The documents themselves refer to the
assignment as being a continuing collateral security for the payment of the
indebtedness.  The clear intention of the parties is that the assignment is
given as security for the payment  of a debt and upon payment of the debt the
GABD is to be of no force or effect.  That is to say the lending institution
could not, after payment of the debt, make use of the GABD to realise upon any
of the book debts of the assignor.  In my view since the assignment by its
terms can be redeemed by payment of the debt it cannot or at least should not
be construed as an absolute assignment.  IX.              Neither the lending institutions
nor the debtor companies by their actions gave any indication that the
respondents were the owners of the book debts.  This is demonstrated by the
fact that the lending institutions made no efforts whatsoever to realise upon
the book debts or in any way to act as “owners” of them until the debtor
companies were obviously in severe financial difficulty if not bankrupt.  Only then
did the lending institutions seek to realise upon their security.  Both the
wording of the documents and the actions of the parties indicate that they
regarded the assignment to be given as collateral security for the
indebtedness.  In commercial affairs, it is well known that a GABD is indeed a
means of granting collateral security for a debt.  In my view, so long as the
possibility of redemption exists, the GABD remains as collateral security.  X.                In light of this customary
commercial understanding of a GABD, it may be helpful to review the legislation
to determine if, by its wording, it renders a GABD something other than
collateral security for a debt and makes the assignee the owner of the book
debts.  Pertinent Provisions
of the ITA and the ETA  and Their History  XI.              As Major J. pointed out, prior
to 1987 the provisions of the garnishment remedy in the ITA
(s. 224(1)) were almost unanimously interpreted by the courts in such a
way that a demand made under the section was ineffective to attach any of the
assigned debts.  The courts held that by the assignment the tax debtor had
transferred all its interest in the accounts to the assignee with the result
that there was nothing left for the Minister of National Revenue (MNR) to
attach by garnishment.  XII.             In an attempt to address these
decisions, Parliament amended the ITA in 1987 by adding two new
subsections.  They provided that the MNR could garnish funds owed by a tax debtor
to a “secured creditor” and defined the terms “secured creditor” and “security
interest”.  As Major J. observed, there was a divergence of opinion in the
provincial courts of appeal as to whether the 1987 amendments permitted the MNR
to effectively garnish funds in the hands of an assignee of a GABD.  XIII.            In order to further clarify the
situation and resolve the differences of opinion in the appellate courts,
Parliament again amended the ITA with the apparent aim of granting
priority to the MNR.  It may be helpful to set out s. 224(1.2) ITA
as it now appears following the 1990 amendment:                     224. . . .                     (1.2)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this Act, the Bankruptcy Act, any other enactment
of Canada, any enactment of a province or any law, where the Minister has
knowledge or suspects that a particular person is or will become, within 90
days, liable to make a payment  (a)  to
another person (in this subsection referred to as the “tax debtor”) who is
liable to pay an amount assessed under subsection 227(10.1) or a similar
provision, or  (b)  to
a secured creditor who has a right to receive the payment that, but for a
security interest in favour of the secured creditor, would be payable to the
tax debtor,  the
Minister may, by registered letter or by a letter served personally, require
the particular person to pay forthwith, where the moneys are immediately
payable, and in any other case, as and when the moneys become payable, the
moneys otherwise payable to the tax debtor or the secured creditor in whole or
in part to the Receiver General on account of the tax debtor’s liability under
subsection 227(10.1) or a similar provision, and on receipt of that letter
by the particular person, the amount of those moneys that is required by that
letter to be paid to the Receiver General shall, notwithstanding any security
interest in those moneys, become the property of Her Majesty and shall be paid
to the Receiver General in priority to any such security interest. 
[Emphasis added.]                     (1.3)
In subsection (1.2),   “security
interest” means any interest in property that secures payment or performance of
an obligation and includes an interest created by or arising out of a
debenture, mortgage, hypothec, lien, pledge, charge, deemed or actual trust,
assignment or encumbrance of any kind whatever, however or whenever arising,
created, deemed to arise or otherwise provided for;   C.  Principles of Interpretation                     The
central question on this appeal of whether the appellant is entitled to take
advantage of the inventory valuation method in s. 10 of the Act involves a
careful examination of the wording of the provisions of the Act and a
consideration of the proper interpretation of these sections in the light of
the basic structure of the Canadian taxation scheme which is established in the
Income Tax Act.                     In
interpreting sections of the Income Tax Act, the correct approach, as
set out by Estey J. in Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1
S.C.R. 536, is to apply the plain meaning rule.  Estey J. at p. 578 relied
on the following passage from E. A. Driedger, Construction of Statutes
(2nd ed. 1983), at p. 87:                     Today
there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be
read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense
harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the
intention of Parliament.   While
it is true that the courts must view discrete sections of the Income Tax Act
in light of the other provisions of the Act and of the purpose of the legislation,
and that they must analyze a given transaction in the context of economic and
commercial reality, such techniques cannot alter the result where the words of
the statute are clear and plain and where the legal and practical effect of the
transaction is undisputed: Mattabi Mines Ltd. v. Ontario (Minister of
Revenue), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 175, at p. 194; see also Symes v. Canada,
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 695.   It
would introduce intolerable uncertainty into the Income Tax Act if clear
language in a detailed provision of the Act were to be qualified by unexpressed
exceptions derived from a court’s view of the object and purpose of the
provision. . . .  (The Antosko case) is simply a recognition
that “object and purpose” can play only a limited role in the interpretation of
a statute that is as precise and detailed as the Income Tax Act.  When a
provision is couched in specific language that admits of no doubt or ambiguity
in its application to the facts, then the provision must be applied regardless
of its object and purpose.  Only when the statutory language admits of some
doubt or ambiguity in its application to the facts is it useful to resort to
the object and purpose of the provision.  XV.             Thus, when there is neither any
doubt as to the meaning of the legislation nor any ambiguity in its application
to the facts then the statutory provision must be applied regardless of its
object or purpose.  I recognize that agile legal minds could probably find an
ambiguity in as simple a request as “close the door please” and most certainly
in even the shortest and clearest of the ten commandments.  However, the very
history of this case with the clear differences of opinion expressed as between
the trial judges and the Court of Appeal of Alberta  indicates that for able
and experienced legal minds, neither the meaning of the legislation nor its
application to the facts is clear.  It would therefore seem to be appropriate
to consider the object and purpose of the legislation.  Even if the ambiguity
were not apparent, it is significant that in order to determine the clear and
plain meaning of the statute it is always appropriate to consider the “scheme
of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament”.  What then
was Parliament’s intention in enacting the 1990 legislation?  The Purpose of the
Legislation  XVI.            There can be no doubt of the
importance of levying taxation.  The ITA entrusts to employers the duty
of deducting income tax from the wages of employees and remitting it on their
behalf.  Similarly the ETA  imposes on those who provide goods and
services to others the duty to collect and remit the GST which is payable.  In
essence, companies collect taxes which they hold in trust for the government.                      To
determine the dominant characteristic of the legislation, it is important to
know the governmental policy behind the section.  The tax debtor’s bank is in
the best position to know its customer and to structure its business
arrangements accordingly.  Revenue Canada, on the other hand, does not have the
same opportunity to become acquainted with the affairs of the tax debtor or its
creditors.  It must therefore rely solely on the provisions of the legislation
to mandate the employer to remit the employee income tax deductions as required
by the [Income Tax] Act, and to establish its collectability in the event of
default.                                                                     . . .                                                                        . . .                     In
my opinion it was intended by Parliament that anyone who, in the ordinary
course of business, made credit arrangements with a tax debtor involving
assignments of accounts receivable, did so subject to the overriding right of
the Crown to satisfy the primary obligations of the tax debtor to collect and
remit taxes withheld from its employees.  The words of the statute can mean
nothing less.  The section is cast in the broadest of possible terms precisely
because it was meant to interfere with and interrupt payments under such
assignments and divert them to meet this statutory obligation.  I do not know
what other words Parliament could use to make its overriding intention and
claim more clear.  XVIII.         These statements can be applied even
more forcefully to the 1990 amendments.  The Parliamentary intent was to
confirm the overriding right of the MNR to collect by garnishment the taxes
collected which ought to have been remitted by the debtor company to the MNR.  What is the Nature of
a General Assignment of Book Debts?  XIX.            Like Major J., I am of the view that
a GABD is a form of security for a loan which is always subject to the right of
the debtor to redeem.  It will be remembered that s. 224(1.3) defines the
“security interest” in these words:  “security
interest” means any interest in property that secures payment or performance of
an obligation and includes an interest created by or arising out of a
debenture, mortgage, hypothec, lien, pledge, charge, deemed or actual trust,
assignment or encumbrance of any kind whatever, however or whenever arising,
created, deemed to arise or otherwise provided for;  This definition encompasses the
general assignments of book debts which are at issue in these appeals. 
However, I cannot agree with Major J.’s conclusion that the creditors are not
secured creditors.  I find it difficult, indeed impossible, to conclude that
the same document can be both a security interest and an absolute assignment.  The
same document cannot, simultaneously, embrace two such conflicting concepts.  XX.             Basically, security is something
which is given to ensure the repayment of a loan.  Black’s Law Dictionary
(6th ed. 1990), at p. 1357, gives a clear definition of a “security
interest” in these terms:                     The
term “security interest” means any interest in property acquired by contract
for the purpose of securing payment or performance of an obligation or
indemnifying against loss or liability.  A security interest exists at any
time, (A) if, at such time, the property is in existence and the interest has
become protected under local law against a subsequent judgment lien arising out
of an unsecured obligation, and (B) to the extent that, at such time, the
holder has parted with money or money’s worth.  XXI.            This definition is consistent with
that set out in the ITA.  It is in sharp contrast to the definition of
the word “absolute” set out in the same source at p. 9 in these terms:  Complete;
perfect; final, without any condition or incumbrance; as an absolute bond (simplex
obligatio) in distinction from a conditional bond.  Unconditional; complete
and perfect in itself; without relation to or dependence on other things or
persons.  XXII.          These definitions are, in my view,
correct.  If that is the case, then it can be seen that the same instrument
cannot be both a “security interest” and an “absolute assignment”.  If an
instrument is an absolute assignment, then since it is complete and
perfect in itself, there cannot be a residual right remaining with the
debtor to recover the assets.  By definition, a complete and perfect assignment
cannot recognize the concept of an equity of redemption.  An absolute
assignment cannot function as a means of “securing” the payment of a debt since
there would be no basis for the debtor to recover that which has been
absolutely assigned.  An absolute assignment is irrevocable.  To say that the
same instrument can operate both as an absolute assignment and as a
security interest is to simultaneously put forward two incompatible positions. 
The two conflicting concepts cannot live together in the same document.  Cases Which Have
Considered the Nature of a General Assignment of Book Debts   XXIV.         In Thermo King Corp. v. Provincial
Bank of Canada (1981), 34 O.R. (2d) 369 (C.A.), leave to appeal refused,
[1982] 1 S.C.R. xi, Wilson J.A. (as she then was) held, for a unanimous court,
that a GABD is a security document.  In that case she was required to consider
an instrument which was very similar if not identical to those presented in
these appeals.  At p. 381 she concluded:  While
these provisions appear on their face to constitute the assignor a trustee for
the bank of any payments it receives from its customers and to permit the bank
to appropriate them at will, whether or not any debt is then due to the bank
by the assignor, this seems to be quite incompatible with the nature of the
instrument as a collateral security.  [Emphasis in original.]  Similarly, in Bonavista (Town) v.
Atlantic Technologists Ltd. (1994), 117 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 19, Osborn J.
considered a GABD.  He wrote (at p. 24):                     One
may ask, if the assignment is absolute to the point of ownership, why does it
specifically give to the Bank the power to collect or dispose of the debts. 
Are not such powers incidents of ownership?  Similarly, if the assignment is
absolute, what remaining rights reside in the customer that may be
“extinguished” if the Bank buys the accounts at a sale?                     In
my view, the assignment contemplates that it will operate as a security
interest.  It vests in the Bank title to the debts owed to Atlantic, but such
vesting is for the purpose of security; it is not to transfer ownership, as
that term is commonly understood . . . .  The Bank is a “secured
creditor”.  The nature of the interest held by the Bank, even if considered to
be an absolute assignment, cannot be divorced from the circumstances in which
it arose.  The commercial reality is that the Bank held a security interest in
the property of Atlantic.  Atlantic transferred its receivable to the Bank to
secure payment of money Atlantic owed to the Bank.  Once Atlantic paid off the
Bank, it was entitled, not to a reassignment of the debt, but, by the wording
of the assignment, “to the cancellation hereof”.  The Bank was a secured
creditor holding a security interest.  [Emphasis added.]  XXV.          I agree with the reasoning expressed in
these cases.  As well, I would note that the Newfoundland Court of Appeal in Bank
of Montreal v. Baird (1979), 33 C.B.R. (N.S.) 256, leave to appeal refused,
[1980] 1 S.C.R. v, dealt with a GABD as a security interest.  Further, the New
Brunswick Court of Appeal in R.V. Demmings & Co. v. Caldwell
Construction Co. (1955), 4 D.L.R. (2d) 465, found that a bank holding a
GABD was a secured creditor, subject to an equity of redemption in the assignor
company.   XXVII.        In R. in Right of B.C. v. F.B.D.B.
(1987), 17 B.C.L.R. (2d) 273, McLachlin J.A. (as she then was), on behalf of
the majority of the Court of Appeal, considered the manner in which courts have
dealt with such instruments and in so doing, reached the following conclusions
at p. 303:                     Generally
speaking, the authorities draw a clear distinction between fixed and floating
charges, recognizing nothing between and taking the view that any charge which
permits dealing in the ordinary course of business must be regarded as
floating. . . .   The
generally accepted view . . . is that such a charge should be
regarded as floating rather than fixed because it involves no final and
irrevocable appropriation of property to the creditor.   . . .
this theory was soon rejected by the English courts, as is seen from the
comments of Lord Buckley in Evans v. Rival Granite Quarries Ltd., [1910]
2 K.B. 979 at 999 (C.A.):                     A
floating security is not a future security; it is a present security, which
presently affects all the assets of the company expressed to be included in
it.  On the other hand, it is not a specific security; the holder cannot
affirm that the assets are specifically mortgaged to him.  The assets are
mortgaged in such a way that the mortgagor can deal with them without the
concurrence of the mortgagee.  A floating security is not a specific
mortgage of the assets, plus a licence to the mortgagor to dispose of them in
the course of his business, but is a floating mortgage applying to every item
comprised in the security, but not specifically affecting any item until
some event occurs or some act on the part of the mortgagee is done which causes
it to crystallize into a fixed security.  [Emphasis added by McLachlin J.A.]  XXIX.         In determining whether a particular
charge over book debts is fixed or floating, McLachlin J.A. referred (at
p. 307) to R. A. Pearce in “Fixed Charges over Book Debts”, [1987] J.
Bus. L. 18, at p. 29:  . . . 
the essential characteristic for deciding whether a charge of book debts is
fixed or floating is whether the book debts can be disposed of free from the
charge; if they can, the charge is a floating charge, otherwise it is a fixed
charge.                                                                     . . .                     Modern
authorities have accepted the either-or approach to fixed and floating charges
upon which the courts settled in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.  For
example, they accept the conclusion that a fixed charge on book debts is
inconsistent with the assignor having the freedom to deal with proceeds in the
course of his business: see Siebe Gorman & Co. v. Barclays Bank Ltd.,
[1979] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 143 (Ch. D.); Re Armagh Shoes Ltd., [1982]
N.I. 59 (Ch. D.); Re Keenan Bros. Ltd. (1985), 5 I.L.R.M. 641 (S.C.). 
In Great Lakes Petroleum Co. v. Border Cities Oil Ltd., [1934] O.R. 244,
[1934] 2 D.L.R. 743 (C.A.), an assignment of book accounts which permitted the
debtor to continue to “collect, get in, and deal with said debts, accounts,
claims, moneys, and choses in action in the ordinary course of the business”
was held to be a floating charge.  The same result obtained in R. v. Lega
Fabricating Ltd. (1980), 22 B.C.L.R. 145 (S.C.).  She indicated that the sole exception
to this rule appeared to be the case of Evans Coleman and Evans Ltd. v. R.A.
Nelson Construction Ltd. (1958), 27 W.W.R. 38 (B.C.C.A.), cited by Major J.
in his reasons.  Significantly she went on to observe at p. 307:                     Why
did the courts reject the concept of a fixed charge with a licence to deal?  In
doing so, they undeniably limited the freedom of debtor and creditor to
contract as they might choose in an age when freedom of contract was
paramount.  The answer, it may be suggested, lies in the effects which
recognition of such a concept would have upon the rights of third parties and
general commercial activity, as well as the perceived injustice of allowing the
debtor to trade freely while remaining immune from the normal incidents of
legal process.  As Fletcher-Moulton L.J. put it in Evans v. Rival Granite
Quarries Ltd., supra (p. 995):  The
results of such a contention are astonishing; it means that by giving such a
debenture a company retains the full right of trading with untied hands and at
the same time obtains immunity from the operation of all processes of law.  I
should be slow to come to the conclusion that such an anomaly was recognized by
the law.  Nor do I think that it is.  A consideration of the effect of floating
charges and of the fact that the freedom of the company to carry on its
business is not based on special words creating that freedom, but on the nature
of the charge itself, leads me to the conclusion that the right of the company
to carry on its business as it wills pending the enforcement of the security
must mean that it may carry it on in accordance with law, including a liability
to the processes of the law if it does not pay its debts.  Finally, at p. 309, McLachlin
J.A. concluded:  In
general, the courts have been unwilling to characterize charges which permit
the debtor to deal with his property in the ordinary course of business as
fixed charges with licenses to sell.  Rather, the courts have characterized
such charges as floating, with the result that they give the chargeholder no
priority over third parties prior to crystallization. . . .  In
short, the answer to the question of whether the courts have recognized a fixed
charge subject to a licence to sell in the ordinary course of business is no
. . . .  The Significance of
the Equity of Redemption  XXX.          For the resolution of these appeals, it
is essential that there be a clear recognition of the fundamental difference
between an absolute and a conditional assignment of book debts.  In an absolute
assignment, all interests are transferred and no property remains in the hands
of the assignor.  It is, simply, a sale of the book debts of the company.  This
is the basis of the business of factoring.  Factoring is described in R.
Burgess, Corporate Finance Law (2nd ed. 1992), at p. 100, in this
manner:  “Factoring
is a legal relationship between a financial institution (the factor) and a
business concern (the client) selling goods or providing services to trade
customers (the customers) whereby the factor purchases the client’s book debts
either with or without recourse to the client and administers the client’s
sales ledger.”                     From
this definition it is apparent that factoring arrangements involve:  (1)  the
purchase of the client’s book debts;  (2)the
taking over and administration of the client’s sales ledger and credit control
functions; and  (3)the
provision to the client of finance which will be a specified percentage of the
nominal value of the debts.  The author goes on (at p. 101) to
consider the requirements for an assignment of book debts under English law and
observes that to be effective the assignment must be absolute.  The text
defines “absolute”, in these terms:                     The
ordinary legal meaning of “absolute” is unconditional, so, for an assignment to
be absolute, it must not be conditional in any way; specifically, it must not
purport to be by way of charge only.  XXXI.         A factoring of accounts receivable is
based upon an absolute assignment of them.  It is in effect a sale by a company
of its accounts receivable at a discounted value to the factoring company for
immediate consideration.  In my view, s. 224 ITA does protect those
engaged in the factoring business and those lending institutions that have
succeeded in perfecting their security interest prior to any intervention by
the MNR.  However, I cannot accept the submission that Parliament, by this
section, intended to create an interest which was both conditional as a
security interest and at the same time unconditional as an absolute
assignment.  There cannot have been an intent to combine such incompatible
concepts.  XXXII.        Clearly a GABD does not meet the standard
required for a factoring arrangement which requires  an absolute transfer of
the proprietary interest of the assignor in the book debts.  Pursuant to the
instruments presented in this case the borrower retains the right to redeem the
book debts once the debt is paid off.  This right of redemption irrefutably demonstrates
that the assignment is something less than absolute.  XXXIII.      I agree with the MNR that what the actual
equity of the borrower in the book debts may be from time to time is irrelevant
for the purpose of determining the legal effect of the equity of redemption. 
It would be absurd if a company were to fluctuate between having title and not
having title to their book debts based on their ratio of debt to assets.  This
is particularly true of a company engaged in a seasonal business.  Yet if a
GABD is treated as an absolute assignment, this can be the only result, as the
bank is limited to recovering the amount of the loan.  Since the bank could not
recover any book debts if the company had a surplus in their account, the book
debts would belong to the company.  When there was a deficit, some or all of
the book debts would belong to the bank.  Such a fluctuating state of affairs
is inconsistent with the certainty required in commercial matters.  I believe
that the correct view is that a GABD represents a security interest with the
legal title being with the lender and the equitable title remaining with the
borrower.  This is supported both by the jurisprudence and by the wording of
the section.    Based
on the reasoning of Houlden J. in Re Broydon Printers, supra, as
approved by Lamer J. in Federal Business Development Bank, supra,
the right of redemption of the book debts, in my view, comes within the
definition of “property” in the Bankruptcy Act.  As such, the reasoning
of Lamer J. in Federal Business Development Bank would apply and the
book debts would constitute “property of the bankrupt” for purposes of
subsection 107(1) of the Bankruptcy Act.  In summary, an assignment cannot be
both absolute and yet leave an equity of redemption in the form of the right to
redeem with the assignor.  The retention of an equity of redemption is consistent
with a security interest and not with an absolute assignment.  A GABD
simply cannot constitute an absolute transfer of property.    Summary  XXXVIII.    In Friesen, supra, it was held
that the words of the Income Tax Act should be given their plain and
ordinary meaning in accordance with the structure and purpose of the Act.  It
is clear that in enacting the sections of the ITA and ETA  under
consideration Parliament was attempting to ensure the priority of the claim of
the MNR over that of other creditors.  The primary task of collecting and
remitting taxes and contributions under both Acts rests with those who are
employers and those who sell goods and services.  These amounts so collected
could be said to belong not to the collecting debtor entities but to the
government.  In a sense the funds collected but not remitted might be
considered to be held in a form of trust since the entities that have collected
these funds are not in any circumstances entitled to retain them.  Rather, they
must remit the funds.  In those circumstances the priority granted to the MNR
to recover such funds cannot possibly be said to be expropriation without
compensation.  XXXIX.      In an effort to ensure the recovery of
these amounts collected for the MNR, Parliament has endeavoured to ensure the
priority of the claims of the MNR to these funds over other creditors.  The
majority of the courts that have considered this issue since the 1990 amendment
have concluded that Parliament has succeeded in achieving this aim:  see: TransGas
Ltd. v. Mid-Plains Contractors Ltd. (1993), 101 D.L.R. (4th) 238 (Sask.
C.A.), aff’d [1994] 3 S.C.R. 753; Berg v. Parker Pacific Equipment Sales,
[1991] 1 C.T.C. 442 (B.C.S.C.); Lundrigans Ltd. (Receivership) v. Bank of
Montreal (1993), 110 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 91 (Nfld. T.D.); Bonavista
(Town) v. Atlantic Technologists Ltd., supra, as well as two of the
trial decisions in this case on appeal.  XL.             I am in agreement with Major J. that
a GABD is a security interest and as well that “secured creditor” excludes
those individuals who own property absolutely.  However I cannot agree that a
GABD constitutes an absolute assignment so that the assignee becomes the owner
of the book debts.  The two concepts in the same instrument are incompatible
and an impossible contradiction.  Quite simply, a GABD cannot be an absolute
assignment since by its very nature it is a security interest.  XLI.            In drafting the language of the
sections it must be assumed that Parliament sought carefully to achieve its
purpose, and that it did not intend to create an absurdity or a redundancy.  My
position can be summarized in this manner:  (i)                The
definitions of a “security interest” and a “secured creditor” cannot be
contradictory.  Parliament cannot have intended to create definitions which
overlap and contradict each other with the result that the same instrument can,
at the same time, be both a “security interest” and not a “security
interest”.  This is not to say that all assignments are “security interests”. 
Rather it is simply that an instrument, once having been defined as a “security
interest”, cannot also be an absolute assignment.  By definition, an absolute
assignment cannot be a “security interest”.  (ii)               GABDs
are “security interests” and not absolute assignments because they:  (a)  meet
the definition of “security interests” as set out in s. 224(1.3) ITA;  (b)  are
defined as collateral security on their face;  (c)  are
treated as security for a loan on the part of the parties involved;  (d)  have
been defined by this Court as including an equity of redemption, and thus
provide a property interest for the borrower.  As a result they cannot be
absolute;  (e)  cannot
be simultaneously a security interest and an absolute assignment;  (f)  to
recognize GABDs as absolute assignments would frustrate the purpose of several
other statutes.  (iii)  “secured
creditor” is meant to exclude absolute owners.  By definition, one cannot be a
secured creditor and at the same time an owner of the security.  An absolute
assignee would be an owner of the book debts as is, for example, a factor. 
Parliament by this section has excluded those financial institutions engaged in
factoring from the operation of the section, together with those financial
institutions who have perfected their security interest by assuming ownership. 
There is no intention manifested by the 1990 amendment to accord any priority
to holders of GABDs.  Disposition                      The following are the reasons
delivered by  I.                 Iacobucci J.
(dissenting) -- While I agree with the general principles of statutory
interpretation outlined by my colleague Justice Cory, I agree with Justice
Major that the general assignments of book debts in this case were tantamount
to an absolute transfer of property.  Accordingly, I would dispose of the
appeals in the manner proposed by Major J.                     The following are the reasons
delivered by                     Major
J. (dissenting) --  I.                 Introduction  II.                These
are appeals from a decision of the Court of Appeal of Alberta involving three
cases.  In all cases Her Majesty in Right of Canada as represented by the
Minister of National Revenue (the "MNR") is a party.  Alberta
Treasury Branches is a party in two of the cases and the Toronto-Dominion Bank
is the other party.  Each appeal involves a priorities contest between the
MNR's garnishee summons, and a general assignment of book debts
("GABD") to the lending institutions.  III.               Section
224(1.2) of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended in
1990, S.C. 1990, c. 34, s. 1, provides a form of garnishment which enables the
MNR in certain circumstances to intercept monies owed to tax debtors.  This
form of garnishment is not available for the collection of income tax debts
generally.  It is limited to the collection of amounts owing by a person who
has withheld, or should have withheld, monies from another under s. 153 of the Income
Tax Act and who has failed to remit the withheld amounts.  An identical
garnishment remedy, provided by the Excise Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c.
E-15, s. 317(3) , applies where a person has failed to remit GST which was, or
ought to have been, collected from other persons.  IV.              The
issue in these appeals is whether the sections apply to give the MNR a priority
over creditors who have received an absolute assignment of book debts from the
tax debtor.  The resolution of the appeals turns on the definition of
"secured creditor", which requires the holding of a security interest
in the "property of another person".  V.                In
my opinion, the sections do not grant the MNR a priority over a creditor who
holds an assignment of book debts.  As a matter of law, such a creditor owns
the book debts in question and thus cannot be said to have a security interest
in the property of another person.  VI.              This
result is dictated by the common law as well as basic principles of the
interpretation of the Income Tax Act.  The wording of the sections is
simply not sufficiently clear and unambiguous to authorize the expropriation,
without compensation, of a proprietary interest from the innocent holder of the
assignment of the book debts.  II.                Facts  VII.             The
first case arose in 1987 from a loan made by the respondent, Alberta Treasury
Branches, to Country Inns Inc., an Alberta hotel operator.  The borrowed money
was secured in part by a general assignment of book debts. Country Inns Inc.
was in arrears to the appellant MNR for $33,312.67 in unremitted GST, plus
interest and penalties.  Zurich Canada owed Country Inns Inc. $15,000 while
Zurich Insurance Company was alleged to owe $95,000.  VIII.            In
June 1992, the MNR served requirements to pay under s. 317(3)  of the Excise
Tax Act  on Zurich Canada and Zurich Insurance Company, and all other
possible debtors.  After Country Inns Inc. made an assignment under the Bankruptcy
Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. B-3 , the trustee estimated the realization of the
assets of the estate would leave a shortfall to the respondent Alberta Treasury
Branches, which was owed in excess of $6,000,000.  Forsyth J. of the Court of
Queen's Bench, in an application to determine priorities, held that the MNR had
priority by virtue of the provisions of the Excise Tax Act :  (1992), 5
Alta. L.R. (3d) 141.  IX.              In
the second case, Pigott Project Management Ltd. contracted with Land-Rock
Resources Ltd. for excavation work on the Old Man River Dam spillway.  In 1989,
Land-Rock borrowed monies from the respondent Alberta Treasury Branches and
granted it a general assignment of book debts.  After Land-Rock completed the
contract work, Pigott held $161,821.77 in contract holdback funds.  These funds
were claimed by various creditors of Land-Rock, including the appellant MNR, to
whom Land-Rock was indebted for unremitted employee source deductions,
interests and penalties.  X.                In
1991, the MNR served two requirements to pay on Pigott, under s. 224(1.2) of
the Income Tax Act, for almost $600,000.  On an application to determine
priority to the monies in question, Master Waller of the Court of Queen's Bench
decided the respondent Alberta Treasury Branches had priority through its
general assignment of book debts.  An appeal to Hunt J. was dismissed:  (1993),
9 Alta. L.R. (3d) 349.  XI.              In
the third case, Bodor Drilling Ltd. operated a drilling company which borrowed
monies from the respondent Toronto-Dominion Bank.  The borrowed money was
secured in part by a general assignment of book debts.  Bodor owed the
appellant MNR $83,325.19, in unremitted GST, interest and penalties.  XII.             In
March 1992, the MNR served requirements to pay under s. 317(3)  of the Excise
Tax Act  on the trade debtors of Bodor.  Another of Bodor's creditors
successfully filed a petition under the Bankruptcy Act to have Bodor
declared a bankrupt.  Bodor was indebted to the respondent Toronto-Dominion
Bank in the amount of $266,331.12.  In an application to determine priority,
MacLeod J. of the Court of Queen's Bench held that the MNR had priority under
the provisions of the Excise Tax Act .  XIII.            All
three cases were appealed to the Alberta Court of Appeal.  It held that in each
case the lending institution had priority over the MNR:  (1994), 16 Alta. L.R.
(3d) 1.  III.               Analysis  XIV.            Before
1987, the primary garnishment remedy in the Income Tax Act was provided
by s. 224(1), which stated:                     224. (1)  Where the Minister has knowledge or
suspects that a person is or will be, within 90 days, liable to make a payment
to another person who is liable to make a payment under this Act (in this
section referred to as the "tax debtor"), he may, by registered
letter or by a letter served personally, require that person to pay forthwith
... the moneys otherwise payable to the tax debtor in whole or in part to the
Receiver General on account of the tax debtor's liability under this Act.  XV.             Where
a tax debtor had assigned its debts to another party as part of a security
arrangement, courts were virtually unanimous in finding that a demand under s.
224(1) was ineffective to attach any of the assigned debts.  The courts held
that, by the assignment, the tax debtor had transferred its interest in its
accounts to the assignee, leaving nothing for the MNR's garnishment to attach. 
See: Royal Bank of Canada v. R. (1984), 52 C.B.R. (N.S.) 198 (F.C.T.D.),
at pp. 210-13, aff'd (1986), 60 C.B.R. (N.S.) 125 (F.C.A.).  XVI.            Parliament
amended the Income Tax Act in 1987 (S.C. 1987, c. 46, s. 66) and added
two additional subsections (ss. 224(1.2) and (1.3)).  Sections 317(3)  and (4) 
were also added to the Excise Tax Act .  For the purposes of the issue
raised in these appeals the wording of the sections in the Excise Tax Act  is
identical to that of the Income Tax Act.  For the sake of convenience I
will refer to the sections of the Income Tax Act.  XVII.          Section
224(1.2) provided that the MNR could garnish funds owed to a tax debtor or to a
"secured creditor".  Section 224(1.3) provided, inter alia,
definitions of "secured creditor" and a "security
interest":                     224.
...                     (1.2)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Bankruptcy Act, any
other enactment of Canada, any enactment of a province or any law, where the
Minister has knowledge or suspects that a particular person is or will become,
within 90 days, liable to make a payment  (a) to
another person who is liable to pay an amount assessed under subsection
227(10.1) or a similar provision, or to a legal representative of that other
person (each of whom is in this subsection referred to as the "tax
debtor"), or  (b) to
a secured creditor who has a right to receive the payment that, but for a
security interest in favour of the secured creditor, would be payable to the
tax debtor,  the Minister
may, by registered letter or by a letter served personally, require the particular
person to pay forthwith, where the moneys are immediately payable, and in any
other case, as and when the moneys become payable, the moneys otherwise payable
to the tax debtor or the secured creditor in whole in or in part to the
Receiver General on account of the tax debtor's liability under subsection
227(10.1) or a similar provision.                            (1.3) In subsection
(1.2),  "secured
creditor" means a person who has a security interest in the property of
another person or who acts for or on behalf of that person with respect to the
security interest and includes a trustee appointed under a trust deed relating
to a security interest, a receiver or receiver-manager appointed by a secured
creditor or by a court on the application of a secured creditor, a sequestrator,
or any other person performing a similar function;  "security
interest" means any interest in property that secures payment or
performance of an obligation and includes an interest created by or arising out
of a debenture, mortgage, hypothec, lien, pledge, charge, deemed or actual
trust, assignment or encumbrance of any kind whatever, however or whenever
arising, created, deemed to arise or otherwise provided for;  XVIII.         The
operation of the 1987 version of s. 224(1.2) as against the holder of a GABD
was considered by courts in Alberta, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba
and Nova Scotia.  XIX.            In
Alberta, in Lloyds Bank of Canada v. International Warranty Co. (1989),
64 Alta. L.R. (2d) 340 (Q.B.), rev'd (1989), 68 Alta. L.R. (2d) 356 (C.A.),
McDonald J. held that the new definition of "security interest" was
broad enough to include monies which were equitably assigned by a tax debtor to
a bank (at pp. 352-53):  ...the
definition of "security interest" is so broad as to include moneys
which have been equitably assigned by the tax debtor to, for example, a bank. 
The ownership by the bank of the funds that are the subject of the assignment
constitutes an "interest in property".  That interest in property is
one which "secures payment" of the "obligation" of the tax
debtor.... The provision of such security is the very purpose of the assignment
of book debts.  Moreover, the bank's interest is one "created by or
arising out of [an] assignment...of any kind whatever, however or whenever
arising..."  As a result, he held that the MNR obtained
priority to the garnished funds over the claim of Lloyds Bank as the assignee
of the book debts.  XX.             The
Alberta Court of Appeal reversed the trial decision in Lloyds Bank but
on other grounds.  Relying on its decisions in Re Lamarre; University of
Calgary v. Morrison, [1978] 2 W.W.R. 465, and Attorney General of Canada
v. Royal Bank of Canada, [1979] 1 W.W.R. 479, the Court of Appeal held that
the provisions of s. 224(1.2) provided at most for a form of extra-judicial
attachment which could bring the funds into the custody of the MNR.  The court
held that the section fell short of effecting a transfer of property in the
funds or establishing the priority of the MNR's claim.  It concluded (at p.
362) that "[s]omething further is required to accomplish either
purpose".  XXI.            The
decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal in Lloyds Bank was followed by
the Manitoba Court of Appeal in Pembina on the Red Development Corp. v.
Triman Industries Ltd., [1991] 6 W.W.R. 481, and the British Columbia Court
of Appeal in Concorde International Travel Inc. v. T.I. Travel Services (B.C.)
Inc. (1990), 72 D.L.R. (4th) 405.  In the B.C. decision, Hinkson J.A.
referred to the decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal in Lloyds Bank
and stated at p. 409:                     In
my opinion, s. 224 styled as it is "Garnishment" deals in s-ss. (1)
and (1.2) with the mechanics of garnishment.  The Minister in serving a demand
pursuant to that section must be proceeding upon the basis that he asserts a
tax debtor's liability to him.  That justified garnishing the funds in the
hands of a creditor of the tax debtor.  But, I am unable to see in that
section any provision that would have the effect of transferring the property
in the funds to the Minister or establishing a priority of Revenue Canada's
claim.  That was the point dealt with by the Alberta Court of Appeal.  [Emphasis
added.]  XXII.          To
the opposite effect are decisions by courts in Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia:  Royal
Bank of Canada v. Saskatchewan Power Corp., [1991] 1 W.W.R. 1 (Sask. C.A.),
aff'g [1990] 2 W.W.R. 655 (Sask. Q.B.) and Touche Ross Ltd. v. M.N.R.
(1990), 71 D.L.R. (4th) 648 (N.S.S.C.T.D.).  XXIII.         Apparently
in order to deal with the competing lines of authority as to whether s.
224(1.2) was sufficient to grant a priority to the MNR, Parliament amended the
section in 1990 by adding the following to the end of the section:  ...and on
receipt of that letter [i.e. the garnishment summons] by the particular person,
the amount of those moneys that is required by that letter, to be paid to the
Receiver General shall, notwithstanding any security interest in those moneys,
become the property of Her Majesty and shall be paid to the Receiver General in
priority to any such security interest.  XXIV.         This
1990 amendment was made to both the Income Tax Act and the relevant
provisions of the Excise Tax Act .  The three trial decisions in the
cases at issue in these appeals are principally concerned with the issue of
whether this amendment constituted the "something further" which Lloyds
Bank had held was necessary to transfer the property interest in the funds
to the MNR or to grant a priority to the MNR.  XXV.          Two
judges of the Court of Queen's bench held that the 1990 amendments did
constitute the "something further" and that as a result the MNR
gained priority over the book debts to the lending institutions in question. 
Forsyth J. based his decision expressly on the wording of the 1990 amendment
and held that it was sufficiently explicit.  In addition to the 1990
amendments, MacLeod J. placed reliance on the finding of McDonald J. in Lloyds
Bank that a GABD falls within the definition of a security interest in s.
224(1.3).  XXVI.         In
the third case, the Master in Chambers held that the 1990 amendments were still
not sufficiently broadly worded to allow Revenue Canada to attach monies in
which the tax debtor has no interest by virtue of an absolute assignment.  Hunt
J. on appeal agreed with his conclusion.  She relied on a perceived ambiguity
in the definition of security interest, stating at pp. 360-61:                     I
am of the view, moreover, that it is not clear whether the modifying provisions
at the end of the definition of "security interest" (the words
"of any kind whatever, however or whenever arising, created, deemed to
arise or otherwise provided for") are meant to apply to each of the
enumerated types of interests or instruments  (debenture, mortgage, assignment,
etc.) or whether these words are meant only to modify the term
"encumbrance".  McDonald, J. [in Lloyds Bank, supra]
assumed the former to be the case, but in my view the meaning is not without
doubt.  There is a third way of reading the modifying words at the end, namely
that the words "of any kind whatever" describe
"encumbrance", with the balance of the words applying to each of the
listed types of interests.  The words "of any kind whatever" might
also be taken to apply to assignments and encumbrances.  Were this
provision more clear, it would be easier to conclude that Parliament meant to
include all types of assignments, including unconditional assignments,
in the definition.  This would make it plainer that, indeed, Parliament
intended Revenue Canada's claim to take priority over the property of someone
other than the tax debtor, such as an assignee of the tax debtor's book debts. 
[Emphasis in original.]  XXVII.        I
agree with Forsyth J. that the 1990 amendments to the Income Tax Act and
the Excise Tax Act  were sufficient to provide the "something
further" which the Alberta Court of Appeal thought to be necessary in Lloyds
Bank.  As Côté J.A. in the decision of the Court of Appeal in this case
stated about the amendment to s. 224(1.2), at p. 6:  ...the
amendments to that subsection say that service transfers the debt to Her
Majesty, and that it shall be paid to Her Majesty notwithstanding the security
interest, and in priority to the security interest.  Where those amendments
apply, in my view they reverse our Lloyds Bank decision and give the
M.N.R. priority over earlier mortgages and assignments.  I cannot confine them
to floating or conditional assignments and must disagree with one of the
Justices appealed from.  XXVIII.      I
also agree with MacLeod J. that McDonald J. at trial in Lloyds Bank was
correct to hold that a GABD falls within the definition of security interest in
s. 224(1.3).  That section defines "security interest" as including:  ... any
interest in property that secures payment or performance of an obligation and
includes an interest created by or arising out of ... [an] assignment ... of
any kind whatever, however or whenever arising ....  XXIX.         With
respect, I do not accept the conclusion of Hunt J. that the definition of
"security interest" is ambiguous and that the phrase "of any
kind whatever" should be read to modify only "encumbrance" which
is the last type of security listed.  When the definition is read in its plain
and ordinary sense, it is clear that the broad phrase "of any kind
whatever" is intended to cover all of the listed types of security
including an assignment.  The phrase "a[n] assignment ... of any kind
whatever" is broad enough to encompass the absolute assignments of book
debts which are at issue in these appeals.  XXX.          The
finding that a GABD is a security interest for the purposes of the Income
Tax Act or the Excise Tax Act  is also consistent with the manner in
which the assignments are dealt with in the contracts which create the
assignments.  For instance, the instrument which creates the assignment of book
debts from Land-Rock Resources Ltd. to Alberta Treasury Branches provides, inter
alia:                     THE
PRESENT assignment and transfer shall be a continuing collateral security
to Treasury Branches for the payment of all and every present and future
indebtedness and liability of the undersigned to Treasury Branches and any
ultimate unpaid balance thereof with interest. [Emphasis added.]  XXXI.         My
conclusions that the GABDs at issue in these appeals fall within the statutory
definition of a security interest and that the 1990 amendment is effective,
when it applies, to give the MNR a priority over earlier mortgages and
assignments, do not, however, lead inevitably to the conclusion that the MNR
has priority over the lending institutions to the debts at issue in these
appeals.  XXXII.        A
new argument was raised before the Alberta Court of Appeal and this Court to
the effect that even if an unconditional GABD is a security interest, the
lending institutions do not fall within the definition of "secured
creditor" in s. 224(1.3) of the Income Tax Act.  Côté J.A. held at
pp. 7-8:  The M.N.R. must
believe or suspect that the intended recipient of the letter is liable, or will
soon become liable to make a payment under para. (a) or para. (b)
of the operative subs. (1.2).  No one suggests that para. (a) applies
here, given the general assignments of book debts and other assignments.  So
the effective precondition in these cases is para. (b).  It says:                     (b)
to a secured creditor who has a right to receive the payment that, but for [a]
security interest in favour of the secured creditor, would be payable to
the tax debtor. (emphasis added)  Subsection
(1.3) defines "security interest", and that definition appears to be
satisfied in the present cases.  But subs. (1.3) also defines "secured
creditor"....  I will restate that definition slightly using square
brackets:  ... a
[certain] person who has a security interest in the property of another
person or who acts for or on behalf of that person with respect to the
security interest and includes... (emphasis added)                     In
each of these three appeals, there was a general assignment of book debts which
purported immediately to transfer title to the Bank or Treasury Branch. 
Doubtless it was done to secure a loan, but legal title was thereafter in the
transferee, the Bank or Treasury Branch.  Therefore, the Bank or Treasury
Branch is not a "secured creditor" under this definition, because it
does not have any interest "in the property of another person".  The
Bank or Treasury Branch itself is the owner.  The tax debtor, both sides agree,
would have to be the "other person".  But he has no title.  So one
cannot say that the book debts (receivables) assigned are "the property
of" the tax debtor.  XXXIII.      I
agree.  The wording of s. 224(1.2) clearly requires not only that there is a
security interest, but also that the payment be made either to the tax debtor
or to a secured creditor.  Here, because of the assignments, the payments are
made to the lending institutions and the question is whether these lending
institutions meet the definition of "secured creditor" as defined in
the statutes.  XXXIV.      The
definition of secured creditor is a "person who has a security interest in
the property of another", that other being the tax debtor.  The critical
issue is whether, after an assignment, the lending institutions have a security
interest in the property of the tax debtor.  In my view, they do not.  An
assignment passes title and therefore property in the book debts is held by the
lending institution and not by the tax debtor.  XXXV.       It
is well-established law that a GABD, such as the ones at issue in these
appeals, has the effect of transferring all right, title and ownership in and
to the property assigned so that it can no longer be considered the property of
the assignor.  See: Evans Coleman and Evans Ltd. v. R.A. Nelson Construction
Ltd. (1958), 27 W.W.R. 38 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 42; Lettner v. Pioneer Truck
Equipment Ltd. (1964), 47 W.W.R. 343 (Man. C.A.), at pp. 348-49; Royal
Bank of Canada v. Attorney General of Canada (1977), 25 C.B.R. (N.S.) 233
(Alta. S.C.T.D.), at pp. 236 and 241, aff'd [1979] 1 W.W.R. 479; Royal Bank
of Canada v. R., supra, at pp. 206 and 212; Toronto-Dominion Bank
v. Minister of National Revenue (1990), 39 F.T.R. 102, at p. 105.  XXXVI.      In
Evans Coleman and Evans Ltd. v. R.A. Nelson Construction Ltd., the
plaintiff attempted to garnish funds owing to the defendant which were held by
a bank.  A second bank held a GABD executed by the defendant.  The British
Columbia Court of Appeal concluded that the  GABD passed property in the book
debts absolutely, and that the defendant no longer had an interest that could
be garnisheed.  XXXVII.     In
Royal Bank of Canada v. R., Muldoon J. of the Federal Court Trial
Division came to a similar conclusion which was unanimously confirmed by the
Federal Court of Appeal.  Under the terms of the assignment, the assignor Miles
contracted to act as a trustee for the funds assigned by him to the Royal Bank
under a GABD.  The MNR argued that an assignee can have no greater claim on the
garnished money than the assignor.  Muldoon J. rejected this argument and held
at p. 212:                     With
respect, that contention misses the point.  To equate the respective rights of
the assignee and the assignor in and upon the book debts is to overlook the
very nature and effect of the assignment, for the assignee owns the book debts
and the assignor does not.  To those who have not searched in the personal
property security register, the assignor, of course, might still appear to be
an ordinary trade creditor, but having assigned the book debts, the assignor,
Miles, was in reality a trustee of them for the assignee, the plaintiff bank. 
Here, the Crown has received that which belonged to the bank.  XXXVIII.    In
Lettner v. Pioneer Truck Equipment Ltd., Guy J.A. of the Manitoba Court
of Appeal commented upon the nature and effect a GABD as follows at pp. 348-49:                     As
between Pioneer Truck and the bank, Pioneer Truck knows that its accounts
receivable or book debts belong to the bank.  In equity it cannot be heard to
say that it owns these book debts.                                                                     .
. .  The fact that
banking practice in Canada permits the extension of credit to going concerns,
and permits the borrowers (by licence, as it were) to collect some accounts to
pay wages and current creditors, does not destroy the absolute and specific
quality of the legal assignment to the bank.  XXXIX.      In
Toronto-Dominion Bank v. Minister of National Revenue, Jerome A.C.J. of
the Federal Court Trial Division conducted a thorough review of the
authorities, including those discussed above, and concluded at p. 105:                     In
light of the preceding authorities, and particularly in light of the Federal
Court of Appeal's decision in Royal Bank of Canada v. The Queen, which
is entirely binding on this Court, I must conclude that the general assignment
of book debts granted April 26, 1983, by J.K. Campbell and Associates Limited
to the Toronto-Dominion Bank constituted an absolute transfer of all property
and interest previously held by J.K. Campbell in its accounts or other book
debts, present or future.  Accordingly, after April 26, 1983, the
Toronto-Dominion Bank had full legal and equitable title in all accounts that
were owing or that would become owing by debtors of J.K. Campbell unless such
right was otherwise expropriated by competent and valid legislation.  XL.             In
addition to establishing that an absolute assignment of book debts transfers
property in the debts to the assignee, the cases discussed above also stand for
the simple and obvious proposition that the true nature of an assignment can
only be determined by examining the particular wording of the instrument which
creates the assignment.  XLI.            The
assignments in each of the three cases which are involved in these appeals all
contain language which makes it clear that they are immediate and absolute. 
Typical is the assignment from Land-Rock Resources to Alberta Treasury
Branches, which provides:                     THE
UNDERSIGNED Land-Rock Resources Ltd. for valuable consideration HEREBY ASSIGNS
AND TRANSFERS to Province of Alberta Treasury Branches (herein called
"Treasury Branches") all debts, demands and choses in action now due
or hereafter to become due, together with all judgments and securities for the
said debts, demands and choses in action, and all other rights and benefits in
respect thereof which now are or may hereafter become vested in the
undersigned.  XLII.           It
was noted in Royal Bank of Canada v. R., at p. 202, that there may be a
distinction between an absolute assignment and one that provides that, in the
event of default and the non-remedy of the default, the bank may without
further notice deal with the book debts.  Such wording appears to be less than
an absolute assignment and creates for the lending institution a charge on the
book debts which does not crystallize into property in the debts until there
has been an unremedied default.  XLIII.          While
it does not fall to be decided in this case, it seems likely that such an
assignment does not transfer property to the lending institution and thus, at
least prior to default on the part of the assignor, the lending institution
would be a secured creditor under s. 224(1.3).  This type of conditional
wording is not present in any of the instruments at issue in these appeals, all
of which are unconditional and absolute.  XLIV.         Moreover,
at least one of the instruments provides that the assignor is a trustee for the
book debts held by the lending institution.  In Royal Bank of Canada v. R.,
Muldoon J. held that the fact that the assignor is in the position of a trustee
is a further indication that the assignment passes property to the assignee. 
The assignment from Bodor to the Toronto-Dominion Bank provides:  IT IS HEREBY
DECLARED AND AGREED that all money received by the Assignor in payment of any
debts, demands and choses in action...shall be received and held by the
Assignor in trust for the Bank.  XLV.           It
should be noted that the fact that the GABD is referred to as "continuing
collateral security" in two of the instruments does not make the GABD
anything less than absolute.  In both Evans Coleman and Lettner,
the GABDs contained language that the general assignment of book debts would be
continuing collateral security and in each case the courts held that such
language did not affect the absoluteness of the assignment.  XLVI.         At
the Alberta Court of Appeal, the MNR took the position that even if legal title
was transferred to the assignee by the GABD, the assignor tax debtor retained
an equitable interest in the nature of an equity of redemption which was
sufficient for the book debts to remain the "property" of the tax
debtor.  XLVII.        Côté
J.A. responded to this argument by stating that while in theory the tax debtor
held an equity of redemption, this equity could not be exercised in practice
except by application to a court of equity.  Such an application would only be
granted by a court of equity where the value of the book debts exceeded the
value of the loans which they secured.  He concluded that in cases like the
three on appeal, where the value of the loans exceeded the value of the book
debts, there is no real equity of redemption.  He also held that the only
property of the tax debtor was the equity of redemption and that the MNR did
not claim that interest.  XLVIII.       I
agree with Côté J.A. that the tax debtor retains an equity of redemption upon
an assignment of its book debts.  Halsbury's Laws of England (4th
ed. 1980), vol. 32, at para. 401, defines a mortgage as "a disposition of
property as security for a debt" which "may be effected ... by an
assignment of a chose in action" such as a book debt.  At para. 407 Halsbury's
also states that:  Incident to
every mortgage is the right of the mortgagor to redeem, a right which is called
his equity of redemption.... This right arises from the transaction being
considered as a mere loan of money secured by a pledge of the estate.  Thus prima facie an assignor of book debts
retains an equitable right to redeem his assignment of the book debts once the
debt obligation which is secured by the book debts has been completely
discharged by the assignor.  XLIX.         I
also agree with Côté J.A. that in the context of these appeals the fact that
the tax debtors in theory hold an equity of redemption in their book debts is
of purely academic interest since, on the facts, the value of the loans secured
by the book debts far exceeds the value of the debts themselves.  Thus there is
no value in the equity of redemption held by the tax debtors.  While the equity
of redemption theoretically exists, for practical purposes it is incapable of
any realization.  L.                The
appellant MNR argues, however, that Côté J.A. erred by focusing his attention
on whether the value of the loans exceeds the value of the book debts.  The MNR
points out that if the relative value of the loan and the security is the only
relevant factor then a tax debtor who operates his business with the assistance
of a revolving line of credit secured by an assignment of book debts (which is
a common business arrangement) would fluctuate between being and not being a
secured creditor on an almost daily basis depending on the relative value of
the collectibles and the line of credit of the business.  LI.               I
share the MNR's concern that the relative value of the loan and the book debts
is not the sole determining factor as to whether the assignor's equity of
redemption makes the book debts his "property".  LII.              As
a matter of law, an absolute assignment of book debts makes those book debts
the property of the assignee.  Those book debts remain the property of the
assignee until the assignor actually exercises his equitable right to redeem. 
It is a necessary precondition to the exercise of the equity of redemption that
the loans secured by the assignment be paid off in full, along with any accrued
interest and costs.  LIII.            With
respect, however, while it is a necessary precondition that the value of the
security exceed the value of the loan in order to exercise the right of
redemption, the fulfilment of this precondition is not sufficient to return the
book debts to the property of the assignor.  The assignor must also choose to
exercise the right of redemption which will mean a termination of the loan
arrangement with the lending institution.  LIV.            At
base, the equity of redemption is no more than a recognition that the
assignment of debts to the creditor, while immediate and absolute, is for a
limited purpose.  In equity, the creditor cannot unjustly enrich itself by
realizing on more security than the value of the loan which is secured.  At any
given time the value of the security may exceed the value of the loan, but upon
termination of the lending relationship, the assignor of the security is
entitled, in equity, to an accounting.  LV.             In
determining whether the book debts, once assigned, are the "property"
of the assignor or of the assignee, the Court must choose between two competing
definitions of "property".  One definition is the immediate legal
title to what had been assigned and the other is a potential interest
enforceable only in equity to reacquire property which has been assigned to
another, contingent upon successfully fulfilling the terms of the loan
agreement.  LVI.            In
Friesen v. Canada, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 103, it was held that the words of
the Income Tax Act are to be read in their plain and ordinary sense. 
The plain and ordinary meaning of "property" is legal title and not a
contingent future equitable right to reacquire property which one does not
presently hold.  The very term "equity of redemption"
highlights the fact that property is not presently held by the assignor, but
rather there is a limited right to reacquire property at a future date.     LVII.        The
central thrust of the MNR's submissions in this Court is contained in para. 45
of his factum, where he states that where title to property is transferred, the
phrase "property of another person" must be read to mean
"property that, absent the security interest, is the property of
the person giving the security".  LVIII.          This
proposition is contrary to the traditional Canadian jurisprudence that the
words of a taxing statute are to read strictly for their plain and ordinary
meaning and that only if there is a true ambiguity is the intention of
Parliament to be considered.  LIX.            In
the circumstances of these appeals, a strict reading of the taxation statute is
appropriate.  As pointed out by Hunt J. at p. 361, these appeals raise not only
the traditional tax interpretation principle of resolution of ambiguity in
favour of the taxpayer: Johns-Manville Canada Inc. v. The Queen, [1985]
2 S.C.R. 46, at p. 72.  They also raise the well-known principle that, in the
absence of clear and unequivocal language, there is a presumption that
proprietary rights are not to be taken away without provision being made for
compensation.  LX.             In
the context of these appeals, the interpretation of s. 224 urged by the MNR
would have the effect of expropriating property to which the lender is legally
entitled under its security agreement with the tax debtor.  The taxes which
would be garnished and withheld from the lending institution are not taxes owed
by the lender but rather taxes owed by its debtor.  LXI.            The
lending institutions are innocent third parties whose proprietary rights would
be expropriated by the provisions of s. 224 and accordingly those provisions
must be read strictly to determine whether the expropriatory language is clear
and unequivocal.  LXII.           However,
it is not necessary to resort to strict interpretation to resolve these
appeals.  In this case the plain and ordinary meaning of the phrase
"property of another person" is property now held by another person. 
This interpretation makes sense of the words without reading anything into the
statute and respects the well-established principle of interpretation that
statutes are to be read as though presently speaking.  LXIII.          One
of the cardinal principles of the plain and ordinary meaning approach is that
nothing be read into a section unless no sense can be made of that section
without the addition of the extra words.  The plain and ordinary meaning of the
statutory words simply does not bear the strained interpretation urged by the
MNR of "property that, absent the security interest, is the
property of the person giving the security".  LXIV.         In
addition to offending the principle that extra words should not be read into a
section unless absolutely necessary, this proposed reading attempts to read in
wording which can be expressly found in another part of the same section. 
Section 224(1.2)(b) applies to "a secured creditor who has a right
to receive the payment that, but for a security interest in favour of the
secured creditor, would be payable to the tax debtor".  The emphasized
words in s. 224(1.2)(b) are identical in effect to the words which the
MNR seeks to introduce into the definition of secured creditor.  LXV.           The
use of a particular phrase in other parts of the Income Tax Act
militates against reading that same phrase into a section of the Act where it
is not found.  This is particularly so where the phrase is found in the very
same section as the disputed wording, and the section in question has been the
subject of amendments twice within the last decade.  LXVI.         If
Parliament had intended that s. 224(1.2) should cover all persons who hold a
security interest, it could have defined "secured creditor" as any
person who holds a security interest without the deliberately limiting words
"in the property of another person".  Alternatively, it could have
expressly provided "property that but for a security interest in favour
of the secured creditor would be the property of another person", thus
echoing the phrasing found in the rest of the section.  LXVII.        In
spite of two recent amendments to this section, Parliament chose not to define
secured creditor in the manner urged by the appellant MNR.  To read into the
section the words suggested by the MNR would be an unwarranted judicial
usurpation of the legislative function.  The only conclusion which can be drawn
from the plain and ordinary meaning of the words which do appear in the Act is
that Parliament did not intend to bring creditors who actually owned the title
to the security interest within the purview of the section.  LXVIII.       It
is my conclusion that these appeals can be resolved without resort to any
special principles of interpretation tailored to the expropriatory nature of
this particular provision.  LXIX.         If
I am mistaken in this conclusion, and there is an ambiguity in the meaning of
the word "property" then I would hold that the specific effect of
this section warrants a strict resolution of any ambiguity in favour of the
respondents.  Such an interpretation requires that "property" be read
to mean present legal title in preference to a future contingent equitable
right to reacquire property not currently held.  It also requires that words
expressly found in another part of the same section not be read without cause
into the definition of secured creditor.  LXX.           In
summary, these appeals should be resolved as follows:  1.The
definition of "security interest" is broad enough to include a
general assignment of book debts even where that assignment is absolute.  2.The wording
of s. 224(1.2), as amended in 1990, is sufficiently clear and unequivocal to
allow a transfer of property in the garnished funds to the MNR and to grant him
a priority in circumstances where the rest of that section applies.  3.An assignee
of an absolute assignment of book debts is not a "secured creditor"
within the meaning of s. 224(1.3) because he does not hold a security interest
"in the property of another person".  4.Therefore, s.
224(1.2) of the Income Tax Act and s. 317(3)  of the Excise Tax Act 
are not effective to grant the appellant MNR an interest in or priority over
debts owed to the assignee of a GABD.  IV.              Disposition  LXXI.         All
three appeals should be dismissed with costs to the respondents.                     Appeals allowed with costs, Iacobucci
and Major JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitor for the
appellant:  The Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the respondent
Province of Alberta Treasury Branches:  Bruni Greenan Klym, Calgary;  Parlee
McLaws, Calgary.   