Schwartz v. Canada, [1996] 1
S.C.R. 254  Alan M. Schwartz        Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Schwartz v.
Canada  File No.:  24093.  1995:  October 6;
1996:  February 22.   on appeal from the federal court of
appeal                        Held:  The appeal should be allowed.                       Taxability in this
case should be assessed pursuant to the retiring allowances provisions of the
Act.  While s. 3(a) of the Act contemplates the possibility that
income arising from sources other than those enumerated in s. 3(a) and
in Subdivision d of Division B of Part I of the Act may
nonetheless be taxable, to find that the damages received by the appellant are
taxable under the general provision of s. 3(a) would disregard the
fact that Parliament, in amending the Income Tax Act in 1983, has chosen
to deal with the taxability of such payments in the provisions relating to
retiring allowances.  Such an approach would amount to giving precedence to a
general provision over the detailed provisions enacted by Parliament.  This
would be inconsistent with basic principles of interpretation.                      Per Sopinka, Iacobucci and
Major JJ.:  On a plain meaning, s. 56(1)(a)(ii) of the Income
Tax Act does not provide for the taxation of settlements for loss of
intended employment.  As well, there was no factual foundation on which to
argue that the settlement could be taxed under s. 3(a) of the Act
as income from the employment contract.  It is, however, unnecessary and
undesirable in this case to answer the question of whether s. 3(a)
permits taxation of unenumerated sources of income.  If this Court intends to
conclude that s. 3(a) should be applied literally, and permit
taxation on income from any source, it should only do so in circumstances which
warrant such a decision because such a result is of fundamental importance. 
Moreover, so deciding can be viewed as a marked departure from previous tax
jurisprudence.  Cases Cited  By La Forest J.   By Major J.                     Referred to:  The Queen v. Savage,
[1983] 2 S.C.R. 428; Curran v. Minister of National Revenue, [1959]
S.C.R. 850; Canada v. Fries, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1322.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited    Authors Cited  Arnold,
Brian J., Tim Edgar and Jinyan Li, eds. Materials on Canadian Income Tax,
10th ed.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1993.      Gibbens, R. D. 
"Appellate Review of Findings of Fact" (1992), 13 Adv. Q. 445.   Hansen,
Brian G.  "The Taxation of Employees".  In Brian G. Hansen,
Vern Krishna and James A. Rendall, contributing eds., Canadian Taxation. 
Toronto:  Richard De Boo, 1981, 117.  Harris,
Edwin C.  Canadian Income Taxation.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1979.  Harris,
Edwin C.  Canadian Income Taxation, 4th ed.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1986.  Hogg,
Peter W., and Joanne E. Magee.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax
Law.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1995.  Krishna,
Vern.  "Characterization of Wrongful Dismissal Awards for Income Tax"
(1977), 23 McGill L.J. 43.  Krishna,
Vern.  The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax, 4th ed.  Scarborough,
Ont.:  Carswell, 1992.   Rendall,
James A.  "Defining the Tax Base".  In Brian G. Hansen,
Vern Krishna and James A. Rendall, contributing eds., Canadian Taxation. 
Toronto:  Richard De Boo, 1981, 59.  Scace,
Arthur R. A.  The Income Tax Law of Canada, 4th ed.  Toronto: 
Law Society of Upper Canada, 1979.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal, [1994] 2 F.C. 720, [1994] 2 C.T.C. 99,
94 D.T.C. 6249, 167 N.R. 35, 2 C.C.P.B. 109, setting aside a judgment of the
Tax Court of Canada, [1993] 2 C.T.C. 2125, 93 D.T.C. 555.  Appeal allowed.                     Benjamin Zarnett and Carrie Smit, for the
appellant.                     J. S. Gill, Q.C., Susan Van Der Hout
and Elizabeth Chasson, for the respondent.   1                 La
Forest J. -- This appeal involves the issue whether compensation
received by an "employee" from his "employer" pursuant to a
settlement regarding liability for the employer's unilateral decision to cancel
a contract of employment before the employee had become under obligation to
provide services is taxable as income from an unenumerated source under the
general provision of s. 3(a) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952,
c. 148 (now R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)), or, in the alternative, as a
retiring allowance under s. 56(1)(a)(ii) of the Act.  I.  Background  2                 In the spring of 1988, Mr.
Schwartz, a lawyer, received a verbal offer of employment from the Dynacare
Health Group Inc.'s Chairman, Albert J. Latner.  The appellant accepted on the basis
that the employment would begin on completion of an assignment by the appellant
for the Government of Ontario, which was expected in November.  Later, in May
1988, Mr. Schwartz wrote Mr. Latner a letter outlining the terms of their
agreement.  Mr. Latner accepted the proposed terms and signed the letter.  They
agreed that the appellant was to receive a salary of $250,000 annually as well
as the option to acquire 1.25 percent of the existing non-voting shares of
Dynacare, calculated at the date of the agreement, for the price of $0.01 per
share.  The agreement provided that the shares would “vest in three equal
amounts [on the date of commencement of the employment and on the first and
second anniversary dates]”.  They also agreed that every effort would be made
to minimize taxes payable by both parties.  Within days, the appellant notified
his partners of his intention to withdraw from the partnership at the end of
his assignment.  3                 The contract was never carried
out.  In late September, Dynacare informed the appellant that his services
would not be required.  Later, the appellant received a letter dated October 6,
1988 from Dynacare's solicitors confirming the cancellation of the employment,
recognizing Dynacare's contractual obligation towards the appellant and
offering him $75,000 in exchange for a full and final release.  The letter also
made reference to the fact that the appellant had an obligation to mitigate his
damages.  The appellant refused the offer.  He continued to practise law until
he withdrew from the partnership on January 31, 1989, as he had agreed with his
partners.  He commenced employment with an investment firm the next day at an
annual salary of $175,000.  4                 Negotiations for settlement were
conducted by the parties' lawyers during the course of which two letters, later
filed at trial, were exchanged.  The first, dated June 13, 1989, was from
Dynacare's solicitors and was addressed to the appellant's solicitors.  It
dealt specifically with the value of Mr. Schwartz's stock options and concluded
that Dynacare considered them to be worth $267,000 for the purposes of the
settlement.  Dynacare's solicitors also stated that their client was “prepared
to be flexible around the range of $267,000”.  The appellant's solicitors
replied in a letter dated June 22, 1989, expressing disagreement with
Dynacare's method of calculating the value of the stock options and stating
that the appellant was owed $75,000 as lost salary.  That letter contained an
offer to settle the dispute for $400,000 plus costs.  5                 A settlement was reached and a
release was signed on August 21, 1989.  Dynacare agreed to pay the appellant a
lump sum of $360,000 as damages plus $40,000 on account of costs.  At trial,
Mr. Schwartz testified that in arriving at the amount of $360,000, losses on
stock options, salary, embarrassment, anxiety and inconvenience resulting from
the breach of the employment contract by Dynacare were considered, but no
specific allocation among such losses was made.  6                 The respondent Crown assessed
the damages as constituting a “retiring allowance” taxable under s. 56(1)(a)(ii)
of the Act.  The appellant filed a notice of objection, but the respondent
confirmed the assessment initially made.  The appellant then appealed the
assessment successfully to the Tax Court of Canada, [1993] 2 C.T.C. 2125, 93
D.T.C. 555, from whose decision the respondent appealed to the Federal Court of
Appeal, which allowed the appeal, [1994] 2 F.C. 720, [1994] 2 C.T.C. 99, 94
D.T.C. 6249, 167 N.R. 35, 2 C.C.P.B. 109.  This Court granted the appellant
leave to appeal the latter decision on October 13, 1994, [1994] 3 S.C.R. xi.  II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  7                 The provisions of the Act to
which I will refer during the course of these reasons are the following:                     3.  The income of a taxpayer for a
taxation year for the purposes of this Part is his income for the year
determined by the following rules:                     (a) 
determine the aggregate of amounts each of which is the taxpayer's income for
the year (other than a taxable capital gain from the disposition of a property)
from a source inside or outside Canada, including, without restricting the
generality of the foregoing, his income for the year from each office,
employment, business and property;                     5. (1)  Subject to this Part, a
taxpayer's income for a taxation year from an office or employment is the
salary, wages and other remuneration, including gratuities, received by him in
the year.                     6. (1)  There shall be included in
computing the income of a taxpayer for a taxation year as income from an office
or employment such of the following amounts as are applicable:  (a) 
the value of board, lodging and other benefits of any kind whatever received or
enjoyed by him in the year in respect of, in the course of, or by virtue of an
office or employment, except any benefit . . . .                     56. (1)  Without restricting the
generality of section 3, there shall be included in computing the income of a
taxpayer for a taxation year,  (a) 
any amount received by the taxpayer in the year as, on account or in lieu of
payment of, or in satisfaction of,                                                                     . . .  (ii) 
a retiring allowance, other than an amount received out of or under an employee
benefit plan, a retirement compensation arrangement or a salary deferral
arrangement . . . .                     80.4 (1)  Where a person or partnership
received a loan or otherwise incurred a debt by virtue of the office or
employment or intended office or employment of an individual, or by virtue of
the services performed or to be performed by a corporation carrying on a
personal services business (within the meaning assigned by paragraph 125(7)(d)),
the individual or corporation, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have
received a benefit in a taxation year equal to that amount, if any, by which the
aggregate of                                                                     . . .  (b) 
the aggregate of all amounts each of which is an amount of interest that was
paid or payable in respect of the year on such a loan or debt by  (i) 
a person or partnership (in this paragraph referred to as the “employer”) that
employed or intended to employ the individual. . . .                     248. (1)  In this Act,                                                                     . . .  “employment”
means the position of an individual in the service of some other person
(including Her Majesty or a foreign state or sovereign) and “servant” or “employee”
means a person holding such a position;                                                                     . . .  “retiring
allowance” means an amount (other than a superannuation or pension benefit, an
amount received as a consequence of the death of an employee or a benefit
described in subparagraph 6(1)(a)(iv)) received  (a) 
upon or after retirement of a taxpayer from an office or employment in
recognition of his long service, or  (b) 
in respect of a loss of an office or employment of a taxpayer, whether or not
received as, on account or in lieu of payment of, damages or pursuant to an
order or judgment of a competent tribunal  by
the taxpayer or, after his death, by a dependant or a relation of the taxpayer
or by the legal representative of the taxpayer;  III.  Judgments Below  Tax Court of Canada, 93 D.T.C. 555  8                 The Crown's principal contention
before the Tax Court of Canada was that the settlement amount was taxable as a
“retiring allowance”.  In considering this contention, Rip J.T.C.C. relied
heavily on the ordinary meaning of the words of  the Act dealing with retiring
allowances.  In his view, the ordinary meaning of the words “employment”,
“office”, “employee”, “officer”, “position” and “holding” ought not be
altered.  The definition of “retiring allowance”, he stated, does not refer to
an “intended” or “prospective” employment, and one should not read into it
words that are not present there.  He confirmed that finding by considering English
dictionary definitions of the word “position” and the French equivalent “poste”
and found (at p. 560) that an officer is “one who holds, has possession of or
fills a position which grants him a right to stipend or remuneration” and that
an employee is one who “occupies a position in the service of another”.  9                 The consideration of various
factors led the trial judge to the conclusion that Mr. Schwartz was not an
“employee” or in the “employment” of Dynacare when the cancellation of the
employment agreement occurred.  The appellant was still a partner in his law
firm at the time.  He was not performing any services for Dynacare, nor was he
under any obligation to do so.  He was not receiving any kind of remuneration
and the directors of Dynacare had not yet appointed him.  What the appellant
lost when the contract was cancelled, Rip J.T.C.C. held, was not his employment
or his position, but the legal right entitling him to employment in the future.  10               Rip J.T.C.C. rejected the
respondent's submission that parliamentary documents and earlier cases
supported its position by underlying the importance of the distinction to be
made between termination of employment contracts occurring when employment had
already commenced and those occurring before the employee had started providing
any services to his employer.  He therefore concluded that the damages were not
a “retiring allowance” within the meaning of s. 248(1) of the Act.  11               The judge also rejected the
respondent's first alternative argument that if the damages were not a retiring
allowance, they had been received by the appellant as a benefit by virtue of an
office or employment and therefore fell within the purview of s. 6(1)(a)
of the Act.  He followed the Federal Court of Appeal's decisions in The
Queen v. Atkins, 76 D.T.C. 6258, and The Queen v. Pollock, 84 D.T.C.
6370, and found that the damages received by the appellant could not be
regarded as “salary”, “wages” or “remuneration” or as a benefit “received or
engaged [sic] by him . . . in respect of, in the course of, or
by virtue of the office or employment” within the meaning of ss. 5(1) and 6(1)(a)
of the Act.  He added that the fact that the appellant had not commenced
employment at the time the breach occurred made the reasoning even more
persuasive.  12               Finally, Rip J.T.C.C. dealt with
the respondent's argument that the damages were taxable under s. 3 as being
“income from a source”, the source being the employment contract.  He found
that the amount received by the appellant could not be considered “income”,
because the ordinary concept of income pertained to recurring receipts and did
not extend to a lump sum received because a source of income had been taken
away or destroyed.  Consequently, in a case such as the one at bar,
compensation for damages relating to future services was not to be considered
“income”.  He noted that in the present situation, the damages received by the
appellant did not relate in any way to past services.  13               In the course of his reasons, Rip
J.T.C.C. stated (at p. 557) that there was no evidence indicating any
allocation of the settlement amount and made the following finding of fact,
which was disturbed by the Federal Court of Appeal and which is at issue before
our Court, at p. 562:  Schwartz
suffered inconvenience and prejudice when he was informed his services would
not be required.  He had given notice of withdrawal to his law partnership.  He
had to begin to look for employment.  Schwartz was never an employee or officer
of the purported employer.  The damages he received was [sic] in a
small part, if any, for loss of income for future services and to a larger
part, according to the evidence, for embarrassment, anxiety and inconvenience. 
[Emphasis added.]  Federal Court of Appeal (Mahoney, Stone and McDonald JJ.A.),
[1994] 2 F.C. 720  14               The respondent did not argue that
the damages constituted a retiring allowance before the Federal Court of
Appeal.  Mahoney J.A. for the court nonetheless held that he was in substantial
agreement with Rip J.T.C.C.'s finding that the damages did not constitute a
retiring allowance as contemplated by ss. 56(1)(a)(ii) and 248(1) of the
Act.  15               The critical issue before the
Federal Court of Appeal was the Tax Court of Canada's finding of fact relating
to apportionment.  After stating the guidelines laid down by our Court in Stein
v. The Ship “Kathy K”, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802, Mahoney J.A. concluded that the
Federal Court of Appeal was justified in overturning Rip J.T.C.C.'s finding of
fact because the latter had omitted to consider relevant documentary evidence. 
He found that the letters dated June 13, 1989 and June 22, 1989 from the
parties' solicitors were contradictory to the oral evidence on the issue of
allocation and he held that, on a balance of probabilities, $75,000 had been allocated
for loss of salary and $267,000 for loss of the stock options, and that there
was thus no reason not to conclude that $18,000 had been awarded for
embarrassment, anxiety and inconvenience suffered by Mr. Schwartz.  He
preferred the documentary evidence over the appellant's testimony because
paragraph 4 of the May 1988 agreement, which indicated concerns by both parties
regarding taxes, and the self-serving nature Mr. Schwartz's testimony raised
doubts as to his credibility.  16               The Federal Court of Appeal
therefore held that the damages relating to lost salary and stock options
($342,000) were taxable under s. 3 of the Act as income from employment.  It
followed the English decision London & Thames Haven Oil Wharves, Ltd. v.
Attwooll, [1967] 2 All E.R. 124 (C.A.), which was approved by the Federal
Court of Appeal in The Queen v. Manley, [1985] 2 F.C. 208 (leave to
appeal to this Court refused, [1986] 1 S.C.R. xi), and stated, at p. 732:  Where,
pursuant to a legal right, a person receives from another compensation for the
failure to receive a sum of money or benefit which, if it had been received,
would have been income from an employment or office, the compensation is to be
treated for income tax purposes in the same way as if the benefit or sum of
money had been received instead of the compensation.  The Federal Court of Appeal held (at
p. 732) that the source of the appellant's right was the contract of
employment, “a source of income within the express contemplation of paragraph
3(a)”, and that the $342,000 was therefore taxable as income from
employment.  IV.  Analysis   18               For the reasons that follow, I am
of the opinion that the appeal should be allowed.  To deal with the substance
of the Minister of National Revenue's main argument, it is necessary to address
the correctness of the Federal Court of Appeal's decision to overturn Rip J.T.C.C.'s
finding of fact with respect to the allocation made by Dynacare and Mr.
Schwartz of the compensation agreed upon.  I conclude that the Federal Court of
Appeal was wrong in doing so, a conclusion that is sufficient, technically, to
dispose of the Crown's main argument in favour of the appellant.  However, the
substance of the Minister's main argument raises important questions that merit
attention by this Court and it having been fully argued by the parties, I think
it appropriate to deal with it on its merits.  Regarding this issue, I have
come to the conclusion that s. 3(a) of the Act does contemplate
taxability of income arising from sources other than those specifically
provided for in s. 3(a) and in Subdivision d of Division B of Part I of
the Act.  However, in the case at bar, an analysis of the way Parliament
handled the taxability of payments such as the one received by Mr. Schwartz
demonstrates that it is to the rules relating to retiring allowances that one
should turn in assessing taxability.  This brings us to a consideration of the
Crown's alternative argument and, like the trial judge and the Federal Court of
Appeal, I have come to the conclusion that the damages received by Mr. Schwartz
do not constitute a retiring allowance.  19               Before dealing specifically with
the issues raised in this appeal, however, I find it advisable to consider the
manner in which Parliament has historically chosen to deal with the taxability
of monies received by an employee from his ex-employer as a result of the
latter's cancellation of the employment contract.  A.  The Historical Background   21               Initially, damages received by an
employee, from his ex-employer, as a result of the latter's cancellation of the
employment contract, did not constitute income from office or employment
taxable under s. 5(1); nor did they constitute a retiring allowance taxable
under s. 56(1)(a)(ii).  22               On the first of these
propositions, the Federal Court of Appeal, in Atkins, supra,
stated that such payments did not constitute taxable income from an office or
employment under s. 5(1).  That was so because these amounts were not
considered to be in the nature of income for tax purposes.  Jackett C.J.,
confirming the decision rendered by Collier J. at trial (75 D.T.C. 5263), held,
at pp. 6258-59:                     Once
it is conceded, as the appellant does, that the respondent was dismissed
“without notice”, monies paid to him (pursuant to a subsequent agreement) “in
lieu of notice of dismissal” cannot be regarded as “salary”, “wages” or
“remuneration” or as a benefit “received or enjoyed by him . . . in
respect of, in the course of, or by virtue of the office or employment”.  Monies
so paid (i.e., “in lieu of notice of dismissal”) are paid in respect of the “breach”
of the contract of employment and are not paid as a benefit under the contract
or in respect of the relationship that existed under the contract before that
relationship was wrongfully terminated.  The situation is not altered by the
fact that such a payment is frequently referred to as so many months' “salary”
in lieu of notice.  Damages for breach of contract do not become “salary”
because they are measured by reference to the salary that would have been
payable if the relationship had not been terminated or because they are
colloquially called “salary”.  The situation might well be different if an
employee was dismissed by a proper notice and paid “salary” for the period of
the notice even if the dismissed employee was not required to perform the normal
duties of his position during that period.  Having regard to what I have
said, it is clear, in my view, that the learned Trial Judge was correct in
holding that the payment in question did not fall within section 5 of the Income
Tax Act as applicable to the taxation year in question.  [Emphasis
added.]  The principle laid down in Atkins,
which was decided by the Federal Court of Appeal in May of 1976, was therefore
accepted as authoritative both by the courts and commentators (see Krivy v.
Minister of National Revenue, 79 D.T.C. 121 (T.R.B.); Girouard v. The
Queen, 80 D.T.C. 6205 (F.C.A.); Beck v. Minister of National Revenue,
80 D.T.C. 1747 (T.R.B.); Grozelle v. Minister of National Revenue, 77
D.T.C. 310 (T.R.B.); E. C. Harris, Canadian Income Taxation (1979), at
p. 116; R. B. Goodwin, “Personal Damages”, in Canadian Tax Foundation, Report
of Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Tax Conference (1977), 813, at pp.
820-21; also W. A. MacDonald and G. E. Cronkwright, eds., Income Taxation in
Canada (1977 (loose-leaf)), vol. 2, at ¶17,521; and L. M. Collins, “The
Terminated Employee:  Minimizing the Tax Bite”, in Canadian Tax Foundation, Report
of Proceedings of the Forty-Fifth Tax Conference (1994), 31.1, at pp. 31:18
and 31:19), although some questioned the correctness of the legal reasoning
adopted by the Federal Court of Appeal at the time (see V. Krishna,
“Characterization of Wrongful Dismissal Awards for Income Tax” (1977), 23 McGill
L.J. 43).  P. W. Hogg and J. E. Magee, in their recent textbook Principles
of Canadian Income Tax Law (1995), at pp. 164-65, address this historical
reality in these words:                     Before
1978, if the departing employee sued the employer for wrongful dismissal and
recovered damages, then the damages would be received free of tax.  This was
because an award of damages for breach of contract (or for a tort or other
cause of action) is not income for tax purposes.  This was so, even though the
amount of a damages award for wrongful dismissal would be computed by reference
to exactly the same considerations (that is, the amount of salary that would
have been paid during a required period of notice) as would be applied to the
computation of a consensual severance payment.  Since court-awarded damages
were free of tax, it was also held that an out-of-court settlement of a
wrongful dismissal action also escaped tax.  23               The position taken by the courts
towards such payments was clearly accepted by the Minister of National
Revenue.  In Interpretation Bulletin IT-365, dated March 21, 1977, and entitled
“Damages, Settlements, and Similar Receipts”, it is stated:  Receipts
in Respect of Termination of Employment  2.                An
amount that a taxpayer receives on the termination of his employment may
consist of many components such as amounts in respect of salaries, accumulated
leave credits, retiring allowances, compensation for loss of job opportunity or
for lack of adequate or reasonable notice, or other similar amounts.  That part
of the amount that represents salary or wages that the taxpayer would have
received under the contract is taxable pursuant to the provisions of section 5
of the Act.  The portion of the amount that is damages for breach of
contract or loss of future job opportunity is not taxable.  It is a
question of fact whether all or some portion of the amount received is on
account of salary, retiring allowance, or an obligation arising out of an
agreement.  For example a taxpayer may be dismissed with proper notice and be
paid “salary” (which would be taxable) for the period of notice even if the
dismissed employee was not required to perform the normal duties of his
position during that period.  On the other hand, the fact that damages may
be calculated by reference to salary that would have been payable if the
relationship had not been terminated or because they are colloquially called
“salary” does not alter the character of the payments to one of “salary”.  [Emphasis
added.]  24               It was also settled that such
payments did not constitute retiring allowances as contemplated by the Act. 
The definition of “retiring allowance” was different then and read:                     248.  (1)  . . .  “retiring
allowance” means an amount received upon or after retirement from an office or
employment in recognition of long service or in respect of loss of office or
employment (other than a superannuation or pension benefit), whether the
recipient is the officer or employee or a dependant, relation or legal
representative;  At that time, retiring allowances
related only to payments made by an employer following voluntary cessation of
employment on the part of the ex-employee or again following cessation upon the
arrival of a condition agreed upon by the parties, thus excluding from the
scope of the definition payments made by the employer in pursuance of a
judicial order or in settlement of pending or threatened litigation following
unilateral dismissal of the ex-employee.  The position adopted by the courts is
best explained by reference to Collier J.'s reasons in Specht v. The Queen,
[1975] F.C. 150 (T.D.), where the taxpayer had received from his ex-employer a
payment in compensation for the consequences of the latter's unilateral
decision to terminate employment.  There Collier J. had this to say, at p. 158:                     In
my view, the payment here was not made upon or after the plaintiff's
retirement.  The plaintiff did not retire or go into retirement from his
occupation with MacMillan Bloedel within the ordinary meaning of “retire” or
“retirement”.  That is, he did not withdraw from his employment because he had
reached a mutually stipulated age, or generally withdraw from his occupation or
business activity.  I have obtained some assistance on this point, in
endeavouring to ascertain the ordinary meaning of “retirement”, from dictionary
definitions:  The
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed. rev):  “withdrawal from occupation or business activity”  The
Living Webster (1st
ed.):  “retire” “to withdraw from business or active life”.                     The
contract of employment in this case (Exhibit 1) uses the words “retire” and
“retirement” in clauses 1 and 2.  Age 65 was stipulated, but extensions could
be agreed upon.  In my view, “retirement” was used by the parties in its
ordinary meaning as set out above:  a cessation of or withdrawal from work
because of an age stipulation or because of some other condition agreed between
employer and employee.  Although Collier J. did not refer to
any authority on the issue, his position was consistent with the jurisprudence
applicable at that time; see No. 45 v. Minister of National Revenue, 52
D.T.C. 72 (T.A.B.); Larson v. Minister of National Revenue, 67 D.T.C. 81
(T.A.B.); and Jones v. Minister of National Revenue, 69 D.T.C. 4
(T.A.B.); see also Goodwin, supra, at pp. 829-32; B. G. Hansen,
"The Taxation of Employees", in B. G. Hansen, V. Krishna and J. A.
Rendall, eds., Canadian Taxation (1981), 117, at p. 160; and A. R. A.
Scace, The Income Tax Law of Canada (4th ed. 1979), at p. 63.  Collier
J. reiterated his position in Atkins, and applied the reasoning laid
down in Specht.  The Federal Court of Appeal did not deal with the issue
in its reasons because, apparently, the Crown had abandoned the retiring
allowance argument on appeal:  Goodwin, supra, at p. 830, and Krishna,
“Characterization of Wrongful Dismissal Awards for Income Tax”, supra,
at p. 53.  25               Here again, Interpretation
Bulletins offer some helpful hindsight.  The Minister wrote, in Interpretation
Bulletin IT-337R, dated November 19, 1979, and entitled "Retiring
Allowances":  1. 
Amounts received by a former employee arising out of or in consequence of the
termination of employment are usually included as income from that employment
under subsection 5(1) alone or together with paragraph 6(3)(b) (see IT-196R),
or as a retiring allowance under subparagraph 56(1)(a)(ii).  One common
exception is where the payment constitutes damages in respect of a breach of the
contract of employment by the former employer.  [Emphasis added.]  26               Clearly then, at the end of the
1970s, it had been settled and accepted by all, including the Minister of
Revenue, that damages received by an employee, from his ex-employer, as a
result of the latter's cancellation of the employment contract, did not constitute
income from office or employment taxable under s. 5(1) or a retiring allowance
taxable under s. 56(1)(a)(ii) of the Act.  27               This, without doubt, constitutes
the mischief Parliament intended to remedy in 1979 when it amended the Act and
introduced the concept of “termination payments”.  Termination payments were
rendered taxable through s. 56(1)(a)(viii) and were defined in s. 248(1)
in the following manner:                     248.  (1)  . . .  “termination
payment”, for a taxation year, means an amount equal to the lesser of  (a) 
the aggregate of all amounts each of which is an amount received in the year in
respect of a termination of an office or employment, whether or not received
pursuant to an order or judgment of a competent tribunal, other than  (i) 
an amount required by any provision of this Act (other than subparagraph 56(1)(a)(viii))
to be included in computing the income of a taxpayer for a year,  (ii) 
an amount in respect of which an election has been made under subsection 40(1)
of the Income Tax Application Rules, 1971, and  (iii)
an amount received in the year as a consequence of the death of an employee,
and  (b)
the amount by which 50% of the aggregate of all amounts each of which is the
amount that may reasonably be considered to be the employee's salary, wages and
other remuneration from an office or employment for the 12 months preceding the
date that is the earlier of  (i) 
the date on which the office or employment was terminated, and  (ii) 
the date on which an agreement, if any, in respect of the termination was entered
into  exceeds
the amount determined under paragraph (a) for each previous year in
respect of that termination  whether
the recipient is the officer or employee whose office or employment was
terminated or a dependant, relation or legal representative of the officer or
employee;  In Interpretation Bulletin IT-365R,
dated March 9, 1981, the Department of National Revenue stated its position on
termination payments and emphasized that the portion of a payment exceeding the
amount to be considered a “termination payment” under s. 248(1) was considered
to be a non-taxable benefit.  This is consistent with the fact that before this
amendment, amounts such as those received by Mr. Schwartz were not taxable
under the Act.  28               Parliament again addressed the
issue in 1983 by making termination payments of this kind taxable as retiring
allowances.  To that end, s. 56(1)(a)(viii) and the definition of
“termination payment” found in s. 248(1) were repealed, and the definition of
“retiring allowance” was amended in a form that is substantially the same as
the definition applicable to this appeal.  The purpose of this second series of
amendments was to somehow broaden the scope of the Act with respect to such
payments, which became fully taxable, as opposed to the partial taxability of
termination payments.  29               As will become evident throughout
these reasons, this historical perspective must be steadily kept in mind in
considering the proper scope and the applicability to the case at bar of the
provisions relied upon by the Minister in assessing the compensation received
by Mr. Schwartz.  I, therefore, turn to the specific grounds relied upon by the
Crown before our Court.  B.  The Taxability of the
Compensation Received by Mr. Schwartz  30               As I noted at the outset, the
Minister argued that the amount of compensation relating to lost salary and
stock options ($342,000) constitutes income from a source taxable under
the general provision of s. 3(a) of the Act, such source being the
contract of employment.  I pause here to mention that what the Crown argued
before us differs somewhat from the approach adopted by the Federal Court of
Appeal.  Mahoney J.A. found that $342,000 of the $360,000 was income from
employment since it had been received by Mr. Schwartz to compensate for loss of
moneys that, if duly received, would have constituted income from employment
taxable under s. 5(1).  Before us, the Crown did not argue that this amount
constitutes income from employment.  It first submitted that the application of
the surrogatum principle, developed in the London & Thames
case, supra, leads to the conclusion that $342,000 of the $360,000
received by Mr. Schwartz must be characterized as income from a source, since
it compensates Mr. Schwartz for loss of moneys that, if received, would have
constituted income from a source.  The Minister then identifies that source as
being the employment contract, a source other than the five enumerated in s. 3(a)
and the “other sources” provided for in Subdivision d of Division B of Part I
of the Act.  The difference lies in the Minister's argument relating to the
specific source of the damages received by the appellant.                     (1)  Income from
a Source:  Taxability under Section 3(a) of the Act  31               In order to deal with the
substance of the Crown's main argument, it is necessary to analyze the
correctness of the premise on which it is based.  This requires us to deal with
the Federal Court of Appeal's decision to reconsider Rip J.T.C.C.'s finding
regarding the apportionment that was made by the parties of the compensation
received by Mr. Schwartz.                     (a)  The Finding
of Fact  32               It has long been settled that
appellate courts must treat a trial judge's findings of fact with great
deference.  The rule is principally based on the assumption that the trier of
fact is in a privileged position to assess the credibility of witnesses'
testimony at trial.  Lord Shaw thus explained the underlying  principles of the
rule in Clarke v. Edinburgh and District Tramways Co., [1919] S.C.
(H.L.) 35, at pp. 36-37:                     When
a Judge hears and sees witnesses and makes a conclusion or inference with
regard to what is the weight on balance of their evidence, that judgment is
entitled to great respect, and that quite irrespective of whether the Judge
makes any observation with regard to credibility or not.  I can of course quite
understand a Court of Appeal that says that it will not interfere in a case in
which the Judge has announced as part of his judgment that he believes one set
of witnesses, having seen them and heard them, and does not believe another. 
But that is not the ordinary case of a cause in a Court of justice.  In Courts
of justice in the ordinary case things are much more evenly divided; witnesses
without any conscious bias towards a conclusion may have in their demeanour, in
their manner, in their hesitation, in the nuance of their expressions, in even
the turns of the eyelid, left an impression upon the man who saw and heard them
which can never be reproduced in the printed page.   33               The courts have thus adopted a
general rule concerning situations where an appellate court will be justified
in intervening in a trial judge's findings of fact and substituting its own
assessment of the evidence presented at trial.  The generally accepted
formulation of the applicable standard is as stated by Ritchie J. in The
Ship “Kathy K”, supra, where, after reviewing the relevant
authorities, he wrote, at p. 808:  These
authorities are not to be taken as meaning that the findings of fact made at
trial are immutable, but rather that they are not to be reversed unless it can
be established that the learned trial judge made some palpable and
overriding error which affected his assessment of the facts.  While the
Court of appeal is seized with the duty of re-examining the evidence in order
to be satisfied that no such error occurred, it is not, in my view, a part of
its function to substitute its assessment of the balance of probability for the
findings of the judge who presided at the trial.  [Emphasis added.]  This Court has also held, in Beaudoin-Daigneault,
supra, at pp. 8-9, that an appellate court will be justified in
disturbing the trial judge's findings of fact only if a specific and identifiable
error made by the trial judge convinces it that the conclusion of fact reached
is unreasonable, and not one that constitutes a mere divergence of opinion as
to the assessment of the balance of probabilities.  Further, it was held that a
second appellate court should only intervene in a first appellate court's
decision to overturn findings of fact made at trial if it is convinced that the
first appellate court's intervention was not justified.  34               What thus constitutes an error
justifying an appellate court's intervention in the findings of fact made at
trial?  In the present case, the respondent successfully argued before the
Federal Court of Appeal that the trial judge had clearly omitted to consider
documentary evidence that contradicted the appellant's testimony regarding the
allocation made by the parties of the damages.  It is now accepted that a clear
omission of evidence by the trier of fact is the kind of error that can and
will justify a reconsideration of the evidence by an appellate court.  In Chartier
v. Attorney General of Quebec, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 474, the appellant sued the
Province of Quebec after being unjustly convicted of causing the death of
another person during a fist fight.  The Quebec Superior Court and the Court of
Appeal both dismissed Chartier's claim.  The trial judge, whose findings were
endorsed by the Court of Appeal, mentioned only the depositions of the
provincial police officers and disregarded evidence relating to the baldness of
the true assailant which had been observed by four eyewitnesses and which had
not been taken into account by the Quebec Police Force in preparing a composite
sketch.  Pigeon J., for the majority, found that a reconsideration of the trial
judge's findings of fact in that case was justified.  He stated, at p. 493:                     The
question now is on what basis could the trial judge dismiss the claim when
faced with these facts that are practically all established by undisputed
documents.  Counsel for the Attorney General relies on our rule against
interference with concurrent findings.  But this rule admits of certain
exceptions, particularly where the courts below have misapprehended or
overlooked material evidence.  Here it must be noted that, out of all the evidence,
the trial judge mentioned only the depositions of the provincial police
officers.  He did not say a word of the baldness of the true assailant, which
was observed by four eyewitnesses, and which the Quebec Police Force did not
take into account in preparing the composite sketch.  35               An appellate court will be
justified in interfering with the trial judge's findings of fact if certain
relevant evidence was not considered.  This means that the appellate court will
be justified in conducting its own assessment of the balance of probabilities,
taking into consideration the omitted elements.  It does not necessarily mean,
however, that the appellate court will come to a different conclusion from that
arrived at by the trial judge.  It could be that a reconsideration of the
evidence, taking into consideration the omitted evidence, calls for a different
conclusion on a given factual situation.  It could also be that the omitted
evidence, even when considered, would not have led to a different conclusion,
in view of the weight to be given it.  In that sense, the appellate court must,
in order to disturb the trial judge's findings of fact, come to the conclusion
that the evidence in question and the error made by the trial judge in disregarding
it were overriding and determinative in the assessment of the balance of
probabilities with respect to that factual issue.  36               This Court has also developed
principles to guide a second appellate court's role regarding findings of fact
made by the trial judge that have been overturned by a first appellate court. 
In Beaudoin-Daigneault, supra, Lamer J., as he then was, referred
to this Court's decision in Demers v. Montreal Steam Laundry Co. (1897),
27 S.C.R. 537, at pp. 538-39, where Taschereau J. stated what was subsequently
held to be the governing principle on the power of a second appellate court to
reconsider a first appellate court's decision to disturb a finding of fact made
by the trial judge:  For
it is settled law upon which we have often acted here, that where a judgment
upon facts has been rendered by a court of first instance, and a first court of
appeal has reversed that judgment, a second court of appeal should interfere
with the judgment on the first appeal, only if clearly satisfied that it is
erroneous;  [Emphasis added.]  Seventy years later, Fauteux J., in Dorval,
supra, at p. 294, shed some light on the scope and meaning of Taschereau
J.'s reasons in Demers.  Commenting on the above cited excerpt, he
wrote:  [translation]  That is the rule followed
in this Court and applied again recently in Pelletier v. Shykofsky,
[1957] S.C.R. 635.  Thus, in order to intervene in this case, it would be
necessary to be clearly satisfied that the judgment of the Court of Appeal is
erroneous, either with respect to the reason for its intervention or with
respect to its assessment of the evidence in the record.  [Emphasis added.]   37               In my view, nothing justifies a
second appellate court in showing that kind of deference to the assessment of
the balance of probabilities made by the first appellate court.  If the second
appellate court agrees that the trial judge made some kind of error that
justifies intervention, it should be free to reconsider the evidence and
substitute its own findings of fact for that of the first court of appeal's if
disagreement occurs.  The first appellate court is not in a more advantageous
or privileged position than the second court of appeal in assessing the
evidence.  It does not see or hear the witnesses testifying, nor benefit from
the general insight that comes from participating at the trial.  Moreover,
judicial policy concerns referred to earlier regarding a trial court's role
would obviously not justify deference towards the assessment made by an
appellate court.  There is therefore no reason to impose any duty of deference
on a second court of appeal in those specific circumstances.  38               With that in mind, I now move on
to a consideration of the factual issue.  The essence of the Crown's argument,
before the Federal Court of Appeal and this Court, is that Rip J.T.C.C. erred
because in assessing the evidence on the question of apportionment, he failed
to consider evidence which contradicted Mr. Schwartz's testimonial evidence. 
Rip J.T.C.C. found that the amount received by Mr. Schwartz in compensation was
mostly for mental distress suffered as a result of the termination of the
contract and that no specific allocation had been agreed upon by the parties.
In the Federal Court of Appeal's opinion, that contradictory evidence consisted
in the June letters, in which the parties' solicitors made offers to settle the
litigation and calculated the proposed amounts by reference to lost salary and
stock options.  39               To find that Rip J.T.C.C. erred in
overlooking contradictory evidence on the allocation made by the parties of the
settlement amount, one must obviously first be convinced that the June letters
in fact do constitute evidence as to the allocation made by the parties
of the settlement amount and that such evidence is in contradiction of Mr.
Schwartz's testimonial evidence.  I do not think that is the case.  40               The June letters certainly do
constitute evidence that is relevant to this litigation.  They establish that
in arriving at the final settlement amount of $400,000, both Dynacare and Mr.
Schwartz considered losses of salary and stock options, thereby supporting the
appellant's testimony on this point.  In that sense, the June letters are
evidence of the fact that the amount of $360,000 is composed, at least in part,
of amounts paid to Mr. Schwartz in compensation for losses of salary and stock
options.  But can they be considered evidence as to what portion of the
$360,000 was allocated to such losses?  41               A global analysis of the evidence
on the issue convinces me that this is not the case.  There is no evidence that
the $267,000 offered by Dynacare for the stock options was accepted by the
appellant.  Nor is there any evidence that the $75,000 claimed by the appellant
for lost salary was agreed upon by Dynacare.  The letters were written in June,
while the final release was signed by the parties at the end of August.  In
cross-examination, Mr. Schwartz gave the following testimony as to how the
parties arrived at the final settlement amount:  Q.And
at that time, in [the October 6, 1988] letter, you were offered $75,000?  A.That
is correct.  Q.You
didn't agree with that sum of money?  A.That
is correct.  Q.You
thought you were entitled to more?  A.That
is correct.  Q.And
you felt that the income that you'd lost as a result of Dynacare's breaking
this contract was greater than $75,000?                                                                     . . .  Q.In
the colloquial sense, money that you lost, it was worth more than $75,000?   Q.And
you put in a counter-offer of $400,000?  A.That's
correct.   A.I
would say that that's true in the very broadest sense of the word.  I know that
my counsel and I and, in fact, counsel for Dynacare struggled to find some way
of finding a number that one could rationalize because this involved a number
of factors, as I mentioned earlier.  My view is, in the end, we never did and
never could and the number was, in some sense, picked from the air.  Q.I'd
just like you to flip to Tab 9, please, Mr. Schwartz, pages 33 and 34.  That is
a copy of the letter from your lawyer?  A.Yes.  Q.At
the top of page 34, there is a discussion there about, “apart from the shares,
he is entitled to $75,000 for lost income”.  A.That's
all correct.  Q.So
that was part of the way in which the amount was calculated? That was taken
into account?  A.As
I said, I think it was taken into account in the broadest sense.  It was part
of the hurly-burly of the discussions.  But, ultimately, it didn't seem to me
that that became terribly relevant.  Q.The
final amount you actually did settle on was $360,000 plus costs for $40,000?  A.That's
correct.  It is difficult to see how the
solicitors' letters could be seen as constituting evidence as to apportionment
when Mr. Schwartz clearly testified to the contrary and Rip J.T.C.C. made no
negative finding as to Mr. Schwartz's credibility.  It is also noteworthy that
the record at trial reveals that the Minister did not even argue that the
letters constituted evidence as to apportionment contrary to Mr. Schwartz's
testimony.  Logically, the Minister should not have the burden of presenting,
in every case where the apportionment of a general award is at issue, specific
evidence amounting to an explicit expression of the concerned parties'
intention with respect to that question.  However, there must be some
evidence, in whatever form, from which the trial judge will be able to infer,
on a balance of probabilities, which part of that general award was intended to
compensate for specific types of damages.  I believe that the solicitors'
letters, considered in the global evidentiary context of the case at bar, are insufficient
to serve as a basis for such an inference.   43               As mentioned earlier, the
conclusion that the Federal Court of Appeal was wrong in interfering with the
trial judge's finding of fact respecting apportionment disposes of the
Minister's main argument.  This is so because in order to find that some of the
amount received by Mr. Schwartz was taxable under s. 3(a) as income from
the employment contract, one must be able to identify what portion of the $360,000
was paid to Mr. Schwartz in compensation for amounts that he would have been
entitled to receive under the contract of employment.  Since the Federal
Court of Appeal erred in its decision relating to the trial judge's assessment
of the evidence,  the factual situation is that there is evidence that
the amounts received by Mr. Schwartz were, in part, received to compensate for
the loss of amounts to which he would have been entitled under the employment
contract entered into with Dynacare and, in part, to compensate for
embarrassment, anxiety and inconvenience suffered by the appellant, and that
there is no evidence tending to establish what portion of the $360,000
was allocated to which head.  Thus, absent a proper determination of that
factual situation, the damages received by Mr. Schwartz cannot, in whole or in
part, be found to be taxable under s. 3(a) of the Act as income from the
employment contract.  44               As I mentioned at the beginning of
my analysis, however, I propose to deal with the substance of the Minister's
main contention since it raises important issues that merit attention and have
been fully argued by the parties.  I, therefore, turn to these submissions.                     (b)  The
Surrogatum Principle and Unenumerated Sources  45               The Crown relies on the principle
developed by Diplock L.J. in London & Thames, supra, and
argues that the portion of damages received by Mr. Schwartz relating to lost
salary and stock options constitutes income from a source.  In London &
Thames, Diplock L.J. had this to say, at p. 134:  Where,
pursuant to a legal right, a trader receives from another person compensation
for the trader's failure to receive a sum of money which, if it had been
received, would have been credited to the amount of profits (if any) arising in
any year from the trade carried on by him at the time when the compensation is
so received, the compensation is to be treated for income tax purposes in the
same way as that sum of money would have been treated if it had been received
instead of the compensation.  The Minister, quite correctly, noted
that this principle was adopted and applied by the Federal Court of Appeal in Manley,
supra.  There the Minister had assessed damages received by the taxpayer
in compensation for a finder's fee he was entitled to pursuant to a commercial
agreement as constituting profit from a business taxable under s. 9(1) of the
Act.  Mahoney J.A., for the court, after citing relevant excerpts from London
& Thames, stated, at p. 219:                     In
the present case, the respondent was a trader; he had engaged in an adventure
in the nature of trade.  The damages for breach of warranty of authority, which
he received from Benjamin Levy pursuant to a legal right, were compensation for
his failure to receive the finder's fee from the Levy family shareholders.  Had
the respondent received the finder's fee it would have been profit from a
business required by that Income Tax Act, to be included in his income
in the year of its receipt.  The damages for breach of warranty of authority
are to be treated the same way for income tax purposes.  In the present case, the Federal Court
of Appeal applied this principle and found that, since part of the damages
received by the appellant replaced lost salary and stock options which, if they
had been paid to Mr. Schwartz, would have constituted income from employment
taxable under s. 5(1), such damages had to be treated in the same manner for
tax purposes, i.e., as income from office or employment taxable under s. 5(1)
of the Act.  46               The solution arrived at by the
Federal Court of Appeal is in contradiction with the findings in the Atkins
case, supra, where the same court held that such damages could not be
characterized as income from office or employment under s. 5(1).  The
correctness of the conclusion arrived at in Atkins was reaffirmed in
1984 by the Federal Court of Appeal in Pollock, supra, despite
the doubts expressed in an obiter dictum by Pigeon J. in Jack Cewe
Ltd. v. Jorgenson, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 812, at pp. 815-16.  47               However, the correctness of Atkins
is not at issue before us since the Minister, as I have explained, is not
arguing that the amounts are taxable as income from employment, but submits,
rather, that they are income from an unenumerated source taxable under the
general provision of s. 3(a) of the Act. Pigeon J., in Jack Cewe,
had pointed out that the Federal Court of Appeal, in Atkins, had not
considered whether such amounts were alternatively taxable under the general
provision of s. 3(a):  This
Court might well disagree with the conclusion reached by the Federal Court of
Appeal in Atkins.  In this respect, I will note that in that case
consideration appears to have been given only to the question whether the
damages for wrongful dismissal were income “from an office or employment”
within the meaning of ss. 5 and 25 of the Income Tax Act (R.S.C. 1952). 
No consideration appears to have been given to the broader question whether
they might not be income from an unspecified source under the general provision
of s. 3.  48               I pause here again to reaffirm
what was implied by Pigeon J. in Jack Cewe, that s. 3(a) does
contemplate the possibility that income arising from sources other than those
enumerated in s. 3(a) and Subdivision d of Division B of Part I of the
Act may nonetheless be taxable.  Parliament has stated very clearly in that
section that the five sources identified in s. 3(a) do not constitute an
exhaustive enumeration.  This is evident from the emphasized words in the
paragraph, which I here reproduce:                     3.  . . .                     (a) 
determine the aggregate of amounts each of which is the taxpayer's income for
the year (other than a taxable capital gain from the disposition of a property)
from a source inside or outside Canada, including, without restricting the
generality  of the foregoing, his income for the year from each office,
employment, business and property;  [Emphasis added.]  Mr. Schwartz argues that the sources
of income other than those contemplated in s. 3(a) are the “other
sources” referred to in Subdivision d of Division B of Part I of the Act and
relies on this statement by E. C. Harris, Canadian Income Taxation (4th
ed. 1986), at p. 99:  While
the Act recognizes that there may be other sources of income than [those
specifically provided for in s. 3(a)], the case law under the former Act
suggests that the only other sources of income and loss that are likely to be
recognized are those that are specifically recognized in the Act.  However, this conclusion disregards
the fact that Parliament, in the introductory part of s. 56(1) of the Act, made
clear that the enumeration that followed was not to be interpreted as
restricting the generality of s. 3:                     56.  (1)  Without restricting the
generality of section 3, there shall be  included in computing the income
of a taxpayer for a taxation year. . . .  [Emphasis added.]  49               Mr. Schwartz also submitted that,
for policy reasons, an interpretation to the contrary would defeat the purpose
and fundamental structure of the Act.  However, as noted by Krishna, similarly
valid policy concerns can be invoked to support an interpretation to the
contrary.  In his textbook The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax, supra,
at pp. 129-30, he writes:  The
better view is that the named sources (office, employment, business, and
property) are not exhaustive and income can arise from any other unnamed
source.  Hence, income from any source inside or outside Canada should be
taxable under paragraph 3(a) of the Act.  This is justifiable both on
the basis of the language of the statute and on policy grounds.  To the extent
that the income tax is based on the ability to pay, all accretions to wealth of
an income nature are a measure of that ability and should be taxable regardless
of source.  [Emphasis added.]  50               In any event, policy concerns such
as those raised by the appellant should not and cannot be relied on in
disregard of Parliament's clearly expressed intention.  In s. 3(a), when
Parliament used the words “without restricting the generality of the
foregoing”, great care was taken to emphasize that the first step in
calculating a “taxpayer's income for the year” was to determine the total of
all amounts constituting income inside or outside Canada and that the
enumeration that followed merely identified examples of such sources.  The
phrasing adopted by Parliament, in s. 3(a) and in the introductory part
of s. 56(1) is probably the strongest that could have been used to express the
idea that income from all sources, enumerated or not, expressly provided
for in Subdivision d or not, was taxable under the Act.  51               This interpretation is also
consistent with the approach adopted by this Court in the few other cases where
this question was at issue.  In Curran v. Minister of National Revenue,
[1959] S.C.R. 850, the taxpayer had received a $250,000 payment by a third party
in return for which he was to resign from his employment and start working for
another company.  The payment did not constitute income from employment, since
it had not been paid by the taxpayer's employer, but was assessed as
constituting “income from a source” under the general provision of s. 3 of the
Act.  This assessment was upheld by the Exchequer Court of Canada (57 D.T.C.
1270).  The relevant provisions found in s. 3 of the Act were, at that time,
similar to those found in s. 3(a) in today's version of the Act:                     3.  The income of a taxpayer for a
taxation year for the purposes of this Part is his income for the year from all
sources . . . and without restricting the generality of the
foregoing, includes income for the year from all  (a)               businesses                    (b)   property,
and                    (c)   offices
and employments.  Dumoulin J., after concluding that the
impugned payment was in the nature of income, held that it was taxable.  He
stated, at p. 1277:                     For
reasons somewhat differing from those propounded by respondent, I agree that
the sum of $250,000 constitutes income.                      Now
the controlling and paramount enactment of sec. 3 defining the income is “the
annual net profit or gain or gratuity.” Having said so much the statute
proceeding by way of illustration, but not by way of limiting the foregoing
words, mentions seven different classes of subjects which  cannot be taken as
exhaustive since it provides, by what has been called the omnibus clause, a
very material addition reading “and also the annual profit or gain from any
other sources.” The words “and also” and “other sources” make the above
illustration absolutely refractory to any possibility of applying the doctrine
of ejusdem generis set up at the hearing. The balance of the paragraph
is added only ex majori cautelâ . . .  The net is thrown with
all conceivable wideness to include all bona fide profits or gain made
by the subject.                     Despite
a lapse of years, this interpretation of section 3 is still true of the amended
text as it read in 1951.                     In
very wide terms, section 3 renders taxable “income for the year from all sources
and without restricting the generality of the foregoing . . .”                     Therefore,
this controversial payment meets, I believe, the statutory meaning of income
for the year from a source other than those particularized by subsections (a),
(b) and (c) and was properly assessed as such.  [Emphasis in original.]  This decision was later confirmed by
this Court.  More recently, in Canada v. Fries, [1989] 3 F.C. 362, the
Federal Court of Appeal expressly recognized that income from unenumerated
sources was taxable under the general provision of s. 3(a) of the Act. 
In that case, the taxpayer was contesting the Minister's assessment, including
in his yearly income strike pay he had received from his union.  The court
dismissed the taxpayer's claim and found that the amounts were taxable as
constituting income from a source within the purview of s. 3(a) of the
Act.  Our Court, however, while implicitly holding that income from
unenumerated sources was in fact taxable under the general provision of s. 3(a)
of the Act, reversed this decision on the basis that the payments were not in
the nature of “income . . . from a source” within the meaning of s.
3(a); see Canada v. Fries, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1322.  52               In the case at bar, I do not think
the Minister's argument should be accepted.  In order to determine if a
specific amount is taxable under the general provision of s. 3(a) of the
Act, various considerations should be taken into account.  Without providing a
list of such considerations or attempting to suggest an approach to taxation
under the general provision of s. 3(a) in an exhaustive way, I note that
one must obviously go back to the concept of income and consider the whole
scheme of the Act in order to properly analyze the issue in a given case.  In
the present case, accepting the argument made by the Crown would amount to
giving precedence to a general provision over the detailed provisions enacted
by Parliament to deal with payments such as that received by Mr. Schwartz
pursuant to the settlement.  53               As indicated earlier, Parliament
adopted a specific solution to a specific problem that resulted from a number
of rulings by the courts respecting the taxability of payments similar to the
one received by the appellant.  Under these rulings, damages paid with respect
to wrongful dismissal were not taxable as income from office or employment
under s. 5(1); nor were they taxable as constituting retiring allowances.  The
Crown had at that point many options.  The Minister could have argued that such
damages were taxable as income from a source under the general provision in s.
3(a) of the Act.  It could also have sought an amendment to the Act
making such payments expressly taxable as income from office or employment. 
But neither of these courses was taken.  Instead, the Act was amended twice so
that such amounts could be taxable under s. 56 as income from “another”
source.  First, it was provided that termination payments were taxable.  Then,
the Act was amended to make such a payment taxable as constituting a retiring
allowance.  It is thus pursuant to these provisions that taxability should be
assessed.  To do otherwise would defeat Parliament's intention by approving an
analytical approach inconsistent with basic principles of interpretation.  54               This Court has always refused to
interpret the Act in such a manner.  For example, in The Queen v. Savage,
[1983] 2 S.C.R. 428, the taxpayer received $300 from her employer as a prize
for achievement.  Section 56(1)(n) of the Act provided that such gifts,
when worth over $500, constituted taxable income.  The prize was not,
therefore, caught by this provision.  The Minister, however, argued that the
amount also fell within the purview of s. 6(1)(a) of the Act as a
general benefit, and as such was taxable as income from an office or
employment.  Dickson J., as he then was, rejected this argument.  At page 446,
he stated:  If a
prize under $500 would still be taxable under ss. 5 and 6, it would have to
follow on the Crown's argument that a prize under $500 would equally be taxable
under s. 3.  That cannot be right.  That would mean that a prize over $500
would be taxable under s. 56(1)(n) and a prize up to $500 would be
taxable under s. 3.  The $500 exclusion in s. 56(1)(n) would never have
any effect.  It seems clear that the first $500 of income received during the
year falling within the terms of s. 56(1)(n) is exempt from tax.  Any
amount in excess of $500 falls under s. 56(1)(n) and is taxable
accordingly.  If that is not the effect, what purpose is served by the
subsection?  The situation here is analogous.  To
find that the damages received by Mr. Schwartz are taxable under the general
provision of s. 3(a) of the Act would disregard the fact that Parliament
has chosen to deal with the taxability of such payments in the provisions of
the Act relating to retiring allowances.  It is thus to those provisions that I
will turn in assessing taxability.                     (2)  Retiring
Allowance:  Taxability under Section 56(1)(a)(ii)  55               Before this Court, the Crown
argued, alternatively, that the damages received by Mr. Schwartz were taxable
under s. 56(1)(a)(ii) of the Act as constituting a retiring allowance. 
Both courts below refused to find these amounts could be so characterized, although
the Crown abandoned this argument before the Federal Court of Appeal.  At issue
is whether the damages agreed to were received by Mr. Schwartz “in respect of a
loss of an office or employment” within the meaning of para. (b) of the
definition of “retiring allowance” found in s. 248(1) of the Act.  Section
248(1) also defines the words “employment” and “employee”.  56               In the recent case of Québec
(Communauté urbaine) v. Corp. Notre-Dame de Bon-Secours, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 3,
my colleague Gonthier J. clarified the proper rules governing the
interpretation of tax legislation.  After explaining the underlying principles
of the traditional rule providing for a strict construction of fiscal statutes,
he analyzed the evolution that had occurred on the issue during the past
decade.  As he explained, at pp. 15-16, this evolution was the logical
consequence of the recognition of the social and economic purposes of such
legislation.  In light of this Court's decisions in Stubart Investments Ltd.
v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, The Queen v. Golden, [1986] 1
S.C.R. 209, Johns-Manville Canada Inc. v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 46,
The Queen v. Imperial General Properties Ltd., [1985] 2 S.C.R. 288, and Bronfman
Trust v. The Queen, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 32, Gonthier J. held, at p. 17:  [T]here
is no longer any doubt that the interpretation of tax legislation should be
subject to the ordinary rules of construction.  At page 87 of his text
Construction of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983), Driedger fittingly summarizes
the basic principles:  “. . . the words of an Act are to be read in
their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously
with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of
Parliament”.  [Emphasis added.]  (See also McClurg v. Canada,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 1020; Friesen v. Canada, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 103; Symes
v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at pp. 744-51; Thibaudeau v. Canada,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 627; Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312, at p. 326.)  57               The essence of the Minister's
argument is that “employment” as understood in s. 248(1) of the Act commences
the moment the contract of employment is entered into by the parties,
regardless of whether or not the employee has the obligation to provide
services from that point.  Therefore Mr. Schwartz, by losing the benefit of the
contract of employment entered into with Dynacare, lost “employment”, and the
damages received fall within the purview of s. 56(1)(a)(ii) of the Act. 
I do not think the Minister's position is correct in law, in light of the
definitions given by Parliament to the word “employment” and of the ordinary
meaning of the words chosen by Parliament to define this term.  The Minister's
position is also inconsistent with the way Parliament has used the term
"employment" in at least one other provision of the Act, while also
being untenable when one considers the context in which the 1983 amendment was
made.   59               Therefore, when one considers the ordinary
meaning to be given to the definition of “employment” in the Act, a
distinction must be made between the start of the contractual relationship
agreed upon by the employer and the employee and the moment, according to the
terms of the contract, at which the employee is bound to start providing
services to the employer.  It is noteworthy that the Crown does not seriously
contest the interpretation to be given under the ordinary meaning of the words
Parliament chose to use.  During oral argument, counsel admitted that an
ordinary person would find that Mr. Schwartz was not an employee of
Dynacare when the contract was cancelled.  60               The Minister's position is also
inconsistent with Parliament's use of the word "employment" in s.
80.4(1) of the Act.  Section 80.4 is included in Subdivision f of Division B of
Part I of the Act, “Rules Relating to Computation of Income”.  It provides the
method for determining how an amount in respect of interest-free or
low-bearing-interest loans will be characterized as a benefit taxable as income
from office or employment under s. 6(9) of the Act, or again, in the case of
corporations, as income from a business or property under s. 12(1)(w) of
the Act.  For the sake of convenience, I repeat the relevant provision, while
underlining the crucial passages:                     80.4  (1)  Where a person or partnership
received a loan or otherwise incurred a debt by virtue of the office or
employment or intended office or employment of an individual, or by
virtue of the services performed or to be performed by a corporation
carrying on a personal services business (within the meaning assigned by
paragraph 125(7)(d)), the individual or corporation, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to have received a benefit in a taxation year equal to that
amount, if any, by which the aggregate of . . . .  A parallel can be drawn between the
concept of “intended employment” of an individual and services “to be
performed” by a corporation carrying on a personal services business, in light
of the fact that “employment” refers to the situation of an individual being
“in the service” of a person.  Clearly, in both cases, the intention of
Parliament was to include within the scope of s. 80.4(1) such loans made by
virtue of a legal relationship involving the provision of services, by an
individual or by a corporation, regardless of whether or not the loans were
made before the borrower became under obligation to provide any services. 
The distinction made by Parliament is an implicit recognition that the term
"employment" does not, in itself, have such a broad meaning.  61               It is a well-established principle
of interpretation that words used by Parliament are deemed to have the same
meaning throughout the same statute; see, for recent applications of the
principle by this Court, R. v. Zeolkowski, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1378, and Thomson
v. Canada (Deputy Minister of Agriculture), [1992] 1 S.C.R. 385.  This, as
all principles of interpretation, is not a rule, but a presumption that must
give way when circumstances demonstrate that such was not the intention pursued
by Parliament.  However, in the present circumstances, I see no reason to
depart from that principle since, to the contrary, it confirms and is
consistent with the ordinary meaning of the words “employment” and “retiring
allowance” chosen by Parliament.  62               The Minister's position is also
untenable when one considers the context in which the 1983 amendment was made. 
The amendment made by Parliament to s. 80.4(1) of the Act was made through An
Act to amend the statute law relating to income tax (No. 2), S.C.
1980-81-82-83, c. 140, the same legislation by which the definition of
“retiring allowance” was amended in 1983.  If Parliament had wanted to include
as retiring allowances payments made in respect of the cancellation of an
employment contract occurring before the employee had become under obligation
to provide services to the employer, it would, as counsel for the appellant
argued, have specifically referred to the notion of prospective or intended
employment as it did in s. 80.4(1).  This argument seems to me to be compelling
and clearly establishes that the objective Parliament sought by amending the
definition of "retiring allowance" was limited to termination of the
employment relationship once the employee had come under the obligation to
provide services to the employer.  63               The $360,000 received by Mr.
Schwartz cannot, therefore, be considered a retiring allowance.  As I have
explained, “loss of employment” cannot occur before Mr. Schwartz became under
obligation to provide services to Dynacare because he could not, before that
moment, have been “in the service” of his future employer.  V.  Disposition  64               For all these reasons, I would
allow the appeal and restore the decision of the Tax Court of Canada with costs
throughout.                     The reasons of
Sopinka, Iacobucci and Major JJ. were delivered by   65               Major
J. -- I agree with the conclusion reached by La Forest J. but, with
respect, think his reasons go beyond those necessary to decide this appeal.  I
agree that on a plain meaning, s. 56(1)(a)(ii) of the Income Tax Act,
R.S.C. 1952, c. 148 (now R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)), does not provide for
the taxation of settlements for loss of intended employment.  I agree as well
that there was no factual foundation on which to argue that the settlement
could be taxed under s. 3(a) of the Income Tax Act as income from
the employment contract.  66               I do not agree with his conclusion
on the taxation of income from unenumerated sources.  Since the appeal was
properly disposed of on other grounds, I do not think it was necessary to
discuss this issue.  Although La Forest J. concluded that the settlement in
this case could not be taxed under s. 3(a), his obiter dicta
indicate that unenumerated sources are as a general matter taxable under s. 3(a). 
With respect, I disagree with my colleague on this point because I do not
believe it is either necessary or desirable to decide the question.  Given the
conclusion reached in this case, it would seem preferable to avoid deciding
whether, in theory, the Minister can tax on sources not specifically identified
in the Act.  I say this because a number of arguments can be and have been
advanced on why this is not necessarily the case.  I will briefly discuss
these.  67               Section 3(a) ostensibly
permits taxation of income from any source.  The argument for the Minister,
which is supported by the literal wording of the section, is that "office,
employment, business and property" are only examples of sources
which may be taxed.  My colleague quotes with approval from The Fundamentals
of Canadian Income Tax (4th ed. 1992), where Professor V. Krishna states
that "all accretions to wealth of an income nature are a measure of [the]
ability [to pay] and should be taxable regardless of source" (p. 130).  68               However, a literal adoption of
this position would arguably constitute a dramatic departure from established
tax jurisprudence.  It has long been recognized that not all "accretions
to wealth" are included as income.  Inheritances and gifts are
"accretions to wealth" but are nevertheless not taxed because they
are not income from employment, property, or business.  Profits from hobbies
are accretions to wealth, but they, too, are not taxed for the same reason.  69               If s. 3(a) were applied
literally to provide for taxation of income from any source, then again it is
arguable the existing jurisprudence would be placed in jeopardy.  Despite the inclusive
language of ss. 3(a) and 56, many observers have pointed out that
Canadian courts have always recognized that monies which do not fall within the
specifically enumerated sources are not subject to tax.  For example, E. C.
Harris states in Canadian Income Taxation (4th ed. 1986), at p. 99:  While
the Act recognizes that there may be other sources of income than [those
specifically listed in s. 3(a)], the case law under the former Act
suggests that the only other sources of income and loss that are likely to be
recognized are those that are specifically recognized in the Act.  This view is reiterated in B. J.
Arnold, T. Edgar and J. Li, eds., Materials on Canadian Income Tax (10th
ed. 1993), at p. 51.  After noting that the literal wording of the statute does
not require that income be from a enumerated source, the authors state:  Nevertheless,
Canadian courts have tended to adopt the approach of the English courts to the
definition of income by restricting the scope of "source" to the
traditional sources of income -- employment, business, and property -- rather
than attempting innovatively to discover new sources of income.  To the same effect see J. A. Rendall,
"Defining the Tax Base", in B. G. Hansen, V. Krishna and J. A.
Rendall, eds., Canadian Taxation (1981), 59.  70               Contrary to the view of my colleague,
accepting that unenumerated sources of income are taxable would seriously
question a number of cases.  For example, in the long line of decisions that
distinguish a "business" from a "hobby", it has been
consistently held that where the activity in question falls outside of the
definition of "business", any profits recognized are not subject to
tax under s. 3.  This is in accordance with the restrictive approach to s. 3(a).  71               In cases where a receipt of money
has fallen outside of s. 3 and Subdivision d of Division B of Part I of the
Act, the money has not been taxed.  For example, in The Queen v. Savage,
[1983] 2 S.C.R. 428, the taxpayer received $300 as a prize for achievement.  As
a result, it fell outside of s. 56(1)(n), which provided for taxation of
prizes over $500.  The Minister claimed that the sum was still taxable as a
"benefit" under s. 6(1)(a).  Dickson J., as he then was,
rejected this argument, because to do otherwise would have meant that s. 56(1)(n)
had no meaning.  As that sum was not specifically included in the Act it was
not taxable.  Thus one could state that that decision is inconsistent with a
literal interpretation of s. 3(a).  72               Moreover, it could be argued that
the structure of the Act supports the conclusion that sources may be taxed only
if specifically recognized in the Act.  If s. 3(a) includes all income
from any source, then there is no reason for Subdivision d of Division B of
Part I of the Act (ss. 56 to 59.1, "Other Sources of Income"). 
Section 56 would be left with no purpose, since all sources it lists would
already be covered by the general opening words of s. 3(a).  However, I
acknowledge in pointing this out that s. 56 contains disclaiming words similar
to those found in s. 3(a).  73               La Forest J. finds support for his
position in Curran v. Minister of National Revenue, [1959] S.C.R. 850,
and Canada v. Fries, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1322.  With respect, my reading of
those cases brings me to a different conclusion.  I agree that the trial judge
in Curran held that the payment in question was taxable under the
general words of s. 3.  However, this Court did not approve or even mention the
proposition that the payment could be taxed under the general provision of s.
3.  Instead, it was held that the payment amounted to income from employment,
since it was made in exchange for personal service.  Kerwin C.J. found,
"the payment of $250,000 was made for personal service only and that
conclusion really disposes of the matter..." (p. 856).   I do not agree
that Curran is any authority for supporting taxation of unenumerated
sources.  74               Likewise, I disagree that this
Court in Fries implicitly held that unenumerated sources of income are
taxable.  This judgment allowed the appeal on the basis that strike pay did not
come within the definition of "income . . . from a source" within the
meaning of s. 3.  If anything, this case leans against the
proposition that unenumerated sources are taxable.  This case follows the
tradition of excluding any sources not specifically recognized in the Act.  75               If this Court intends to conclude
that s. 3(a) should be applied literally, and permit taxation on income
from any source whatsoever, it should only do so in circumstances which warrant
such a decision because such a result is of fundamental importance.  Moreover,
as I have mentioned, so deciding can be viewed as a marked departure from
previous tax jurisprudence.  In 1966, the Carter Commission recommended the
extension of taxation to all sources of income and all accretions to purchasing
power, but its recommendations were not implemented by Parliament and it is
hardly the role of the judiciary to do so.  76               Accordingly, it is my opinion that
this Court in this case should not answer the question of whether s. 3(a)
permits taxation of unenumerated sources.  We should only do so when the
question is properly and unavoidably before us.  77               I agree in all other respects with
my colleague La Forest J. and would dispose of the appeal in the manner he
proposes.                     Appeal allowed with
costs.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Goodman Phillips & Vineberg, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  George Thomson, Toronto.   