Baron v. Canada, [1993] 1
S.C.R. 416  Her Majesty The Queen, the Attorney General of Canada and the Honourable Otto Jelinek in his capacity as Minister of National
Revenue                                       Appellants  v.  Berl Baron and Howard Baron, C.A.                                                Respondents  and  The Attorney General for Ontario and the Attorney General of Quebec                                                       Interveners  Indexed as:  Baron v.
Canada  File No.:  22298.  1992:  February 6;
1993:  January 21.   on appeal from the federal court of
appeal                      Revenue Canada
officers believed certain documents belonging to the respondents could afford
evidence of the commission of various alleged offences under the Income Tax
Act.  The Federal Court, Trial Division, issued warrants under
s. 231.3 of the Act to search respondents' residences and business
premises and a large number of documents were seized.  This section provided
that the judge hearing the application "shall issue the warrant" where
the judge is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe an offence
under the Act has been committed, a document or thing that may afford evidence
of the commission of the offence is likely to be found, and the place to be
searched is likely to contain such a document or thing.                     In 1989,
respondents brought three motions and instituted an action in the Federal
Court, Trial Division, seeking orders setting aside the search warrants,
declaring s. 231.3 contrary to ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms , ordering the return or destruction of the
items seized and of any summaries, notes or diagrams made from those items, and
prohibiting the department from using such material.                     The proceedings
were dismissed with a single set of reasons.  The Federal Court of Appeal
considered the four appeals together and held s. 231.3 of the Income
Tax Act to be contrary to ss. 7  and 8  of the Charter , allowing
the appeals and quashing the search warrants on the basis that s. 231.3 of the
Act violated ss. 7  and 8  of the Charter .  On consent, the Minister
appealed only one of the Court of Appeal's judgments to this Court.  The
constitutional question before the Court queried whether s. 231.3 limited
the rights and freedoms guaranteed by ss. 7  and 8  of the Charter .                     Held:  The appeal should be
dismissed.  Section 231.3 of the Income Tax Act violates s. 8  of
the Charter  and is of no force or effect.                     A residual
discretion in the judiciary to refuse to issue a search warrant in appropriate
circumstances even though the statutory criteria for its issuance have been met
is required by s. 8  of the Charter  and s. 231.3(3)  removed
this residual discretion.                     The exercise of a
judicial discretion in the decision to grant or withhold authorization for a
search warrant was fundamental to the scheme of prior authorization which is an
indispensable requirement for compliance with s. 8 .  The decision to grant or
withhold the warrant requires the balancing of two interests:  that of the
individual to be free of intrusions of the state and that of the state to
intrude on the privacy of the individual for the purpose of law enforcement. 
The circumstances in which these conflicting interests must be balanced will
vary greatly.  The strength of the interests will be affected by matters such
as the nature of the offence alleged, the nature of the intrusion sought
including the place to be searched, the time of the search and the person or
persons who are the subjects of the search.  In order to take account of the
various factors affecting the balancing of the two interests, the authorizing
judge must be empowered to consider all the circumstances.  No set of criteria
will always be determinative or sufficient to override the right of the
individual to privacy.  It is imperative, therefore, that a sufficient degree
of flexibility be accorded to the authorizing officer in order that justice be
done to the respective interests involved.  The requirement that the officer
authorizing the seizure be independent and capable of acting judicially is
inconsistent with the notion that the state can dictate to him or her the
precise circumstances under which the right of the individual can be overborne.                     Section 231.3(3)
provides that a judge "shall" issue the warrant once satisfied that
the three statutory conditions set out therein have been satisfied.  The word
"shall" is normally to be construed as imperative unless such an
interpretation would be utterly inconsistent with the context in which it has
been used and would render the sections irrational or meaningless.  Nothing in
the context of s. 231.3 renders an imperative interpretation of the word
"shall" in s. 231.3(3) inconsistent with the balance of the
section or makes it irrational or meaningless.                     Due to this imperative
language, the issuing judge's discretionary power to attach pre-conditions to
the issue of the warrant cannot be exercised once the statutory criteria for
the issue of the warrant have been met.  Moreover, a judge's inherent power to
prevent an abuse of the court's process or a violation of a constitutional
right does not confer on an issuing judge the discretion to refuse to issue a
warrant in those circumstances.  If the conditions set out in the subsection
are exhaustive of all the conditions precedent of a reasonable search, an
application which meets all of those conditions cannot be an abuse of the
process.                     The removal of the
discretion to refuse to issue a warrant when all statutory criteria are met
takes away the issuing judge's "balance wheel" function.  In order to
fulfil properly the "balance wheel" role required by s. 8  of the
Charter , a judge must be able to weigh all the surrounding
circumstances to determine whether in each case the interests of the state are
superior to the individual's right to privacy.  By restricting the factors that
a judge may consider, Parliament has improperly restricted a judge's ability to
assess the reasonableness of a search.                     Section 231.3(3)
denies the issuing judge the discretion to refuse to issue a warrant where in
all the circumstances a search or seizure would be unreasonable and, indeed,
may require a judge to authorize an unreasonable search or seizure.  By using
the word "shall" the subsection violates s. 8  of the Charter .                     Classifying a
statute as regulatory, while it may affect the exercise of discretion by the
authorizing judge, is not a basis for reading the requirement for a residual
discretion out of s. 8 .  What is ultimately important are not labels
(though these are undoubtedly useful), but the values at stake in the
particular context.  Given the intrusive nature of searches and the
corresponding purpose of such a search to gather evidence for the prosecution
of a taxpayer, there is no reason for a radical departure from the guidelines
and principles expressed in Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R.
145.   The effect of any lessened expectation of privacy by reason of the
character of the Income Tax Act will affect the authorizing judge's
exercise of discretion but cannot justify eliminating it.                     The argument was
rejected that the "reasonable grounds" standard in s. 231.3(3) is
constitutionally insufficient as being a lower standard than "reasonable
and probable grounds", while only the latter satisfies s. 8  of the Charter . 
Nothing turns on the omission of the word "probable" from
s. 231.3(3) .  The standard that the subsection sets out is one of credibly
based probability, which is the standard required by s. 8 . 
"Reasonable" is the same as "reasonable and probable" and
imports the same standard.  "Reasonable" comprehends a requirement of
probability.  The use of an interpretative "gloss" on the word to
make it conform to constitutional requirements is an unnecessary strain on the
meaning of the word.  The alleged distinction between the two phrases was a
"refined distinction" of the type found in American constitutional
jurisprudence and is to be avoided in the interpretation of s. 8  of the Charter .                     Section 231.3(3)(b),
requiring the authorizing judge to be satisfied that a document or thing which
"may afford evidence" is "likely to be found", does not
water down the minimum constitutional standard for the probability that the
search will unearth evidence.  The need to protect individuals against
unreasonable searches in the form of "fishing expeditions" by the
state has been recognized.  A standard of credibly based probability rather
than mere suspicion must be applied in determining when an individual's
interest in privacy is subordinate to the needs of law enforcement.  The
formulation in s. 231.3(3)(b) meets the "credibly based
probability" standard required by s. 8  through its use of the word
"likely" which imports the criterion of probability.  The use of the
word "may" regarding the use of the thing found as evidence in a
prosecution simply reflects one of the realities of the investigation of
offences.  It is impossible to know with certainty at an early stage in
any investigation what particular items will provide evidence in a
trial.                     The issue of
whether s. 231.3(5) allowed the same kind of "wholesale search and
seizures" without prior authorization which was found under the
predecessor legislation to violate s. 8  of the Charter  should be
left to be resolved until such time as this Court is presented with a situation
in which the provision was relied upon to seize documents.                     No analysis under
s. 1  of the Charter  was undertaken.  The burden was on the government
to establish that the law constituted a reasonable limit, and it made no
attempt to do so.  Cases Cited                     Considered:  Hunter v. Southam Inc.,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 145; R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627;
Descôteaux v. Mierzwinski, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 860; Canadian Broadcasting
Corp. v. Lessard, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 421; Canadian Broadcasting Corp.
v. New Brunswick (Attorney General), [1991] 3 S.C.R. 459; referred to:  
Kourtessis v. M.N.R., S.C.C., No. 21654, on appeal from  (1989), 39
B.C.L.R. (2d) 1; Solvent Petroleum Extraction Inc. v. Canada (M.N.R.),
[1990] 1 F.C. 20 (C.A.), aff'g [1988] 3 F.C. 465 (leave to appeal refused,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. xi);  Minister of National Revenue v. Kruger Inc.,
[1984] 2 F.C. 535; R. v. Simmons, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 495;  Re Print
Three Inc. and The Queen (1985), 20 C.C.C. (3d) 392, leave to appeal
refused, [1985] 2 S.C.R. x; Kohli v. Moase (1987), 86 N.B.R. (2d) 15,
aff'd on other grounds (1989), 55 D.L.R. (4th) 740;  R. v. Thompson,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 1111; Minister of National Revenue v. Paroian, [1980]
C.T.C. 131; Selye v. Quebec, [1982] R.D.F.Q. 173; Beauregard v.
Canada, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 56; Re Manitoba Language Rights, [1985] 1
S.C.R. 721; R. v. Wholesale Travel Group Inc., [1991] 3 S.C.R. 154; Thomson
Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 425; R. v. Rao (1984),
12 C.C.C. (3d) 97, leave to appeal refused, [1984] 2 S.C.R. ix; R. v. Debot,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1140, aff'g (1986), 30 C.C.C. (3d) 207; Goguen v. Shannon
(1989), 50 C.C.C. (3d) 45; Nima v. McInnes (1988), 45 C.C.C. (3d) 419; Wiens
v. The Queen (1973), 24 C.R.N.S. 341; R. v. Burnett, [1985] 2 C.T.C.
227; Danson v. Ontario (Attorney General), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1086; MacKay
v. Manitoba, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 357; R v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd.,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 713; Slaight Communications Inc. v. Davidson, [1989] 1
S.C.R. 1038; Osborne v. Canada (Treasury Board), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 69; Schachter
v. Canada, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 679.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian
Bill of Rights,
R.S.C., 1985, App. III, s. 2.  Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 1 , 7 , 8 , 11 (d), 15 .    Constitution
Act, 1982,
s. 52(1) .   Customs
Act, R.S.C., 1985,
c. 1 (2nd Supp .), s. 111(1) .                       APPEAL from a
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal, [1991] 1 F.C. 688, [1991] 1 C.T.C. 125
(1990), 91 D.T.C. 5055, 122 N.R. 47, supplementary reasons, [1991] 1 F.C. 712,
[1991] 1 C.T.C. 408 (1991), 91 D.T.C. 5134) granting an appeal from a judgment
of Reed J., [1990] 2 F.C. 262, [1990] 1 C.T.C. 84 (1989), 30 F.T.R. 188, 
90 D.T.C. 6040.  Appeal dismissed.  Section 231.3(3) of the Income Tax Act
violates s. 8  of the Charter  and is of no force or effect.                     John R. Power,
Q.C., Pierre Loiselle, Q.C., and Robert Frater, for the appellants.                     Guy Dupont, Basile
Angelopoulos and Ariane
Bourque, for the respondents.                     Janet E. Minor and Tanya Lee, for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario.                     Yves Ouellette,
Judith Kucharsky and Diane
Bouchard, for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.  //Sopinka J.//                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered by                     Sopinka
J. --  I.  Introduction                     This appeal was
heard concurrently with Kourtessis v. M.N.R., S.C.C., No. 21654.  Both
appeals address the validity of search warrants issued and executed under s.
231.3 of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended
[hereinafter ITA].  In each case the persons subjected to search and
seizure applied in court to have the searches and seizures invalidated and set
aside, and the things seized returned, on the ground that s. 231.3 of the ITA
violates ss. 7  and 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and
that consequently, the section and the impugned warrants, searches and seizures
are of no force or effect.  Kourtessis also raises an additional issue
as to the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and of this Court to hear the
appeal.  Judgment in that appeal will be released in due course.                     The nub of this
appeal is the ITA's limitation of the judicial discretion of the issuing
judge by use of the word "shall" in s. 231.3(3).  I conclude, for
reasons I will state below, that s. 231.3 of the ITA violates s. 8  of
the Charter  in so far as it removes the residual discretion of the
issuing judge to refuse to issue a search warrant in the proper circumstances,
notwithstanding that the statutory criteria for its issuance have been met.  By
reason of this violation and pursuant to s. 52(1)  of the Constitution Act,
1982 , s. 231.3 is of no force or effect and the search warrants issued and
executed thereunder against the respondents are also invalid and of no force or
effect.                     In my view, the
appeal can be disposed of entirely on the basis of s. 8  of the Charter . 
It is therefore not necessary to consider the respondents' argument that s. 7 
was also violated.  Nor do I propose to consider separately the question of
whether the impugned section improperly interferes with judicial independence. 
In my view, this is merely another ground which supports my conclusion with
respect to the importance of a residual judicial discretion.                     Neither the parties
nor the interveners have made arguments or referred to any evidence either in
this appeal or in Kourtessis in relation to s. 1  of the Charter 
or capable of demonstrating that the violation of s. 8  is justified within the
meaning of s. 1 .  It will therefore not be necessary to consider whether this
legislation permitting unreasonable searches can be demonstrably justified as a
reasonable limit on the right to be secure against unreasonable searches.  II.  The Facts                     After an
investigation, Revenue Canada officers formed the opinion that certain
documents belonging to the respondents Berl and Howard Baron could afford
evidence of the commission of various alleged offences under the ITA. 
The allegation was that Xentec Laboratories Inc. had made false or deceptive
entries in its books of account and evaded or attempted to evade compliance
with the ITA, in violation of ITA ss. 239(1)(c) and (d). 
On August 7, 1986, Strayer J. of the Federal Court, Trial Division, issued
warrants to search the Barons' residences and business premises (the law firm
Baron and Abrams, and the accounting firm Baron, Merton).  The warrants were
executed and a large number of documents were seized.                     On June 21, 1989
Berl and Howard Baron brought three motions and instituted an action in the
Federal Court, Trial Division.  The motions sought orders:                     (a)setting
aside the search warrants;                     (b)declaring
s. 231.3 ITA of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , because it is inconsistent with ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Charter ;                     (c)ordering
the return to the Barons of all the items seized and extracts or copies
thereof;                     (d)ordering
the return of all summaries, notes or diagrams taken from the items seized;                     (e)prohibiting
the Department from using the items or summaries, notes, diagrams or
information taken thereof; and                     (f)ordering
the destruction of all summaries, copies, notes or diagrams not returned to the
Barons.  The ground for the motions was that
the searches and seizures were unreasonable because s. 231.3 ITA is
inconsistent with ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Charter  and consequently is of
no force or effect.                     The relief
requested in the action instituted at the same time as the motions was to the
same effect.  The Barons sought a declaration that s. 231.3 ITA was
inconsistent with ss. 7 , 8  and 15  of the Charter  and of no force or
effect, and that the warrants and searches and seizures which followed were
unreasonable and consequently of no force or effect.  They also sought an order
compelling the return, non-use or destruction of items seized and copies and
summaries thereof corresponding to paragraphs (c) through (f) of the relief
sought in the motions, above.                     As the trial judge,
Reed J., summarized, [1990] 2 F.C. 262, at pp. 266-67, the respondents
contended that the search and seizure provisions in s. 231.3 were invalid because:  . .
. (1)         subsection 231.3(3) allows no discretion to a judge to guard
against abusive searches and seizures -- it requires a judge to issue a
warrant if satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that an
offence has been committed and that evidence of that offence is likely to be
found in certain premises; (2) subsection 231.3(5) allows wholesale searches
and seizures, without adequate authorization, and therefore does not meet the
requirements of a constitutionally valid search and seizure power, as set out
in Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145, ... ; (3) the
requirements under subsection 231.3(3) do not meet the requirements of Hunter
v. Southam (supra) because they only require that there be
reasonable grounds to believe that an offence has been committed -- this is a
lesser test than one requiring that there be "reasonable and
probable" grounds; (4) the provisions of section 231.3 offend section 15 
of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  ... because there are two
avenues by which warrants can be obtained ... and the appeal provisions differ
depending upon which route is chosen ....  [Emphasis in original.]  The respondents also attacked some of
the warrants on the basis that they did not contain a clause protecting
documents which were subject to solicitor-client privilege or which arose in
the course of an accountant-client confidential relationship.                     The motions and
action for a declaration were dismissed with a single set of reasons by Reed
J.  These judgments were appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal, which allowed
all four appeals:  Baron v. Canada, [1991] 1 F.C. 688.  Hugessen J.A.
(for the court) dealt with all four appeals together as they raised identical
issues.  He held that s. 231.3 violated ss. 7  and 8  of the Charter  and
was consequently of no force or effect, and quashed the search warrants.  With
the consent of the Barons, the Minister sought to appeal only one of the Court
of Appeal's judgments to this Court.  Leave to appeal to this Court was granted
on May 16, 1991 at which time it was ordered that Baron be heard on the
same day as Kourtessis.  III.  The Issues                     On June 20, 1991,
Chief Justice Lamer stated the following constitutional question for the
consideration of the Court:  Whether
s. 231.3 of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended by
S.C. 1986, c. 6, limits the rights and freedoms guaranteed by ss. 7  and 8  of
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , Part I of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , being Schedule B of the Canada Act, 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c.
11, and is consequently of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , Schedule B, Canada Act, 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c. 11.  It is to be noted that only ss. 7  and
8  of the Charter  are invoked before this Court.  The argument based on
the s. 15  equality guarantee has been abandoned as a basis on which to attack
s. 231.3 and the warrants.  Section 231.3 is alleged to infringe ss. 7  and 8  of
the Charter  in the following respects:  1.subs.
(3) is invalid in that it removes from the authorizing judge a residual
discretion;  2.subs.
(3) is invalid in that "reasonable grounds" fails to meet the minimum
constitutional standard of "reasonable and probable grounds";  3.subs.
(3)(b) is invalid in that the words "may afford evidence" fail
to meet the minimum constitutional standard for the discovery of evidence;  4.subs.
(5) is invalid in that it authorizes a wholesale search and seizure.  IV.  Pertinent Legislation  A.Income
Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended by S.C. 1986, c. 6, s. 121.                     The provision under
which the search warrants in both cases were sought and issued and which forms
the centrepiece of the present litigation is s. 231.3 of the ITA,
which I reproduce here in its entirety.                     231.3 (1)  A judge may, on ex parte
application by the Minister, issue a warrant in writing authorizing any person
named therein to enter and search any building, receptacle or place for any
document or thing that may afford evidence as to the commission of an offence
under this Act and to seize and, as soon as practicable, bring the document or
thing before, or make a report in respect thereof to, the judge or, where the
judge is unable to act, another judge of the same court to be dealt with by the
judge in accordance with this section.                     (2) 
An application under subsection (1) shall be supported by information on oath
establishing the facts on which the application is based.                     (3) 
A judge shall issue the warrant referred to in subsection (1) where he is
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that  (a) 
an offence under this Act has been committed;  (b) 
a document or thing that may afford evidence of the commission of the offence
is likely to be found; and  (c) 
the building, receptacle or place specified in the application is likely to
contain such a document or thing.                     (4) 
A warrant issued under subsection (1) shall refer to the offence for which it
is issued, identify the building, receptacle or place to be searched and the
person alleged to have committed the offence and it shall be reasonably
specific as to any document or thing to be searched for and seized.                     (5) 
Any person who executes a warrant under subsection (1) may seize, in addition
to the document or thing referred to in subsection (1), any other document or
thing that he believes on reasonable grounds affords evidence of the commission
of an offence under this Act and shall as soon as practicable bring the
document or thing before, or make a report in respect thereof to, the judge who
issued the warrant or, where the judge is unable to act, another judge of the
same court to be dealt with by the judge in accordance with this section.                     (6) 
Subject to subsection (7), where any document or thing seized under subsection
(1) or (5) is brought before a judge or a report in respect thereof is made to
a judge, the judge shall, unless the Minister waives retention, order that it
be retained by the Minister, who shall take reasonable care to ensure that it
is preserved until the conclusion of any investigation into the offence in
relation to which the document or thing was seized or until it is required to
be produced for the purposes of a criminal proceeding.                     (7) 
Where any document or thing seized under subsection (1) or (5) is brought
before a judge or a report in respect thereof is made to a judge, the judge
may, of his own motion or on summary application by a person with an interest
in the document or thing on three clear days notice of application to the
Deputy Attorney General of Canada, order that the document or thing be returned
to the person from whom it was seized or the person who is otherwise legally
entitled thereto if the judge is satisfied that the document or thing  (a) 
will not be required for an investigation or a criminal proceeding; or  (b) 
was not seized in accordance with the warrant or this section.                     (8) 
The person from whom any document or thing is seized pursuant to this section
is entitled, at all reasonable times and subject to such reasonable conditions
as may be imposed by the Minister, to inspect the document or thing and to
obtain one copy of the document at the expense of the Minister.  B.  Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms                     8.  Everyone has the right to be secure
against unreasonable search or seizure.  V.  Judgments Below  A.  Federal Court, Trial Division
(Reed J.)                     Reed J. dealt with
each of the respondents' attacks on s. 231.3 in turn.  First came the issue of
judicial discretion.  She felt bound by the Federal Court of Appeal's decision
in Solvent Petroleum Extraction Inc. v. Canada (M.N.R.), [1990] 1 F.C.
20 (C.A.), aff'g [1988] 3 F.C. 465, leave to appeal refused, [1989] 2 S.C.R. xi
[hereinafter Solvent Petroleum], in which Desjardins J.A. (Pratte and
Stone JJ.A., concurring) said, at p. 24, that if the statutory conditions are
met, the issuing judge must issue the warrant.  Reed J. then cited other
decisions and authorities on the interpretation of the word "shall",
some holding it to be mandatory, others holding it to have been a slip by the
legislature, which had intended to say "may".  She then reproduced a
long excerpt from the British Columbia Court of Appeal's reasons in Kourtessis
v. M.N.R. (1989), 39 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, in which Locke J.A. concluded that
while s. 231.3(3) deprives the issuing judge of the discretion to refuse a
warrant once the statutory criteria are met, it preserves the judge's crucial
"balance wheel" function of deciding whether the facts before him or
her are sufficient to warrant an intrusion of privacy, and thus does not defeat
the standards of Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145.  In any
event, Locke J.A. held the judge may attach conditions to the execution of the
warrant.  Reed J. thought that perhaps s. 2 of the Canadian Bill of Rights,
R.S.C., 1985, App. III, or the court's inherent control over the abuse of its
own process, might allow an issuing judge to refuse to issue an abusive
warrant.  She agreed that certainly the issuing judge could attach conditions
to the warrant.  But ultimately she declined to decide the question of whether
ss. 231.3(3) removed the issuing judge's discretion to refuse to issue a
warrant where to do so would be abusive, since in her view no abusive search or
seizure in violation of s. 8  of the Charter  had occurred in this case
and there was no factual underpinning for the argument (at p. 275).                     Then came the issue
of wholesale search and seizure under s. 231.3(5).  Reed J. referred to the
general requirement of prior authorization enunciated in Hunter, supra,
and the Federal Court of Appeal's judgment in Minister of National Revenue
v. Kruger Inc., [1984] 2 F.C. 535, striking down as too wide and general
the search power in s. 231.3's predecessor (s. 231(4), which allowed the
seizure of anything that may afford evidence of the violation of any
provision of the ITA or a regulation).  She then quoted extensively
from Solvent Petroleum, supra, in which the Federal Court of Appeal held
that the "plain view" seizure permitted by the ITA met the
test of reasonableness and therefore of validity.  Reed J. held that decision
to be binding on her.                     The next issue was
whether it was sufficient to require only "reasonable grounds to
believe" (s. 231.3(3)) instead of "reasonable and probable
grounds".  Reed J. referred extensively to the British Columbia Court of
Appeal's decision in Kourtessis, supra, which held that
"reasonable" in the context of s. 231.3(3) satisfied the
"more-probable-than-not test" required by Hunter, supra.  She
then referred to R. v. Simmons, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 495, at p. 523, which
stated the Hunter test to be "reasonable and probable
grounds", and juxtaposed that with the conclusion reached in Solvent
Petroleum, supra (adopting Lysyk J.'s conclusion in Kourtessis, supra)
that the absence of a statutory requirement for probable as well as reasonable
grounds for belief was not constitutionally fatal since the only explicit
requirement in s. 8  is that of reasonableness which comprehended a requirement
of probability.                     Reed J. then went
on to reject the respondents' s. 15  argument and their arguments based on
solicitor-client or accountant-client privilege.  She dismissed the application
with one set of costs.  B.Federal
Court of Appeal (Hugessen J.A., Pratte and Marceau JJ.A., concurring)                     Hugessen J.A. wrote
the reasons for the court's decision.  He started by considering the
characterization of the search and seizure provisions of the ITA for the
purposes of determining the taxpayer's reasonable expectation of privacy under
s. 8  of the Charter .  He rejected the contention that the procedures
constituted an administrative enforcement mechanism as described in R. v.
McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627, holding instead that they
were concerned with the detection and prosecution of crime.  No easing of Charter 
standards was therefore justified; on the contrary, "nothing less than the
full panoply of Charter  protection is appropriate" (at p. 694).                     Hugessen J.A. then
broached the substantive issues.  On the first question of judicial discretion
and the use of the words "shall issue" in s. 231.3(3), he held that
any text which specifically excludes the residual discretion to refuse to issue
a warrant where the circumstances do not justify an invasion of privacy
"will, for that reason alone, run afoul of sections 7  and 8  of the Charter 
as authorizing an unreasonable search and seizure and one that is in breach of
the principles of fundamental justice" (at pp. 694-95).  He rejected the
trial judge's suggestion that s. 231.3(3) could be "read down" to
preserve a residual discretion and held that the context of s. 231.3 and the
fact that the section's use of "shall" is unique in Canadian search
warrant legislation show that the word was intended to be mandatory and
imperative.  He referred to but rejected the British Columbia Court of Appeal's
holding in Kourtessis, supra, that the judge's discretion to determine
whether the statutory criteria are met satisfies the Hunter standard and
that in any event the issuing judge may attach conditions to the warrant.  He
placed considerable emphasis on this Court's decision in Descôteaux v.
Mierzwinski, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 860, deriving from that case the proposition
that the existence of judicial discretion is a prerequisite to the
reasonableness of a search and to our notions of fundamental justice. 
Moreover, in his view, Descôteaux establishes that any legislative
attempt to define exhaustively when a search will be reasonable is impossible. 
He concluded that the ultimate protection for the citizen against unreasonable
searches resides in the power to refuse to issue a warrant even when all the
conditions prescribed by Parliament are met.                     Hugessen J.A. went
on to consider the other grounds of appeal.  He cited, inter alia,
Dickson J.'s (as he then was) statement in Hunter, supra, at
p. 167, that the standards in s. 443 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C.
1970, c. C-34, ("reasonable ground") and the U.S. Fourth
Amendment ("probable cause") are identical.  From this he held at p.
707 that the words "reasonable grounds" in s. 231.3(3) met the
"more likely than not" standard of probability required for a search
to be reasonable.  Next, he held at p. 708 that s. 231.3(3)(b) did not
pass constitutional muster, since by using the words "may afford
evidence" it failed to meet the standard of Hunter, supra that
there be reasonable grounds to believe that evidence will be found. 
Finally, he held that there was no reason to interfere with the court's
previous holding in Solvent Petroleum, supra, that s. 231.3(5) does not
authorize unreasonable "wholesale" searches and seizures.  As a
result, the appeals were allowed, s. 231.3 was declared of no force or effect
and the search warrants were quashed.  VI.  Analysis:  The Constitutional
Validity of s. 231.3  A.  Legislative History                      Section 231.3 was
enacted by Parliament in 1986 in response to a number of appellate court
decisions finding that the previous search warrant provisions of the ITA
violate s. 8  of the Charter .  The predecessor to s. 231.3 read as
follows:                     231. ...                     (4) 
Where the Minister has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that a
violation of this Act or a regulation has been committed or is likely to be
committed, he may, with the approval of a judge of a superior or county court,
which approval the judge is hereby empowered to give on ex parte
application, authorize in writing any officer of the Department of National
Revenue, together with such members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or
other peace officers as he calls on to assist him and such other persons as may
be named therein, to enter and search, if necessary by force, any building,
receptacle or place for documents, books, records, papers or things that may
afford evidence as to the violation of any provision of this Act or a
regulation and to seize and take away any such documents, books, records,
papers or things and retain them until they are produced in any court
proceedings.                     (5)
An application to a judge under subsection (4) shall be supported by evidence
on oath establishing the facts upon which the application is based.                     In Minister of
National Revenue v. Kruger Inc., supra, s. 231(4) was held to
contravene s. 8  of the Charter  in that it gave the Minister, when he or
she believed one offence to have been committed, the power to authorize a general
search and seizure relating to the violation of any of the provisions of
the Act or its regulations.   The Ontario Court of Appeal agreed with this
holding in Re Print Three Inc. and The Queen (1985), 20 C.C.C. (3d) 392,
leave to appeal refused [1985] 2 S.C.R. x, and found additional reasons that
the section violated s. 8  (at p. 396):                     In
our view, there are additional reasons to those relied upon by the Federal
Court of Appeal for holding the subsection to be in breach of s. 8 .  It is
clear that to meet the standards of reasonableness there must first be an
independent arbiter (judge) who is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds
for believing that an offence has been committed (see Hunter et al v.
Southam Inc., supra).  In s. 231(4) and (5), it is the Minister who has to
have the reasonable and probable grounds and there is no standard or conditions
precedent set out for the judge on which to base his assessment of whether the
Minister's belief is properly founded.  Mr. Kelly argued that the only
reasonable construction of s-s. 5 is that facts must be laid before the judge
so he can be satisfied that the Minister has reasonable and probable grounds. 
Even if the subsection could be so construed, there are, as we have noted,
additional flaws in s. 231(4) and (5).  There is no requirement that the
Minister have grounds to believe that evidence is likely to be found at the
place of the search and there is no requirement that he present such grounds to
the judge.  There is, equally, no direction as to what is to be issued by the
judge in granting his "approval".  It is the Minister who issues what
is, in essence, the warrant.  Finally, the Minister is not required in the
authorization to specify the things to be searched for.                     The new version
addresses these defects.  Subsection 231.3(3) now makes it clear that prior to
the issuance of a search warrant under the Act a judge must be satisfied that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that a particular offence has been
committed under the Act and that a document or thing that may afford evidence
of the commission of that offence is likely to be found in the building,
receptacle or place specified in the application.  Moreover, s. 231.3(4)
requires particulars to be stated within the warrant as to what may be searched
for and seized.                     The
constitutionality of s. 231.3 of the ITA has been considered in a number
of lower court and appellate court decisions.  The majority of these have
upheld s. 231.3: see for example Kohli v. Moase (1987), 86 N.B.R. (2d)
15 (Q.B.), aff'd on other grounds (1989), 55 D.L.R. (4th) 740 (N.B.C.A.), Solvent
Petroleum, supra, and Kourtessis, supra.  In my view, however, the
amended legislation is still inadequate.  B.  Applying Section 8 of the
Charter                     (1)  Denial of
Residual Discretion:  Subs. (3)                     This issue requires
a decision as to whether legislation which authorizes a search or seizure must
provide for a residual discretion in the judicial officer who issues the
warrant.  It is contended by the respondents and the Federal Court of Appeal so
held that legislation that fails to do so violates s. 8  of the Charter . 
Reliance is placed on this Court's decision in Hunter, supra, and cases
that have followed it.  The appellants contend that this was not one of the
conditions laid down by Hunter, that if it was it does not apply here
and in any event the impugned section does provide a discretion that satisfies
the dictates of s. 8 .                     In my view, an
analysis of the principles on which Hunter was based shows that the
exercise of a judicial discretion in the decision to grant or withhold
authorization for a warrant of search was fundamental to the scheme of prior
authorization which Dickson J. prescribed as an indispensable requirement for
compliance with s. 8  in that case.  The judgment makes very clear that the
decision to grant or withhold the warrant requires the balancing of two
interests:  that of the individual to be free of intrusions of the state and
that of the state to intrude on the privacy of the individual for the purpose
of law enforcement.  At pages 158-60 of the judgment, Dickson J. stated:                     In
my view the interests protected by s. 8  are of a wider ambit than those
enunciated in Entick v. Carrington.  Section 8  is an entrenched
constitutional provision.  It is not therefore vulnerable to encroachment by
legislative enactments in the same way as common law protections.  There is,
further, nothing in the language of the section to restrict it to the
protection of property or to associate it with the law of trespass.  It
guarantees a broad and general right to be secure from unreasonable search and
seizure.                                                                      ...                     Like
the Supreme Court of the United States, I would be wary of foreclosing the
possibility that the right to be secure against unreasonable search and seizure
might protect interests beyond the right of privacy, but for purposes of the
present appeal I am satisfied that its protections go at least that far.  The
guarantee of security from unreasonable search and seizure only protects
a reasonable expectation.  This limitation on the right guaranteed by s.
8 , whether it is expressed negatively as freedom from "unreasonable"
search and seizure, or positively as an entitlement to a "reasonable"
expectation of privacy, indicates that an assessment must be made as to whether
in a particular situation the public's interest in being left alone by
government must give way to the government's interest in intruding on the
individual's privacy in order to advance its goals, notably those of law
enforcement.  [Emphasis in original.]                     The circumstances
in which these conflicting interests must be balanced will vary greatly.  The
strength of the interests will be affected by matters such as the nature of the
offence alleged, the nature of the intrusion sought including the place to be
searched, the time of the search and the person or persons who are the subjects
of the search.  The variability of the factors affecting the decision of the
authorizing judge was stressed by Lamer J. (as he then was) in Descôteaux v.
Mierzwinski, supra.  This was a pre-Charter  case in which
this Court held that s. 443  (now s. 487 ) provided for a discretion when a
warrant is sought before a justice under the Criminal Code .  At page 889
Lamer J. said:                     I
come down on the side of the discretion, as it allows more effective judicial
control of the police.  Searches are an exception to the oldest and most
fundamental principles of the common law, and as such the power to search
should be strictly controlled.  It goes without saying that the justice may
sometimes be in a poor position to assess the need for the search in advance. 
After all, searches, while constituting a means of gathering evidence, are also
an investigative tool.  It will often be difficult to determine definitively
the probative value of a particular thing before the police investigation has
been completed.  Be that as it may, there are places for which authorization to
search should generally be granted only with reticence and, where necessary,
with more conditions attached than for other places.  One does not enter a
church in the same way as a lion's den, or a warehouse in the same way as a
lawyer's office.  One does not search the premises of a third party who is not
alleged to have participated in the commission of a crime in the same way as
those of someone who is the subject of such an allegation.                     In order to take
account of the various factors affecting the balancing of the two interests,
the authorizing judge must be empowered to consider all the circumstances.  No
set of criteria will always be determinative or sufficient to override the
right of the individual to privacy.  It is imperative, therefore, that a
sufficient degree of flexibility be accorded to the authorizing officer in
order that justice be done to the respective interests involved.                     In Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. v. Lessard, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 421, and Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. v. New Brunswick (Attorney General), [1991] 3 S.C.R.
459, this Court considered the factors that should be taken into consideration
by a justice of the peace when determining whether to issue a warrant for the
search of the premises of a media organization pursuant to s. 487  of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46 .  It was submitted that two requirements were
constitutionally entrenched, namely that the Justice of the Peace must be
satisfied that there was no investigative alternative for obtaining the
material and, if one existed, that it had been pursued.  In the course of
rejecting the constitutional entrenchment of these two requirements, a majority
of this Court stressed the importance of evaluating the reasonableness of a
search in light of all the surrounding factors.  Cory J. stated in Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. v. New Brunswick (Attorney General), at p. 475:                     Any
search of premises is certain to be disquieting and upsetting.  The invasion of
privacy rights which a search entails is an important concern for all members
of a democratic society.  Some searches are obviously more intrusive and
upsetting than others.  For example, the search of a residence is likely to
have graver consequences than a search of commercial premises which may be
subject to statutory regulation and inspection.  Because of its intrusive
nature, a warrant to search any premises must only be issued when a justice of
the peace is satisfied that all the statutory requirements have been met.  In
those situations where all the statutory prerequisites have been established,
the justice of the peace should still consider all of the circumstances in
determining whether to exercise his or her discretion to issue a warrant.  It
is not a step that can be taken lightly. This is particularly true when a
warrant is sought to search the offices of a news media organization, where the
consequences are likely to be disruptive of the media's role of gathering and
publishing news.  [Emphasis added.]  Moreover, in response to the argument
that these two requirements are constitutionally entrenched prerequisites to
the search of media offices, Cory J. commented at p. 478:                     In
my view, the assessment of the reasonableness of a search cannot be said to
rest only upon these two factors.  Rather all factors should be evaluated in
light of the particular factual situation presented.  The factors which may be
vital in assessing the reasonableness of one search may be irrelevant in
another.  Simply stated, it is impossible to isolate two factors from the
numerous considerations which bear on assessment of the reasonableness of a
search and label them as conditional prerequisites.  The essential question can
be put in this way: taking into account all the circumstances and viewing them
fairly and objectively can it be said that the search was a reasonable one?                     It
is the overall reasonableness of a search which is protected by s. 8  of the Charter . 
Certainly the potentially damaging effect of a search and seizure upon the
freedom and the functioning of the press is highly relevant to the assessment
of the reasonableness of the search.  Yet neither s. 2 (b) nor s. 8  of
the Charter  requires that the two factors set out in Pacific Press
[Re Pacific Press Ltd. and The Queen (1977), 37 C.C.C. (2d) 487
(B.C.S.C.)] must always be met in order for a search to be permissible and
constitutionally valid.  It is essential that flexibility in the balancing
process be preserved so that all the factors relevant to the individual case
may be taken into consideration and properly weighed.  [Emphasis added.]                     In some situations
this discretion will only be exercised subject to specified conditions being
met and subject to restrictions and conditions with respect to the execution of
the warrant that are specified in the authorization.  This would apply, for
example, in the case of the prospective search of a private dwelling.  I
referred to this in R. v. Thompson, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1111, in connection
with authorizations to wiretap in a dwelling.  The authorizing judge must
consider imposing conditions.  The importance of the power to impose conditions
and restrictions was emphasized by Lamer J. in Descôteaux at p.
891, the exercise of which was dependent on the existence of a residual
discretion.                     Not only is the
existence of a discretion indispensable to the balancing of interests which Hunter
envisaged but the requirement that the officer authorizing the seizure be
independent and capable of acting judicially is inconsistent with the notion
that the state can dictate to him or her the precise circumstances under which
the right of the individual can be overborne.  I agree with the statement of
Morden J.A. in Minister of National Revenue v. Paroian, [1980] C.T.C.
131, at p. 138 that "The function of the judge is the most important
safeguard.  It is implicit in the provision that the judge is not to act as a
rubber stamp."  This statement was quoted with approval in Selye v.
Quebec, [1982] R.D.F.Q. 173, at p. 176.  This statement, which was made in
a pre-Charter  case, would apply with greater force in the era of the Charter . 
The concept of a rubber stamp role would be completely inconsistent with the
role assigned to the judiciary as expressed by Dickson J. in Beauregard v.
Canada, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 56, at p. 72:                     Secondly,
the enactment of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  (although
admittedly not relevant to this case because of its date of origin) conferred
on the courts another truly crucial role:  the defense of basic individual
liberties and human rights against intrusions by all levels and branches of
government.  Once again, in order to play this deeply constitutional role,
judicial independence is essential.                     Having found that a
residual discretion is a constitutional requirement, the next question is
whether s. 231.3(3) removes or impermissibly restricts this discretion.  It is
clear to me that the answer is yes.  I would adopt the reasoning of the Federal
Court of Appeal on this point, in preference to that of the British Columbia
Court of Appeal in Kourtessis, supra.  Section 231.3(1) states
that, on an ex parte application, a judge "may" issue a
warrant for the search of premises.  However, s. 231.3(3) provides that a judge
"shall" issue the warrant once satisfied that the three statutory
conditions set out therein have been satisfied.  As Hugessen J.A. pointed out,
the word "shall" is normally to be construed as imperative.  This
rule of construction is embodied in s. 11  of the Interpretation Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. I-21 .  The plain effect of the use of the word in s. 231.3(3)
is as the Federal Court of Appeal held in Solvent Petroleum, supra, at
p. 24 (excerpted in Baron at p. 695):                     Subsection
231.3(1) states that "A judge may".  Subsection 231.3(3) states that
"A judge shall".  It would therefore appear from the language of
subsection 231.3(3) that if the issuing judge comes to the conclusion that the
conditions of paragraphs 231.3(3)(a), (b) and (c) are met,
he need not nor is he permitted to consider whether there has been a previous
substantive voluntary compliance by the taxpayer, whether further documents
might be remitted voluntarily, or whether the applicant for the warrants has
taken all reasonable steps to obtain the information from an alternative source
before applying for the warrants.  In brief, if the conditions are met, he must
issue the warrant.                     As this Court said
in Re Manitoba Language Rights, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 721, at p. 737, the
presumption that the word "shall" is intended to be mandatory should
be followed unless:  such
an interpretation of the word "shall" would be utterly inconsistent
with the context in which it has been used and would render the sections irrational
or meaningless.  Hugessen J.A. found no reason to
depart from the presumption, and I would adopt what he said in this regard, at
p. 697:                     There
is, as it seems to me, absolutely nothing in the context of section 231.3 of
the Income Tax Act which would render an imperative interpretation of
the word "shall" in subsection 231.3(3) inconsistent with the balance
of the section or make it irrational or meaningless.  Indeed, I can see nothing
in the section which would point to a permissive or discretionary meaning for
"shall".  On the contrary, the draughtsman has clearly used the
permissive "may" where this is appropriate (as for example in
subsection 231.3(1) and (5)) and the use of "shall" in subsection
231.3(3) (as well, it may be noted, as in subsection 231.3(6)) has every
appearance of being a deliberate choice.                     Furthermore,
the whole of section 231.3 represents a change from the previous law [s.
231(4)] which was couched in terms that were clearly permissive and left a
discretion in the hands of the judge authorizing the seizure.  Also, as noted
above, the text of subsection 231.3(3) is unique and differs remarkably from
all other Canadian search warrant provisions [which are invariably
permissive].  I cannot view such a change from both previous and current
practice as being anything but intentional.                     I also agree with
Hugessen J.A. that the existence of a discretion is indispensable to the
imposition of conditions to the issue of the warrant.  As he states, this
conclusion follows from what was said by Lamer J. in Descôteaux, supra. 
Although I would not go so far as to hold that Parliament had, in the absence
of express language, removed the power to specify the terms upon which the
warrant is executed, I agree that the power to attach pre-conditions to the
issue of the warrant cannot be exercised once the statutory criteria for the
issue of the warrant have been met.                     Moreover, I do not
accept the position taken by Reed J. at trial and adopted by the appellants
that a judge's inherent power to prevent an abuse of the court's process or a
violation of a constitutional right continues to confer on an issuing judge the
discretion to refuse to issue a warrant in those circumstances.  As Hugessen
J.A. concluded, at p. 698, if the conditions set out in the subsection are
exhaustive of all the conditions precedent of a reasonable search, "an
application which meets all of those conditions cannot be an abuse of the
process".                     Finally, I observe
that the British Columbia Court of Appeal held in Kourtessis, supra,
that s. 231.3(3) preserved the crucial "balance wheel" function of
the issuing judge, and the removal of the discretion to refuse to issue a
warrant when all statutory criteria are met is of no consequence.  I agree with
Hugessen J.A. in rejecting this line of reasoning.  As I have already
indicated, in order to fulfil properly the "balance wheel" role
required by s. 8  of the Charter , a judge must be able to weigh all
the surrounding circumstances to determine whether in each case the interests
of the state are superior to the individual's right to privacy.  By restricting
the factors that a judge may consider, Parliament has improperly restricted a
judge's ability to assess the reasonableness of a search.  For example, as Reed
J. noted, s. 231.3(3) precludes a judge from taking into consideration whether
reasonable alternative sources for obtaining information sought from the search
of a lawyer's office exist, notwithstanding the requirement in Descôteaux,
supra, that this factor be considered before a search warrant under what is
now s. 487  of the Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46 , is issued.                     Bearing all this in
mind, I conclude that s. 231.3(3), by using the words "shall issue",
denies the issuing judge the discretion to refuse to issue a warrant where in
all the circumstances a search or seizure would be unreasonable.  In fact, the
subsection makes it possible for a judge to be statutorily bound to authorize
an unreasonable search or seizure.  For this reason the use of the word
"shall" brings s. 231.3(3) into conflict with s. 8  of the Charter .                     It was submitted,
however, that the above conclusion, while it might be correct in a Hunter v.
Southam Inc. situation, has no application to the ITA because it is
a regulatory statute and the criteria of Hunter must be relaxed.  I
accept that the majority characterized the ITA as a regulatory statute
in McKinlay Transport Ltd. v. The Queen, supra.  In my opinion, however,
in the very different circumstances of this case, while that classification may
affect the exercise of discretion by the authorizing judge, it is not a basis
for reading the requirement for a residual discretion out of s. 8 .  The
distinction between the nature of the state intrusion in McKinlay and
this case was clearly drawn by Wilson J. in her majority reasons.  At pages
649-50, she states:                     In
my opinion, s. 231(3) [sic] provides the least intrusive means by which
effective monitoring of compliance with the Income Tax Act can be
effected.  It involves no invasion of a taxpayer's home or business premises. 
It simply calls for the production of records which may be relevant to the
filing of an income tax return.  At page 649, Wilson J. recognized that
relaxation of the Hunter standards with respect to the demand provisions
by reason of the characterization of the statutory provision as regulatory
would not validate all forms of searches and seizures under the ITA. 
She continued:  The
state interest in monitoring compliance with the legislation must be weighed
against an individual's privacy interest.  The greater the intrusion into the
privacy interests of an individual, the more likely it will be that safeguards
akin to those in Hunter will be required.  Thus, when the tax
officials seek entry onto the private property of an individual to conduct a
search or seizure, the intrusion is much greater than a mere demand for
production of documents.  [Emphasis added.]                     The point is that
the characterization of certain offences and statutory schemes as
"regulatory" or "criminal", although a useful factor, is
not the last word for the purpose of Charter  analysis.  In R. v.
Wholesale Travel Group Inc., [1991] 3 S.C.R. 154, a case in which the
false/misleading advertising offence in the Competition Act, R.S.C.
1970, c. C-23, as amended, was attacked under ss. 7  and 11 (d) of the Charter ,
Justice La Forest said at p. 209 that "what is ultimately important are
not labels (though these are undoubtedly useful), but the values at stake in
the particular context", and held that the potential five-year prison term
upon conviction of the offence was a deprivation of liberty requiring much
greater safeguards to conform with s. 7  or 11 (d) than the provisions at
issue in Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and
Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 425.                     This logic, in my
view, applies in the present case.  Section 231.3 contemplates and authorizes
the physical entry and search, against the will of the occupant, of private
premises, even those occupied by innocent third parties against whom no
allegation of impropriety is levelled.  The purpose of the search is to provide
evidence to be used in the prosecution of ITA offences.  Physical search
of private premises (I mean private in the sense of private property,
regardless of whether the public is permitted to enter the premises to do
business) is the greatest intrusion of privacy short of a violation of bodily
integrity.  It is quite distinct from compelling a person to appear for
examination under oath and to bring with them certain documents, under a subpoena
duces tecum (Thomson Newspapers, supra), or to produce documents on
demand (McKinlay Transport, supra).  Both Justices La Forest and
L'Heureux-Dubé acknowledged in Thomson Newspapers, supra, at pp. 520 and
594, respectively, that the power to search premises is more intrusive of an
individual's privacy than the mere power to order the production of documents.                     The intrusive
nature of a physical search has been acknowledged by this Court on various
occasions: see for example Canadian Broadcasting Corp. v. New Brunswick
(Attorney General), supra.  Warrants for the search of any premises
constitute a significant intrusion on the privacy of an individual that is both
upsetting and disruptive.  Confidences, unrelated to the offence being
investigated, may be subject to scrutiny by strangers.  One should not lose
sight of the fact that s. 231.3 allows for the search not only of business
premises but also of the homes of the taxpayers as well as the premises of
innocent third parties.  Moreover, the premises of individuals whose
relationship with the impugned taxpayer may be subject to professional
privileges and whose offices may also contain confidential information regarding
other individuals might also be subject to a search.                     Given the intrusive
nature of searches and the corresponding purpose of such a search to gather
evidence for the prosecution of a taxpayer, I see no reason for a radical
departure from the guidelines and principles expressed in Hunter, supra. 
The effect of any lessened expectation of privacy by reason of the character of
the ITA will no doubt affect the exercise of discretion by an
authorizing judge but cannot justify elimination of it.                     This is enough to
dispose of the appeal.  I will go on, however, to consider the other grounds on
which the section was attacked and defended, as these were fully argued.  The
resolution of these additional grounds could affect the remedy which is
appropriate.                     (2)  "Reasonable
Grounds" to Believe:  Subs. (3)                     The second argument
raised by the taxpayers in these two appeals revolves around a distinction
between "reasonable grounds" and "reasonable and probable
grounds".  The argument is that the requirement in s. 231.3(3) of
"reasonable grounds" to believe the statutory criteria are met is
constitutionally insufficient, since it is a lower standard than
"reasonable and probable grounds", and only the latter will satisfy
s. 8 .  The argument owes its (precarious) existence in part to passages in Hunter,
supra, which are invoked by both sides.  On the one hand, Dickson J. (as he
then was) said, at p. 168, that "reasonable and probable grounds, . . .
constitutes the minimum standard".  On the other, he said, at p. 167, that
the phrases "reasonable grounds to believe" in s. 443 of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-34 (now R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, s. 487 ) and
"probable cause" in the American Fourth Constitutional Amendment were
identical.                     In my view nothing
turns on the omission of the word "probable" from s. 231.3(3).  The
standard that the subsection sets out is one of credibly based probability,
which is the standard required by s. 8  of the Charter .  I respectfully
disagree with Locke J.A.'s holding in Kourtessis, supra, that
"reasonable" is not the same as "reasonable and probable",
and I find that his use of an interpretative "gloss" on the word to
make it conform to constitutional requirements is an unnecessary strain on the
meaning of the word.  I prefer the reasoning of Lysyk J. in the British
Columbia Supreme Court on this point.  Lysyk J. noted that Hunter, supra,
cast no doubt on the formulation "reasonable grounds" in s. 443  (now
s. 487 ) of the Criminal Code , which is identical in that respect to s.
231.3(3) of the ITA.  He held that the distinction relied on by the
taxpayers was a "refined distinction" of the type found in American
jurisprudence under the Fourth Amendment, with its "probable cause"
warrant clause, to be avoided in the interpretation of s. 8  of the Charter :
 R. v. Rao (1984), 12 C.C.C. (3d) 97 (Ont. C.A.), leave to appeal
refused, [1984] 2 S.C.R. ix.                      To my mind, Hunter,
supra, does not give rise to legitimate controversy on this point.  That
decision required reasonable "and probable" grounds and
simultaneously established that the two words import the same standard. 
"Reasonableness" comprehends a requirement of probability.  As Wilson
J. said in R. v. Debot, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1140, at p. 1166, aff'g (1986),
30 C.C.C. (3d) 207 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 219, the standard to be met in order to
establish reasonable grounds for a search is "reasonable
probability".  It appears that the normal statutory phrase in Canada is
"reasonable grounds", and that some of the remaining exceptions
requiring "reasonable and probable grounds" have been amended in
recent years, one imagines for the sake of uniformity, by deleting "and
probable":  see Locke J.A.'s reasons in Kourtessis, supra, at pp.
24-25.  This use of "reasonable grounds" as the basis for the
issuance of search warrants is not constitutionally fatal.  Rather, it meets
the requirements of s. 8 .                     (3)  Standard
for the Discovery of Evidence: Para. (3)(b)                     The next point
raised by the taxpayers is that s. 231.3(3)(b) waters down the minimum
constitutional standard for the probability that the search will unearth
evidence.  This argument was accepted by the Federal Court of Appeal.  The
taxpayers rely on the following passage from the reasons of Dickson J. in Hunter,
at p. 167:  The
problem is with the stipulation of a reasonable belief that evidence may
be uncovered in the search.  Here again it is useful, in my view, to adopt a
purposive approach.  The purpose of an objective criterion for granting prior
authorization to conduct a search or seizure is to provide a consistent
standard for identifying the point at which the interests of the state in such
intrusions come to prevail over the interests of the individual in resisting
them.  To associate it with an applicant's reasonable belief that relevant
evidence may be uncovered by the search, would be to define the proper
standard as the possibility of finding evidence.  This is a very low
standard which would validate intrusion on the basis of suspicion, and
authorize fishing expeditions of considerable latitude.  It would tip the
balance strongly in favour of the state and limit the right of the individual
to resist, to only the most egregious intrusions.  I do not believe that this
is a proper standard for securing the right to be free from unreasonable search
and seizure.                     This passage
underscores the need to protect individuals against unreasonable searches in
the form of "fishing expeditions" by the state.  This Court
established in Hunter that a standard of credibly based probability
rather than mere suspicion should be applied in determining when an
individual's interest in privacy is subordinate to the needs of law
enforcement.                    In my view, the
taxpayers' argument and Hugessen J.A.'s holding that s. 231.3(3)(b)
fails to meet this criterion is based on a misreading of the paragraph.  There
are important differences between the statutory language at issue here and in Hunter. 
The impugned section in Hunter provided that where the Director of
Investigation and Research of the Combines Investigation Branch believed there
"may be evidence" relevant to an inquiry, officers may search for and
seize anything that "may afford ... evidence":  Combines
Investigation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-23, s. 10(1).  The provision at issue
in the present litigation requires reasonable grounds to believe, inter alia,
that something that "may afford evidence" is "likely to be
found".  This formulation does not make the standard the "possibility
of finding evidence", which was rejected as too low in Hunter (at
p. 167; emphasis in original).  Rather, it meets the "credibly based
probability" standard required by s. 8 .  The paragraph, by using the word
"likely" in respect of the chance of finding the thing sought,
imports the criterion of probability.  The legislation in Hunter, supra
employed the lower threshold of "may" in respect of the chance of
finding the thing sought, which was held to be unacceptable.  When Dickson J.
stated that at a minimum there must be reasonable and probable grounds to believe
there is evidence to be found at the place of search (at p. 168), it must be
remembered that he was addressing himself to the legislative requirement that
"evidence may be found", which made mere possibility of finding
evidence the criterion.  Dickson J.'s reasons in Hunter make it clear
that the controlling standard is credibly-based probability, not mere
possibility.  The word "likely" meets this standard.  Its use in s.
231.3(b) is reinforced by the explicit terms of s. 231.3(c).                     The word
"may" is used in a different sense in s. 231.3(3)(b), namely
regarding the evidential value of the thing sought.  The use of the word
"may" regarding the use of the thing found as evidence in a
prosecution does not detract from the standard of probability of finding the
thing sought; rather, it recognizes the nature of the investigative process. 
The concern in Hunter was with the probability of finding the things
sought, not with the certitude that the things found will be used as evidence. 
The taxpayers do not restrict their argument to Hunter, however.  They
also refer to decisions striking down s. 111(1)  of the Customs Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (2nd Supp .), which employed the words "there may be
found":  see, for example, Goguen v. Shannon (1989), 50 C.C.C. (3d)
45 (N.B.C.A.); Nima v. McInnes (1988), 45 C.C.C. (3d) 419 (B.C.S.C. in
Chambers).  Their reliance on these decisions is misplaced, however.  The
objectionable language in the Customs Act  had to do with the standard
for finding the things sought, not for affording evidence of the offence.                     The use of the word
"may" regarding the use of the thing found as evidence in a
prosecution simply reflects one of the simple realities of the investigation of
offences.  It is impossible to know with certainty at an early stage in
any investigation what particular items will provide evidence in a
trial.  I concede that in some police or other official investigations there
will be some items the evidential value of which is known beforehand and of
which it can be said with confidence that "this thing will probably be
found and if found, will be used as evidence at trial".   But this
standard cannot be expected of every item that may be relevant to the
commission of the offence.  Moreover, even in what appear to be the clear cases,
it is often impossible to know with certainty the evidential value of the
things sought.  That will often depend on further investigation and analysis
after the search warrant is executed.  Accordingly, to exact a higher standard
would unduly restrict investigation and could not have been intended as a
prerequisite to a valid search and seizure.                     I conclude,
therefore, that the standard "may afford evidence", when coupled with
a requirement of credibly based probability that the things sought are likely
to be found, passes constitutional muster.  I find support for this conclusion
in the fact that, at common law, "may afford evidence" was considered
a sufficient test for the issue of a warrant.  As one judge put it in a fraud
case:  It
is not necessary for the magistrate to satisfy himself that the documents
sought to be searched in the case before this Court can prove the fraud alleged
to have been committed.  He need not adjudicate upon the question whether the
offence was committed at the time he issued the search warrant, nor does he
need to adjudicate on the question whether the documents sought can in fact
assist in establishing the commission of the offence.  He need only satisfy
himself that there were reasonable grounds for believing that such documents could
be of assistance in establishing the commission of the offence and that they
were in the premises in respect of which the search warrant is sought.  [Wiens
v. The Queen (1973), 24 C.R.N.S. 341 (Man. Q.B.), at p. 347.]  [Emphasis
added.]                     Although counsel
for the Attorney General of Canada is right in conceding, as he does in his
factum, that the common law standard cannot dictate the constitutional
standard, I agree with his submission that the logic of the common law
decisions applies with added force to the complex commercial fraud and tax
evasion cases of the modern era.  As Hartt J. said in R. v. Burnett,
[1985] 2 C.T.C. 227 (Ont. H.C.), at pp. 238-39:  Where
the alleged misconduct is of a complex nature in which funds are allegedly
funnelled through a number of interrelated companies with a view to hiding
their disposition, it seems to me that the number of documents that may afford
evidence of such a violation may well be very great indeed.  In such a case, an
entire class of documents may in fact be necessary to trace the transactions. 
Granted, many documents in a file may not, in the final analysis, be relevant
to any tax violation.  However, it may be impossible to preclude their
relevance without a detailed examination of all the documents seized.  And, in Re Print Three Inc., supra,
at p. 397, McKinnon A.C.J.O. for the court (Martin and Thorson JJ.A.
concurring) stated:  ...
because of the extent and complexity of business affairs, made possible by
modern technology and merchandising methods, it is impossible to define with
exact precision the documents sought in cases involving fraud or tax evasion.  Given the inherent problems in
specifying the particular items sought to be seized and determining how they
fit into a complex pattern of economic activity, the appropriateness of the
"may afford evidence" standard in the context of income tax
investigations is apparent.                     I therefore
respectfully disagree with Hugessen J.A.'s accession to the taxpayers' argument
on this point (at p. 708), and hold that the language of s. 231.3(3)(b)
is consistent with the right to be secure against unreasonable search or
seizure in s. 8  of the Charter .                     (4)  Wholesale Search
And Seizure: Subs. (5)                     Finally, s.
231.3(5) is attacked for allowing the same kind of "wholesale search and
seizures" without prior authorization found under the predecessor
legislation to violate s. 8  of the Charter .  The Attorney General of
Canada and the interveners argued that given the nature of the documents
involved the provision is a reasonable extension if not a reflection of the
"plain view" doctrine permitting the seizure of articles in plain
view.  The taxpayers submit that s. 231.3(5)  goes beyond plain view seizures
since it will rarely be apparent whether a particular document constitutes
evidence of a violation of the ITA.  The difficulty in dealing with this
question is that we face it in a factual vacuum since there is no indication that
documents were seized in reliance on this provision.  We are always loathe to
adjudicate constitutional issues in the absence of a factual foundation:  Danson
v. Ontario (Attorney General), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1086; MacKay v. Manitoba,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 357, at pp. 361 and 366; R v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd.,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 713, at pp. 762 and 767-68.  I think the issue should be left
to be resolved until such time as this Court is presented with a situation in
which the provision was relied upon to seize documents.  In view of the remedy
which I have adopted, s. 231.3 will have to be re-enacted and therefore the
terms of this subsection may warrant reconsideration.  Moreover, I believe that
the provision is couched in language that is susceptible to interpretation so
as to confine it within constitutional limits on the basis outlined by
Lamer J. (as he then was) in Slaight Communications Inc. v. Davidson,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 1038, at p. 1078.  On this basis, the authority to seize might
be limited to documents that could be seized on the basis of the "plain
view" doctrine with appropriate refinements to comport with the special
circumstance of income tax investigation.  C.  Section 1                     As I said at the
outset of my reasons, I do not intend to engage in any s. 1  analysis since
neither the appellants nor the interveners in this appeal, nor, indeed, the
respondent or the interveners in Kourtessis, have made any submissions
or directed us to any evidence capable of demonstrating that s. 231.3, if
unreasonable for the purposes of s. 8 , is yet reasonable and demonstrably
justified for the purposes of s. 1 .  The burden was on the government to
establish that the law constituted a reasonable limit, and it has made no
attempt to do so.  As observed by Dickson J. in Hunter, it is
problematic as to "what further balancing of interests, if any, may be
contemplated by s. 1 , beyond that envisaged by s. 8 " (at pp. 169-70). 
Presumably for the same reason, other cases in this Court which have considered
s. 8  of the Charter  have not addressed s. 1 .  D.  Remedy                     The Federal Court
of Appeal by its formal order quashed the search warrants and declared and
ordered the return of the documents seized under the authority of the warrant. 
The reasons, however, include "a declaration that s. 231.3 of the Income
Tax Act is of no force or effect".  This declaration is omitted from
the formal judgment but I assume this was an oversight.  No submissions were
made by the appellants to the effect that, if the appeal failed, the relief
granted by the Court of Appeal should be varied.  The order sought in the
appellants' factum is that "the appeal be allowed, with costs, and the
application to set aside the search warrant be dismissed".  The Attorney
General of Canada also submits that the constitutional question be answered in
the negative.  Technically, therefore, the issue of a remedy other than that
which was granted by the Court of Appeal is not properly before us.                     Furthermore, there
is no question that striking out s. 231.3 is an appropriate, if not the most
appropriate remedy.  The subsection I have found constitutionally inadequate is
the one prescribing the conditions precedent for the issuance of a warrant. 
Issuing the warrant is the linchpin of the whole scheme, and all the other
parts of the section depend for their relevance upon, and are inextricably
caught up with, the valid issuance of a search warrant.  Without the power to
issue a warrant, the rest of the section is meaningless.  "Reading
down" by amending the clear intent of a statutory provision may be
appropriate in some cases.  The decision to do so requires a determination that
this remedy will constitute the lesser intrusion into the role of the
legislature consistent with upholding the values and objectives of the Charter . 
See Osborne v. Canada (Treasury Board), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 69, at
p. 104, and Schachter v. Canada, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 679, at p. 707. 
This is a determination that I am not prepared to make in the absence of
submissions by the Attorney General of Canada on behalf of the Government of
Canada that reading down will constitute a lesser intrusion.  VII.  Disposition                     I would dismiss the
appeal with costs.  The judgment of the Court of Appeal is restored but its
formal order should be amended to include the declaration with respect to the
invalidity of s. 231.3.  I would answer the constitutional question as follows:  Question:Whether
s. 231.3 of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c, 63, as amended by
S.C. 1986, c. 6, limits the rights and freedoms guaranteed by ss. 7  and 8  of
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , Part I of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , being Schedule B of the Canada Act, 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c.
11, and is consequently of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982 , Schedule B, Canada Act, 1982 (U.K.), 1982, c. 11.  Answer:Yes,
in that s. 231.3(3) violates s. 8 .                     Appeal dismissed
with costs.  Section 231.3(3) of the Income Tax Act violates s. 8  of the
Charter  and is of no force or effect.                     Solicitor for the
appellants:  John C. Tait, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the
respondents:  Phillips & Vineberg, Montreal.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario:  The Attorney General
for Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Quebec:  The Attorney General of
Quebec, Montreal.       *      Stevenson J. took no part in the judgment.  