Air Canada v. British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R.
1161  Air Canada and Pacific Western
Airlines Ltd.                                                                Appellants  v.  Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia and the Attorney General
of British Columbia                                                                      Respondents  and  The Attorney General for Ontario, the Attorney General of Quebec, the Attorney General of Nova Scotia, the Attorney General for New
Brunswick, the Attorney General of Manitoba, the Attorney General for Saskatchewan, the Attorney General for Alberta, and the Attorney
General of Newfoundland                                                                   Interveners  and
between  Her
Majesty The Queen in Right of the
province of British Columbia and the Attorney General of British Columbia                                                                      Appellants  v.  Air
Canada, Pacific Western Airlines Ltd. and Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd.                                                                                  Respondents  and  The
Attorney General for Saskatchewan                                                                       Intervener  indexed as:  air canada v. british columbia  File
Nos.:  20079, 20082, 20085.  1988: 
June 8, 9, 10; 1989:  May 4.   on
appeal from the appeal court for british columbia       Statutes
-- Retroactive operation -- Taxing statutes -- Ultra vires taxing provision
amended -- Amendment providing for retroactive operation of amendment --
Whether or not retroactive application of taxing provision ultra vires the
province -- Finance Statutes Amendment Act, 1981, S.B.C. 1981, c. 5,
s. 20.      In
1980, Air Canada, Pacific Western Airlines and Canadian Pacific Airlines
commenced separate actions (which were heard together) against British
Columbia, seeking the reimbursement of amounts paid as "gasoline
taxes" under the Gasoline Tax Act in effect on and
following August 1, 1974.  (A fiat was no longer necessary to sue the
provincial Crown from August 1, 1974.)  Air Canada and Pacific Western Airlines
sought to recover the taxes paid between August 1, 1974 and the date of trial. 
Canadian Pacific Airlines' claim was limited to the taxes paid between August
1, 1974 and July 1, 1976.      The
Act, as it stood on August 1, 1974, taxed every purchaser on all gasoline sold
in the province for the first time after its manufacture in, or importation
into, the province.  The Act remained in this form until 1976 even though the
Privy Council had struck down a similar provision for not being a direct tax
within s. 92(2)  of the Constitution Act, 1867 .  The definition
of "purchaser" was repealed and replaced in July 1976. 
"Purchaser" was defined to mean any person who, acting for himself or
as agent, bought or received delivery of gasoline within the province for his
or her own use or consumption.  In 1981, legislation was enacted
purporting to extend the application of legislation similar to that enacted in
1976 back to August 1, 1974.  This legislation also purported to legalize the
Crown's retention of the money collected from 1974 to 1976 under the Act as it
then stood:  moneys collected as taxes, penalties or interest under the Act
during that period were to "be conclusively deemed to have been confiscated
by the government without compensation".      Air
Canada and Pacific Western Airlines alleged that none of the definitions made
the tax a direct tax in the province for provincial purposes so as to give the
province jurisdiction under s. 92(2)  of the Constitution Act,
1867 .  All three airlines contended that, even if the 1976
version of the statute were constitutional, they were still entitled to be
reimbursed for moneys paid between 1974 and 1976 because the 1981 attempt to
give the 1976 tax retroactive effect was invalid.      At
trial the province conceded that the Act as it existed before 1976 was ultra
vires, but the 1976 Act was held to be valid.  The 1981
legislation to give the tax retroactive effect, however, was found to be ultra
vires.  The airlines were therefore entitled to recover taxes
paid between 1974 and 1976 but not the taxes paid after 1976.       The
constitutional questions before this Court queried:  (1) if the Gasoline
Tax Act, as amended in 1976 and 1981, was ultra
vires in its application or otherwise constitutionally inapplicable
to the airlines here; (2) whether the application of the Gasoline
Tax Act to the airlines violated s. 7  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms ; and (3) if so, whether its
application was justified under s. 1 .        The
1976 tax met the requirements of s. 92(2)  of the
Constitution Act, 1867 :  it was a direct tax, imposed in the province and for
provincial purposes.  A direct tax is one demanded from the very person
who it is intended or desired should pay it.  The 1976 Act clearly taxed the
ultimate consumer of the gasoline and made no provision for passing it on to
others, whatever the opportunities of recouping it by other means.  The
transaction attracting the tax took place in the province and the purchaser had
a sufficient presence in the province to be taxed there.  Nothing in the
Constitution Act, 1867  requires that the taxpayer must benefit from the tax. 
A person, a transaction or property in the province may be taxed by the
province if taxed directly.      The
Act did not impose a consumption tax and references to consumption or use in
the definition of purchaser merely defined the taxpayer.  Since the tax was
imposed in the province in respect of the purchase of gasoline, it did not
matter where it was consumed, whether in airspace or in another province.  That
the tax could have an effect on persons outside the province was of no
consequence.      The Charter  right
to "life, liberty or security of the person" could not be invoked
here.  The airlines were required to pay taxes in the same way as other
purchasers of gasoline within the province.  An ordinary tax like the one at
issue could not be equated with expropriation.      Federal
jurisdiction over trade and commerce (s. 91(2) ), interprovincial
undertakings (s. 92(10) (a)) and aeronautics was not violated by the 1976 Act. 
Any alleged violation of the trade and commerce power would be based on the
impugned tax's being characterized as a consumption tax on the airlines' fuel. 
The federal power over interprovincial undertakings and aeronautics did not
create an immunity for the airlines from otherwise valid provincial
legislation.  By and large federal undertakings, like other private enterprises
functioning within the province, must operate in a provincial legislative
environment, and must like them pay provincial taxes imposed within the
province.      The
words of the 1976 Act clearly indicated that the Legislature meant to give
effect to the whole of the statute in its amended form from the date of its
enactment.  The argument that the 1976 Act was invalid because the Legislature
could not amend an ultra vires statute so as to
make it intra vires was without merit.      The
taxing provisions of the 1981 legislation, like the 1976 legislation, were a
proper exercise of the province's power to impose direct taxation in the
province.  The sole difference was that the 1981 provisions were given
retroactive effect -- a result that was not constitutionally barred.  The tax
illegally collected under the ultra vires provision before
1976 would be equal to the amount levied in 1981 and the moneys owing by the
taxpayers under the 1981 provision was simply to be taken out of the equal
amounts collected from those taxpayers under the invalid tax.  The subsection
which referred to "confiscation" was nothing more nor less than
machinery for collecting the taxes properly imposed in the other subsections
and accordingly could not taint their constitutionality.      The
1981 legislation does not violate the principle enunciated in Amax
Potash Ltd. v. Government of Saskatchewan, [1977] 2 S.C.R.
576.  Amax concerned a situation where the province sought to
avoid repaying a tax it was bound by law to pay.  It simply sought in an
indirect way to give effect to an invalid statute.  Here the Legislature did
directly what it was empowered to do -- impose a direct tax and give it
retroactive effect.      The
argument that, apart from the 1981 Act, the airlines could not recover on the
basis that the tax was paid under a mistake of law (the "mistake of
law" rule) could not succeed.  The rule was rejected as having been
constructed on inadequate foundations as lacking in clarity and resulting in
undue harshness.  It should not in any event be extended to the constitutional
plane.  The development of the law of restitution had rendered otiose the
distinction between mistakes of fact and mistakes of law.  It should play no
part in the law of restitution.  Recovery should generally be allowed in any
case of enrichment at the plaintiff's expense caused by a mistake, subject to
any available defences or equitable reasons for denying recovery.  Restitution
should apply against public bodies as well as to private individuals.      Restitutionary
principles, however, preclude recovery where the plaintiff has suffered no
loss.  If the taxing authority retains a payment to which it was not entitled,
it will be unjustly enriched but not at the taxpayer's expense if the economic
burden of the tax has been shifted to others.  Generally, it is preferable
to leave the enrichment with the tax authority instead of putting the judicial
machinery in motion for the purpose of shifting the same enrichment to the
taxpayer.  The law of restitution is not intended to provide windfalls to
plaintiffs who have suffered no loss.  Rather, its function is to ensure
that where a plaintiff has been deprived of wealth that is either in his
possession or would have accrued for his benefit, it is restored to him.  The
measure of restitutionary recovery is the gain the province made at the
taxpayer's expense.  The taxpayer must show that it bore the burden of the tax
to make out its claim.  What the province received was relevant only in so far
as it was received at the taxpayer's expense.      Apart
from this, while the principles of unjust enrichment can operate against a
government to ground restitutionary recovery, where the effect of an
unconstitutional or ultra vires statute is in
issue, special considerations operate to take the case out of the normal
restitutionary framework and require a rule responding to the underlying policy
concerns specific to this problem.  The rule is against recovery of ultra
vires taxes, at least in the case of unconstitutional
statutes.  The policies that underlie this rule are numerous.  Chief among
these are the protection of the treasury, and a recognition of the reality that
if the tax were refunded, modern government would be driven to the inefficient
course of reimposing it, either on the same or on a new generation of
taxpayers, to finance the operations of government.  It could lead to fiscal
chaos, particulary where a long-standing taxation measure is involved.  The tax
here is of broad general application and has been imposed for decades.      Exceptions
may exist where the relationship between the state and a particular taxpayer
results in the collection of tax which would be unjust or oppressive in the
circumstances.  The present case does not, however, call for a departure
from the general rule.  The tax, though unconstitutional, raised an issue
bordering on the technical.  Had the statute been enacted in proper form there
would have been no difficulty in exacting the tax as actually imposed.  Nor was
there compulsion.  Payment under an ultra vires statute does not
constitute "compulsion".  Before a payment will be regarded as
involuntary there must be some natural or threatened exercise of power
possessed by the party receiving it over the person or property of the taxpayer
for which he has no immediate relief than to make the payment.  Finally, the
fact that the province may have been in a better position to determine that the
statute was unconstitutional does not affect the rule.  The policy reasons
underlying it remain.      The
rule against the recovery of unconstitutional and ultra vires levies
is an exceptional rule, and should not be construed more widely than is
necessary to fulfil the values which support it.  The rule should not apply
where a tax is extracted from a taxpayer through a misapplication of the law. 
Where an otherwise constitutional or intra vires statute
or regulation is applied in error to a person to whom, on its true
construction, it does not apply, the general principles of restitution for
money paid under a mistake should be applied, and, subject to available
defenses and equitable considerations, the general rule should favour
recovery.  No distinction should be made between mistakes of fact and mistakes
of law.      Per Beetz
J.:  While agreeing with the reasons and conclusions of La Forest J., it
is not necessary to deal with the "Mistake of Law" defence  or to
express any opinion thereon with respect to private law or public law and with
respect to the recovery of taxes levied pursuant to an unconstitutional statute
because the new Gasoline Tax Act was valid in its
entirety.  If the rule should be against the recovery of ultra
vires taxes, at least in the case of unconstitutional taxes,
this rule should not extend to cases of error in the application of the law.      Per McIntyre
J.:  The reasons for judgment of La Forest J. were agreed with, subject to the
qualifications expressed by Beetz J.      Per Wilson
J. (dissenting in part):  British Columbia's Gasoline Tax Act, as it
existed in 1974, was ultra vires the province and
could not be relied upon by the Crown to justify the collection or retention of
the taxes levied against the appellants between 1974 and 1976.  The
unconstitutional aspects were remedied by amendment made in 1976.  However, in
1981, the province through the imposition of a retroactive tax and the
confiscation of the taxes paid between 1974 and 1976 attempted unsuccessfully
to give effect to the earlier unconstitutional legislation in violation of
principles already stated by this Court.      Appellants'
claim for repayment is not defeated by the doctrine of mistake of law which
should not be extended to moneys paid under  unconstitutional legislation. 
Otherwise, taxpayers would be obliged to check out the constitutional validity
of taxing legislation before paying on pain of being unable to recover anything
paid under unconstitutional laws.  The appellants were entitled to rely on the
presumption of validity of the legislation and on the representation as to its
validity by the legislature enacting and administering it.      Payments
made under unconstitutional legislation are not "voluntary" in a
sense which should prejudice the taxpayer.  The taxpayer, assuming the validity
of the statute which it is entitled to do, considers itself obligated to pay. 
Any taxpayer paying taxes exigible under a statute which it has no reason to
believe or suspect is other than valid should be viewed as having paid pursuant
to the statutory obligation to do so.      Payments
made under a statute subsequently found to be unconstitutional should be
recoverable and the principle should not be reversed for policy reasons
in the case of payments made to governmental bodies.  If any judicial policy
were to be developed, that policy should be one which distributes the loss
fairly across the public.  The loss should not fall on the totally innocent
taxpayer who paid what the legislature improperly said was due.      The
appellants were not required to show that the unjust enrichment of the province
was at their expense.  The argument that their receipt of the money back
amounted to a "windfall" because in all likelihood they had recouped
it from their customers is no basis on which to deny recovery.  Where payments
are made pursuant to an unconstitutional statute there is no legitimate basis
on which they can be retained.      Section
7  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  had no
application to this case for the reasons given by La Forest J.  Cases
Cited  By La
Forest J.   By
Wilson J. (dissenting in part)      Amax
Potash Ltd. v. Government of Saskatchewan, [1977] 2 S.C.R.
576; Bilbie v. Lumley (1802), 2 East 469, 102 E.R. 448; Hydro
Electric Commission of Nepean v. Ontario Hydro, [1982] 1 S.C.R.
347.  Statutes
and Regulations Cited  Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss.
1 , 7 .  Constitution Act, 1867, ss. 91(2) ,
92(2) , (10) (a)  Finance Statutes Amendment Act, 1981,
S.B.C. 1981, c. 5, s. 20.   Gasoline Tax Act, 1948,
R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 162, s. 25(1), (2), (3), (4), (5).  Miscellaneous Statutes Amendment Act, 1976,
S.B.C. 1976, c. 32, s. 7.  Social
Service Tax Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 388.  Authors
Cited  Birks, Peter.  An Introduction to
the Law of Restitution.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1985.  British Columbia.  Law Reform Commission.  Report on
Benefits Conferred Under a Mistake of Law.  Victoria:
Province of British Columbia, Ministry of the Attorney General, 1981.  Corbin, Arthur Linton.  Corbin on Contracts, vol
3.  St. Paul:  West Publishing, 1960.  Goff of Chieveley, Robert Goff, Baron and Gareth
Jones.  The Law of Restitution, 3rd ed.  London: 
Sweet and Maxwell, 1986.  Hogg, Peter W.  Constitutional Law
of Canada, 2nd ed.  Toronto:  Carswells,  1985.  Kennedy, W. P. M. and D. C. Wells.  The Law of
the Taxing Power in Canada.  Toronto:  University of Toronto Press, 1931.  McCamus, John D.  "Restitutionary Recovery of
Moneys Paid to Public Authority Under a Mistake of Law: 
Ignorantia Juris in the Supreme Court of Canada" (1983), 17
U.B.C. Law Rev. 233.  Palmer, George E.  The Law of
Restitution, vol. III.  Boston:  Little, Brown, 1978.  Pannam,
Clifford L.  "The Recovery of Unconstitutional Taxes in Australia and in
the United States" (1964), 42 Texas L. Rev. 779.       D. M.
M. Goldie, Q.C., W. S. Martin, C. F.
Willms and R. G. Berrow, for the appellant
Air Canada.      Wendy
G. Baker and Peter G. Voith, for the appellants
Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd. and Pacific Western Airlines Ltd.      E.
Robert A. Edwards, Q.C., and Joseph J. Arvay, Q.C., for
the respondents the Province of British Columbia, et al.      Elizabeth
Goldberg and Gerry Sholtack, for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario.      Michel
Jolin, for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.      Reinhold
M. Endres, for the intervener the Attorney General of Nova
Scotia.      Richard
P. Burns, for the intervener the Attorney General for New
Brunswick.      Dirk
Blevins and Stewart J. Pierce, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba.      Robert
G. Richards, for the intervener the Attorney General for
Saskatchewan.      Howard
Kushner, for the intervener the Attorney General for Alberta.      F.
Greig Crockett, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Newfoundland.  //Beetz J.//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      BEETZ J. -- I
have had the advantage of reading the reasons for judgment written by my
brother Justice La Forest.  I agree with his reasons and conclusions.  However,
since I take the view that the new s. 25 of the Gasoline Tax Act of
British Columbia is constitutionally valid in its entirety, I do not find it
necessary to express any opinion with respect to the "Mistake of Law"
defence, either in private law or in public law, nor with respect to the
recovery of taxes levied and paid pursuant to an unconstitutional statute.      Assuming
without deciding that my brother La Forest J. is correct in holding that
"the rule should be against recovery of ultra vires taxes,
at least in the case of unconstitutional statutes", I agree with him that
this rule should not extend to a case of misapplication of the law such as the
misapplication of the Social Service Tax Act of British
Columbia to aircraft, aircraft parts and alcoholic beverages in the related
appeals.      I
agree with the disposition proposed by my brother La Forest J.  //McIntyre J.//      The
following  are the reasons delivered by      MCINTYRE J. -- I
agree with the reasons for judgment of my brother, Justice La Forest,
subject to the qualifications expressed by my brother, Justice Beetz, which I
would adopt.  //La Forest
J.//      The
judgment of Lamer, La Forest and L'Heureux-Dubé JJ. was delivered by      LA FOREST J. --
This judgment deals with the third of a trilogy heard at the same time
involving the application and constitutionality of the Social
Service Tax Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 388, and the Gasoline
Tax Act, 1948, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 162.  Most of the major issues
raised regarding the former Act have been dealt with in a separate judgment on
the first and second appeals, issued contemporaneously herewith.  This judgment
deals with the Gasoline Tax Act.  However, a
number of issues, most importantly the issue whether taxes paid under a mistake
of law may be recovered, are common to the second appeal and to this, the third
appeal.  Since these issues were originally raised and more directly addressed
in relation to the Gasoline Tax Act, I have in the
interests of clarity and comprehensiveness dealt with them in this judgment.      The
principal issues raised in this appeal are:      (1)whether the Gasoline Tax Act of
British Columbia, both as originally enacted and as amended over the years, is
constitutionally valid under s. 92(2)  of the Constitution Act,
1867  as imposing direct taxation within the province in
order to the raising of a revenue for provincial purposes;      (2)whether, if the Act as originally enacted was ultra
vires, a later amendment can retroactively impose the tax and
permit the retention of the amounts unconstitutionally levied before the
amendment in settlement of the tax owing under the amendments; and      (3)whether, apart from statute, an unconstitutional
tax paid by a taxpayer may be recovered.  Also at
issue is whether the tax is invalid or inapplicable, as infringing against the
federal powers respecting trade and commerce, aeronautics and interprovincial
undertakings, or as violating s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms .  Facts      In
1980, Air Canada, Pacific Western Airlines and Canadian Pacific Airlines
commenced actions in the Supreme Court of British Columbia against the Province
of British Columbia, seeking the reimbursement of $18 million, $9 million and
$3.5 million respectively, which amounts the airlines had paid as
"gasoline taxes" under the Gasoline Tax Act,
1948, as amended.  The sums claimed by Air Canada and
Pacific Western Airlines represented payments made to the province under the
Act between August 1, 1974 and the date of trial.  Canadian Pacific Airlines'
claim was limited to the payments it made in the 23-month period between August
1, 1974 and July 1, 1976.  The significance of the August 1, 1974 starting date
is that from that date it was no longer necessary to obtain a fiat to sue the
provincial Crown.  Separate actions for taxes paid prior to 1974 were
subsequently launched (see Air Canada v. British Columbia (Attorney General), [1986]
2 S.C.R. 539), but the latter actions do not form the subject matter of this
appeal.      The Gasoline
Tax Act was originally enacted in 1923, and has since been
amended and consolidated on numerous occasions.  The relevant provision of the
Act as it stood on August 1, 1974 provided that every purchaser shall pay a tax
equal to 10 cents per gallon on all gasoline purchased, except gasoline
purchased for use in an aircraft, which was taxed at a lower rate.  Section 2
defined "purchaser" in these terms:  "purchaser"
means any person who within the Province purchases gasoline when sold for the
first time after its manufacture in or importation into the Province.      A
virtually identical provision in the British Columbia Fuel-oil
Tax Act, R.S.B.C. 1924, c. 251, had been struck down by the
Privy Council in Attorney-General for British Columbia v. Canadian
Pacific Railway Co., [1927] A.C. 934, on the ground that since the initial
purchaser could always resell the commodity and thereby pass on the tax, it was
not a direct tax within the meaning of s. 92(2)  of the
Constitution Act, 1867 .  Oddly enough, though the Fuel-oil Tax Act was
shortly afterwards amended so as to impose the tax directly on the consumer, an
approach later held by the Privy Council to conform to the constitutional
requirements of s. 92(2)  (see Attorney-General for British Columbia v.
Kingcome Navigation Co., [1934] A.C. 45), no such step was taken in respect of
the Act impugned in the present case until 1976.  In July of that year,
however, by s. 7 of the Miscellaneous Statutes Amendment Act, 1976, S.B.C.
1976, c. 32, the definition of "purchaser" was repealed and replaced
by the following:  "purchaser"
means any person who, within the Province, purchases or receives delivery of
gasoline for his own use or consumption or for the use or consumption by other
persons at his expense, or on behalf of, or as an agent for, a principal who is
acquiring the gasoline for use or consumption by the principal or by other
persons at his expense.      This
provision, of course, took effect only from 1976.  In 1981, however, the
province enacted the Finance Statutes Amendment Act, 1981, S.B.C.
1981, c. 5, which by s. 20 enacted a new s. 25 of the Gasoline
Tax Act purporting by ss. 25(1) to (4) to extend the
application of the Act, in a form similar to that enacted in 1976, back to
August 1, 1974, and by s. 25(5) purporting to legalize the retention by the
Crown of the money collected from 1974 to 1976 under the Act as it then stood. 
Section 25 reads as follows:      25. (1) In this section
"purchaser" means any person who, within the Province, after August
1, 1974 and before July 8, 1976, purchased or received delivery of gasoline for
his own use or consumption or for the use or consumption by other persons at
his expense, or on behalf of or as an agent for a principal who was acquiring
the gasoline for use or consumption by the principal or by other persons at his
expense.      (2) Every purchaser shall pay to Her Majesty for the
purpose of raising revenue for Provincial purposes a tax of 15¢ a gallon on all
gasoline purchased by him after August 1, 1974 and before February 28, 1975,
but  (a)where gasoline was purchased for use in an aircraft
the tax shall be 3¢ a gallon, and  (b)where gasoline in the form of liquefied petroleum gas
or natural gas was purchased to propel a motor vehicle the tax shall be 10¢ a
gallon.      (3) Every purchaser shall pay to Her Majesty for the
purpose of raising revenue for Provincial purposes a tax of 17¢ a gallon on all
gasoline purchased by him after February 27, 1975 and before July 8, 1976, but  (a)where gasoline was purchased for use in an aircraft
the tax shall be 5¢ a gallon, and  (b)where gasoline in the form of liquefied petroleum gas
or natural gas was purchased to propel a motor vehicle the tax shall be 12¢ a
gallon.      (4) Where a purchaser is liable to pay tax under
subsection (2) or (3) and the gasoline was used or consumed for  (a)the operation of logging trucks other than on public
highways,  (b)the operation of a motor vehicle on a public highway
by any person who had suffered the loss of a limb, or who was permanently
confined to a wheelchair, or who was in receipt of a 100% disability pension
through active service in any war while in Her Majesty's service, or  (c)the operation of the power unit of a motor vehicle,
while the vehicle was stationary, for any industrial purpose approved by the
minister,  the taxes of 17¢ a gallon and 12¢ a gallon shall be
reduced to 5¢ a gallon, and the taxes of 15¢ a gallon and 10¢ a gallon shall be
reduced to 3¢ a gallon.      (5)
Where, after August 1, 1974 and before July 8, 1976, money was collected or
purported to have been collected as taxes, penalties or interest under this
Act, the money shall by this section be conclusively deemed to have been
confiscated by the government without compensation.  Section
62(5) of the Finance Statutes Amendment Act, 1981 makes
clear the retroactive character of this provision.  It reads:      62. . . .      (5)
Section 20 shall be deemed to have come into force on August 1, 1974 and is
retroactive to the extent necessary to give it effect on and after that date.      In
these three actions, which were heard together, two of the airlines (Air Canada
and Pacific Western Airlines) submitted that the province had no jurisdiction
to levy these taxes under any of the various statutory definitions of
"purchaser", as none of those definitions made the tax a direct tax
in the province for provincial purposes as required by s. 92(2)  of the
Constitution Act, 1867 .  All three airlines contended that, even if the 1976
version of the statute were constitutional, the airlines were still entitled to
be reimbursed for moneys paid between 1974 and 1976 because the 1981 attempt to
give the 1976 tax retroactive effect was invalid.  In fact, it appears that the
province has already reimbursed the airlines, and it is the province that is
seeking recovery.  The
Courts Below      At
trial, counsel for the Attorney General conceded that the Act as it stood on
August 1, 1974, was ultra vires, given the Privy
Council's decision in Attorney-General for British Columbia v. Canadian
Pacific Railway Co., supra, but he maintained that the province
was entitled to retain the money collected during the 1974-1976 period by
virtue of (1) the 1981 amendment, which gave the 1976 definition retroactive
effect, and (2) common law defences.       Macdonald
J. summarily rejected attacks on the validity of the 1976 amendment based on
arguments (1) that for a provincial tax to be valid it must be collected from
those who can receive a benefit, and that the airlines could not receive any
benefit; and (2) that the Act impaired the airlines' capacity as a federal
undertaking to carry on business in the province.  He also rejected the
argument that a province cannot amend an ultra vires statute
so as to cure the defect that rendered it invalid.  As he put it at p. 184,
"If the province has the power to impose this tax by re-enacting the whole
Act, I find it difficult to accept the proposition that it cannot do so by
amending the single definition which makes it invalid."      Macdonald
J. then considered the validity of s. 25 of the Finance Statutes
Amendment Act, 1981.  He read that provision as purporting to do two
things:  (a) as imposing, by ss. 25(1) to (4), a fresh tax on any person who,
between August 1, 1974 and July 8, 1976, purchased or received delivery of
gasoline in the province for his own use or consumption; and (b) as providing,
by s. 25(5) that money collected as taxes between August 1, 1974 and July 8,
1976, "shall . . . be conclusively deemed to have been confiscated by the
government without compensation."      So
far as the fresh tax was concerned, Macdonald J. held that since the tax was
direct, there was no impediment to enacting it retroactively.  In his view, the
airlines' reliance on this Court's decision in Amax Potash Ltd. v.
Government of Saskatchewan, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 576, (hereinafter Amax), to
challenge the validity of this new tax was misplaced.  In the present case, a
fresh tax was being levied retroactively pursuant to a valid
re-enactment. Amax applied to a situation where there
was no consitutional basis for the impugned legislation.  It did not apply to
invalidate a taxing statute where there is a constitutional power to enact such
a measure provided it is done in proper form, as in the present cases. 
Sections 25(1) to (4) were, therefore, valid, and each of the airlines was in
consequence obliged to pay a fresh tax pursuant to these provisions.      Macdonald
J., however, found s. 25(5) ultra vires.  It purported to
confiscate taxes paid pursuant to the ultra vires
legislation and, therefore, fell within the reasoning in Amax.  He
recognized that the province might well be in a position to set off the
liability of the airlines arising under ss. 25(1) to (4) against its obligation
to repay taxes improperly collected under the Act as it existed between 1974 to
1976, but, he stated, that matter was not before him.      The
airlines, therefore, succeeded in their claims that they were entitled to
recover taxes paid between 1974 and 1976.  However, they were not entitled to
recover taxes paid after 1976.       Hinkson
J.A. noted that, as a result of the British Columbia Court of Appeal decision
in Marine Petrobulk Ltd. v. R. in right of B.C. (1985),
64 B.C.L.R. 17, the airlines did not advance the submission that the trial
judge erred in concluding that the 1976 definition of "purchaser"
rendered the tax a direct tax within the province as required by s. 92(2)  of
the Constitution Act, 1867 .  He rejected the submission that the
tax was, as the airlines argued, a "consumption tax" and in
consequence invalid because 99% of the fuel was consumed outside the
province (since the airspace over a province is not a situs for
provincial taxation).  In his view the tax was a purchase tax.  It was directed
to a person within British Columbia who purchased gasoline with the intention
of consuming it.  The Legislature was not concerned, and need not be concerned
with where the person consumed the gasoline purchased.  For this reason, he
dismissed the airlines' appeals.      Lambert
J.A. reached the same conclusion.  In his view, the Act as amended in 1976,
taken as a whole, imposed a tax either on the transaction of purchase for the
purpose of consumption, or on a person who purchased goods for the purpose of
consumption.  The qualification that the purchase must be for the purchaser's
own use or consumption was a condition of the application of the tax, as was
the fact that the purchase must take place within the province, but those
conditions did not affect the true incidence of the tax, which was directed at
the transaction of purchase for consumption, or at a purchaser who bought for
the purpose of consumption.      Esson
J.A. concluded, for substantially the same reasons as given by Hinkson J.A.,
that the 1976 definition of "purchaser" in the Gasoline
Tax Act rendered the statute constitutional.  In his opinion,
the statute limited the incidence of the tax to those who purchase or receive
gasoline for their own use or consumption.  The purpose of that limitation was
to ensure that the tax would have no tendency to be passed on; the limitation
did not make the imposition a tax on consumption.      On
the cross-appeal by the Attorney General against the direction that the moneys
paid between 1974 and 1976 must be repaid, counsel for the Attorney General
conceded the invalidity of s. 25(5) of the Finance Statutes
Amendment Act, 1981 in light of the Amax
decision, but submitted that this provision should be severed from the
remainder of s. 25, leaving ss. 25(1) to (4) as a valid retroactive tax.      Though
they arrived at the same conclusion, the two majority judges differed in their
views on this issue.  Hinkson J.A. concluded that it was wrong to read s. 25 as
imposing both a "fresh tax" and then confiscating tax money already
collected.  The tax having been imposed retroactively in ss. 25(1) to (4), s.
25(5) made it clear that its payment was to be made by confiscating the moneys
already paid.  Section 25(5) was therefore integral to the scheme, and once it
was conceded that it was invalid, ss. 25(1) to (4) would also fall.  The
provisions could not be severed since the Legislature would not have enacted
them without also enacting s. 25(5).  Section 25(5), which gave purpose and
meaning to the rest of the section, so tainted the remainder of s. 25 that the
whole section was ultra vires.  The other
majority judge, Lambert J.A., agreed with the trial judge that while s. 25(5)
was ultra vires, ss. 25(1) to (4) were severable and constituted a
valid retroactive tax, not a colourable attempt to retain moneys paid to the
Crown under an unconstitutional taxing statute.  They did not amount to a
legislative confiscation of taxes under an ultra vires statute
forbidden under the principle in Amax.  He, therefore,
upheld the trial judge's conclusion that these provisions were constitutional,
but refrained from expressing any opinion about the effectiveness or
enforceability of the tax and dismissed the cross-appeal.  Lambert J.A.'s view
left open the possibility that the province might validly collect the tax.      In
the Court of Appeal, the province also argued that it was not required to repay
the tax collected because of the operation of the common law rules regarding
"mutual mistake of law" and "voluntary payment of tax". 
After reviewing the evidence, Hinkson J.A. found that from 1927 onwards, the
province was aware that the tax was unconstitutional, while the airlines did
not suspect this until they decided to challenge the legislation.  These
findings refuted the suggestions that there was a mutual mistake of law and
that during the period in question the payments made by the airlines were made
voluntarily knowing that the tax was unconstitutional.      Hinkson
J.A. also rejected the contention that the parties were in pari
delicto, i.e., that if the province was to blame for imposing
the tax, the airlines were equally to blame for paying it.  While he could not,
he stated, on the evidence conclude that Air Canada had acted under practical
compulsion in paying the tax, as Hydro Electric Commission of Nepean v.
Ontario Hydro, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 347 (hereinafter Nepean),
required, he distinguished that decision on the basis that it was not a
constitutional case.  He then relied on this Court's judgment in Amax for the
proposition that, in a federal state, the Crown cannot engage in an ultra
vires exercise of power by way of taxation and then call in
aid either legislation enacted by it or common law rights to retain the
proceeds of that taxation.  He, therefore, concluded that the province could
not retain the moneys paid during the period in question.  He did, however,
leave open the possibility that the Crown could impose a fresh retroactive tax.      Lambert
J.A., too, found that even if the common law principles applicable to recovery
of taxes would preclude restitution, they must be subject to a constitutional
exception.  If money taxed under an ultra vires statute could be
retained, the Constitution would be flouted.  Thus, the Nepean and Amax cases
were perfectly reconcilable.  In his view, payment pursuant to an ultra
vires statute amounted to irresistible practical compulsion
even in the absence of protest or complaint by the taxpayer.  He was also of
the view that retention by the Crown of taxes collected under an ultra
vires statute would be ultra vires.      Esson
J.A. dissented on the cross-appeal.  In his view the trial judge erred in
holding that the province must repay the airlines the taxes paid by them prior
to July 1, 1976.  The salient fact upon which he based that conclusion arose
from the decision on the main appeal that the airlines were in the same
position as all others who purchased fuel within British Columbia for their own
consumption.  Before July 1976, although the tax was imposed under an invalid
statute, it was in essence the same tax as the present one.  Then, as now, it
was imposed "at the pump", i.e., at the point of purchase for
consumption.  The statute was, until 1976, ultra vires the
province because it authorized a tax in terms that could have resulted in its
being passed on to others.  It was capable of being indirect and, therefore,
was indirect.  But the moneys the airlines now seek to recover were not paid by
them in satisfaction of an indirect tax.  As actually administered, the tax was
within the powers of the province.  In that sense, the defect was one of
constitutional form rather than substance.      Esson
J.A. disagreed with the view that Amax stands for the proposition
that any money paid as taxes under a statute later held to be ultra
vires can never be retained, and that private law
considerations such as were relied upon in Nepean are
irrelevant.  Rather, Amax simply stood for the proposition that
an attempt by a legislature to enact a statute barring access to the courts
would be struck down as attempting by covert means to impose illegal burdens.  Amax held
that fundamental principles of federalism preclude a province from barring
access to the general law where the issue is whether the province has exceeded
its powers and whether, if it has, the taxpayer is entitled to a remedy. 
However, where the legislature has not created such a bar, there is no reason
why the province should not be able to rely on ordinary principles of justice
and fairness in defending itself against a taxpayer's claim for repayment of
moneys.  The airlines should be entitled to recover only if they could satisfy
the requirements of the action for money had and received which are rooted in
principles of justice and equity.      In
these cases, the requirements of common law principles were not met.  The
mistake is one of law, not fact.  The in pari delicto
exception had no application.  There was no duress or compulsion in the
collection of the tax.  Moreover, even if there was practical compulsion, it
would not be unjust to permit the Crown to keep the money, since the money
collected was clearly within the province's competence to tax.  The province
received no benefit, and the taxpayer suffered no detriment not authorized by
the Constitution.  It could not be suggested that if the province retained this
money, it would be unjustly enriched.  Rather, it is the airlines who, if
successful, would obtain a windfall.      Esson
J.A. therefore would have allowed the cross-appeal and dismissed the airlines'
action for recovery of the taxes paid.  The
Appeal to this Court      Leave
to appeal to this Court was then sought and was granted on all issues.  These
issues included two not argued before the courts below, namely, whether the
impugned statute as it existed in 1974 was constitutionally valid, and whether
its application in the circumstances of this case contravened s. 7  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  The following constitutional
questions were stated:  1.Is the Gasoline Tax Act,
R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 162, as amended by S.B.C. 1976, c. 32 and as subsequently
amended, ultra vires in its application
or otherwise constitutionally inapplicable to Air Canada in the circumstances
of this case?  2.Does the application of the Gasoline Tax Act to Air
Canada in the circumstances of this case violate s. 7  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  3.If so,
is its application justified on the basis of s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  The
Attorneys General of the following provinces intervened to make submissions
regarding the constitutional questions:  Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, New
Brunswick, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and Newfoundland.      I
propose to deal with the issues in terms of the impugned Act as it existed at
the relevant dates.  The Act
in 1974      As
already described, the Gasoline Tax Act as it existed in
1974 was, in its relevant aspects, substantially the same as it had been at the
time of its original enactment in 1923.  It imposed a tax on a purchaser of
gasoline when it was sold for the first time after its manufacture in, or
importation into the province.  Since the Privy Council in
Attorney-General for British Columbia v. Canadian Pacific Railway Co., supra, had,
we saw, found a similar provision to be ultra vires on the
ground that the tax imposed by it was not direct as required by s. 92(2)  of the
Constitution Act, 1867 , because it was capable of being passed on to subsequent
purchasers, counsel for the Attorney General of British Columbia in the courts
below refrained from arguing the validity of the tax imposed under the Act as
it existed in 1974.  In this Court, however, counsel invited us to review the C.P.R. case and
to hold that the tax had been valid from its inception.  He asked us to
"read down" the Act so that it would apply only to persons who
purchase the gasoline for their own use or consumption as it was in practice
applied.  He observed that the Privy Council in the C.P.R. case
did not expressly advert to this possibility.  However, since counsel squarely
raised the issue in that case (see supra, p. 935), the
Privy Council must have found it unnecessary to deal with it expressly.  In my
view, it quite correctly rejected this argument sub silentio.  The
words of the statute were clear and it is not for the courts to look for
outside evidence of how an Act is applied in practice to determine its
constitutional validity.  This could lead to finding a statute in one province
valid, while holding an identical statute in another province invalid if the
circumstances to which it was applied were different.  It is not for the courts
to redraft statutes, particularly taxation statutes.  Even if it were, I do not
think it would be appropriate after over sixty years to overrule a case that
not only constitutes a distinct step in the development of the definition of
direct taxation, but that has been repeatedly cited and relied upon by the
courts since it was decided.      The
Act as it existed in 1974 cannot, therefore, be relied upon by the Crown to
justify collection or retention of the taxes levied between 1974 and 1976.       The
principal attack on the validity of the 1976 Act was that it did not conform to
the requirements of s. 92(2)  of the Constitution Act, 1867 .  Thus,
it was argued, the tax imposed was not a direct tax; it was not imposed in the
province; and it was not for provincial purposes, each of which conditions is
required by s. 92(2) .  All of these submissions were rejected, rightly in my
view, by the courts below.      That
the tax is a direct tax I have no doubt. Since at least Bank of
Toronto v. Lambe (1887), 12 A.C. 575 (P.C.), the generally accepted test
of what constitutes a direct tax has been that of John Stuart Mill:  "A
direct tax is one which is demanded from the very persons who it is intended or
desired should pay it."  That person is clearly identified in the
definition in the 1976 Act as the ultimate consumer of the gasoline; there is
no passing on of the tax to others, whatever may be the opportunities of
recouping the amount of the tax by other means (a very different thing). 
Whether one chooses to call it a transaction tax or a tax against the purchaser
does not affect this simple reality.  However important it may be to
distinguish between taxes on persons, property or transactions for the purpose
of determining whether a tax is imposed in the province, the relevant inquiry
in determining whether the tax is direct or indirect is generally whether it
conforms to the test just quoted (see Kennedy and Wells, The Law of
the Taxing Power in Canada, at p. 61).  In some cases, it is true, the courts have
decided the latter question on the basis of a "categories" test, but
that is irrelevant here.      I
have no doubt either that the tax is imposed in the province.  It is imposed on
a purchaser of gasoline and a purchaser is defined as "any person who, within
the Province, purchases or receives delivery of gasoline for his own use or
consumption . . . ."  Whether the tax is viewed as one on a transaction
(the purchase) or on a person (the purchaser) does not matter for this purpose
either.  The purchase must obviously take place in the province and the
purchaser has a sufficient presence in the province to be taxed there.      The
airlines argued that the tax was a tax on the consumption of gasoline.  Since
most of that consumption, so far as the airlines were concerned, was in the
airspace, which falls outside the province (see R. in right of
Manitoba v. Air Canada, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 303), the tax was imposed outside the
province.  I cannot agree with this contention.  The Act clearly does not
impose a consumption tax.  The references in the definition to consumption or
use merely define the taxpayer, i.e., a purchaser who buys gasoline for his own
use.  Since the tax is imposed in the province in respect of the purchase of
gasoline, it does not matter where the gasoline is consumed, whether it is in
the airspace or in another province.  The passing reference by Taschereau J. in Atlantic
Smoke Shops, Ltd. v. Conlon, [1941] S.C.R. 670, at p. 717, to the fact that only in
exceptional cases will tobacco (the subject matter of the tax there) be
consumed outside the province, in no way detracts from this.      There
may, I suppose, be cases where a tax, though in form a purchase tax within the
province, might, in essence, be a tax on consumers outside the province.  But
the present statute is a general one directed at all purchasers of gasoline
within the province.  The fact that some of these purchasers may consume some
or a considerable portion of the gasoline outside the province does not change
the basic character of the Act, which is one that imposes a tax on the purchase
of gasoline within the province.  That it may have an effect on persons outside
the province is of no consequence.  In the only field where the issue of the
territoriality of legislation has been canvassed in any depth, succession
duties, it has often been held that property in the province passing on death,
or its transmission there as a result of that event, may be taxed in that
province although the beneficiary who bears the burden of the tax resides
outside the province.  R. in right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, supra, is in
no way contrary to this approach.  What that case decided was that mere
overflight of an aircraft or the landing of an aircraft in a province in the
course of a through-flight did not give the aircraft sufficient presence in the
province to make it the subject of a tax there.  Here the transaction between
the seller of the gasoline and the taxpayer clearly took place in the province.      It
was also argued that the tax was not raised "in order to the raising of a
Revenue for Provincial Purposes" within the meaning of s. 92(2)  of the
Constitution Act, 1867 .  In support of this position, counsel asserted that
for a provincial tax to be valid it must relate to opportunities, benefits or
protection afforded by the taxing province to the taxpayer or class of
taxpayers.  The province, counsel went on, did not and could not confer such
benefits or provide such opportunities or protection since the control of
aeronautics was solely within the powers of Parliament.  Under these
circumstances, the levy imposed here amounted to expropriation rather than
taxation.  In this context, reference was made to United States authorities
such as Braniff Airways, Inc. v. Nebraska State Board of Equalization and
Assessment, 347 U.S. 590 (1954), per Reed J.
(hereinafter Braniff).      I
cannot accept these contentions.  Though spoken in dissent, the view of Duff
C.J. in Reference re The Employment and Social Insurance Act, [1936]
S.C.R. 427, regarding the requirement that taxation must be "for
provincial purposes" has never been successfully challenged.  That
requirement, he said (at p. 434) "mean[s] neither more nor less than
this:  the taxing power of the legislatures is given to them for raising money
for the exclusive disposition of the legislature."  Despite the airlines'
argument to the contrary, the Privy Council on the appeal from that case (Attorney-General
for Canada v. Attorney-General for Ontario, [1937] A.C. 355)
did not cast doubt on Duff C.J.'s proposition.  What the Privy Council objected
to in that case was not the tax (if there was one), but that the federal
legislation there in question was in pith and substance a law in relation to
insurance so framed as to encroach upon a field within the exclusive competence
of the provinces (see pp. 366-67).  There is nothing in the Constitution
Act, 1867  requiring that the taxpayer must benefit from the tax. 
A person, a transaction or property in the province may be taxed by the
province if taxed directly.      I do
not find the Braniff case and similar American decisions
particularly useful in this context.  The Braniff case is
more akin to R. in right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, supra, since
it involved taxation of flight equipment engaged in interstate commerce, with
the difference that the court in Braniff held that there
were sufficient regular stops within the state to give the planes in question
there sufficient contact with the state to permit them to form the subject
matter of taxation there.  Here there can be no doubt that the transaction was
located within the province.       In
addition to arguing that the 1976 Act did not meet the requirements of s. 92(2) 
of the Constitution Act, 1867 , the airlines also advanced a number
of subsidiary arguments.      To
buttress the argument under s. 92(2)  that the airlines received no benefit from
the tax, the airlines also relied on s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms .  The tax, they argued, was tantamount to an
expropriation.  I fail to see, however, how the "life, liberty or security
of the person" of the airlines is involved (assuming the provision can
otherwise apply to them in circumstances like these) by being required to pay
taxes in the same way as other persons who purchase gasoline within the
province.  It is simply not accurate to equate an ordinary tax like the one at
issue in this case with expropriation.  Assuming it is necessary to show a
relationship between the tax and the benefits derived by the airlines, finding
that relationship poses no difficulty here.  Indeed, Air Canada admitted that
airport facilities are serviced by municipal and provincial utilities,
including water, electricity, and road systems to the airport.  To that may be
added fire protection and the benefits provided to various of the airlines'
facilities and offices as well as to their employees.      Counsel
for the airlines also argued that the 1976 Act in its application to fuel
consumed by the airlines was invalid as violating ss. 91(2)  (trade and
commerce) and 92(10)(a) (interprovincial undertakings) of the Constitution
Act, 1867 , and the federal aeronautics power.  The argument
regarding the trade and commerce power appears to have been based on the
characterization that the impugned tax was a consumption tax, a view I have
already rejected.  There is no indication that the tax in question here is
anything but a general tax imposed upon all purchasers of gasoline in the
province.  While it may incidentally affect interprovincial or international
trade, that burden is no greater than that imposed on intra-provincial trade. 
There is nothing discriminatory about the tax, and no one argues that it is so
heavy as to amount to regulation.  The gasoline is not purchased as an article
of commerce for sale abroad.  It is intended to be, and is used by the
airlines.  Even under the broader interpretation given to the commerce power in
the United States, a similar approach to state taxes imposed on fuel used in
interstate and international flights has been followed in that country; see
among others United Air Lines, Inc. v. Mahin, 410
U.S. 623 (1973); Edelman v. Boeing Air Transport, Inc., 289
U.S. 249 (1933); Delta Air Lines, Inc. v. Department of Revenue, 455
So.2d 317 (1984 Fla.), cert. denied 474 U.S. 892 (1985).      So
far as the attack based on the federal nature of the undertaking (i.e., s.
92(10) (a) and the aeronautics powers), the airlines at times
appeared to argue for a type of enclave theory making them immune from
otherwise valid provincial legislation.  This contention is wholly without
merit.  By and large federal undertakings, like other private enterprises
functioning within the province, must operate in a provincial legislative
environment, and must like them pay provincial taxes imposed within the
province.  Obviously, if a tax amounted to a colourable attempt to regulate a
federal undertaking, that would not be permitted; see Reference
re Upper Churchill Water Rights Reversion Act, [1984] 1 S.C.R.
297, at pp. 324-25.  Again, there may be instances where provincial statutes
may cripple or destroy a federal undertaking; see Campbell-Bennett Ltd.
v. Comstock Midwestern Ltd., [1954] S.C.R. 207.  However, we are far from any
situation here that would attract the application of these principles.      Finally,
it was argued that the 1976 Act was invalid because the Legislature could not
by an amendment to an ultra vires statute make the
statute intra vires.  That proposition had, I think wisely, been virtually
abandoned in the Court of Appeal.  It is abundantly obvious from the words used
in the 1976 Act that the Legislature meant to give effect to the whole of the
statute in its amended form from the date of its enactment.  In this I fully
agree with Macdonald J.      I
see no reason then why the airlines should be immune from the tax imposed under
the 1976 statute, nor on the basis of these arguments, from the 1981 Act.  The
latter Act, however, raises difficulties of its own, and I shall now turn my
attention to these.  The 1981
Act      In
1981, the Legislature enacted a new s. 25 of the taxing Act.  Substantially,
ss. 25(1) to (4) purport to retroactively impose a tax on a person who, within
the province, between August 1, 1974 and July 8, 1976, purchased gasoline for
his own use or consumption.  Section 25(5) then goes on to provide that where
during that period moneys were collected as taxes, penalties or interest under
the Act, such money "shall . . . be conclusively deemed to have been
confiscated by the government without compensation".      None
of the judges in the courts below casts any doubt on the legislative power of
the province to impose a retroactive tax in the manner provided in ss. 25(1) to
(4).  What they really disagreed about was the effect of s. 25(5) on those
provisions.  In common with these judges, I am unable to see any constitutional
impediment to the province's enacting ss. 25(1) to (4).  On the reasoning
regarding the 1976 Act, these provisions seem to be a proper exercise of its
power to impose direct taxation in the province, the sole difference being that
the 1981 provisions are given retroactive effect, a result that is not
constitutionally barred.  The real question, then, is whether when ss. 25(1) to
(4) are conjoined to s. 25(5), they become so coloured by the latter provision
as to make all of s. 25 ultra vires.      That,
of course, raises the issue whether s. 25(5) is itself ultra
vires.  There are, in my view, some serious difficulties in
establishing its invalidity.  It may be, if the provision stood alone, that it
could be successfully maintained that it violates the principle in the Amax
decision.  I need not consider that situation because it does not stand alone. 
It is the fifth of five subsections, the first four of which impose a valid
direct tax, and it must obviously be read in that context.  It must also be
read in light of the well known principle that it must be assumed that the
Legislature intended to stay within the confines of its constitutional
competence.  While, as Esson J.A. notes, the expression "confiscated"
is distasteful, one should not permit it to mislead us regarding the purpose of
s. 25(5).  The function of the courts is not to give the Legislature lessons in
tact.  Their function, rather, is to attempt to discern what the Legislature, however
clumsily, was attempting to achieve by the language it used, a task that
should, as already noted, be informed by the presumption that the Legislature
intended to stay within its constitutional powers.      In
the context in which it appears, s. 25(5) seems to be nothing more nor less
than machinery for collecting the taxes properly imposed in the first four
subsections of s. 25.  It must be remembered that the amounts illegally
collected under the ultra vires provision before
1974 would be equal to the taxes levied under ss. 25(1) to (4). 
Administratively, the taxes levied under the invalid scheme were collected in
the same manner and in the same amounts and from the same taxpayers as would
have occurred if the scheme had originally been framed along the lines of ss.
25(1) to (4).  What the Legislature attempted to do by s. 25(5), therefore, was
to provide collection machinery whereby the moneys owing by the taxpayers under
the latter provision could simply be taken out of the equal amounts it had collected
from those taxpayers under the invalid tax.  It was in that sense that the
moneys were deemed to have been confiscated by the government.       Since
the foregoing issues were not strongly pursued, however, I find it better also
to base my decision on considerations raised in relation to "mistake of
law" to which I now turn.  "Mistake
of Law"      In
federal countries like Canada where governments possess only limited
legislative power, constitutional lawyers and judges alike have largely
concentrated on the constitutional validity of laws.  The effect of action
taken under unconstitutional laws is only rarely considered.  It is easy
enough, I suppose, to accept without discrimination the words of Field J. in Norton v.
Shelby County, 118 U.S. 425 (1886), at p. 442, that an
unconstitutional statute "confers no rights; it imposes no duties; it
affords no protection; it creates no office; it is, in legal contemplation, as
inoperative as though it had never been passed".  From this basis it may
quite readily be deduced that anything done under colour of an ultra
vires statute has no more effect than if the statute had not
existed.  In the case of an ultra vires taxing statute,
that would mean that the money levied pursuant to the statute should be
recoverable from the state by the taxpayer under the ordinary remedies for
recovering moneys paid to others without right or compensation, through an
action for restitution for unjust enrichment, and indeed there are cases such
as Canadian Industrial Gas & Oil Ltd. v. Government of Saskatchewan, [1978]
2 S.C.R. 545, and R. in right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, supra, where
recovery has been allowed.      We
know, however, that this neat, logical construct does not always prevail. 
There is a clear distinction between declaring an Act unconstitutional and
determining the practical and legal effects that flow from that determination. 
Dramatic illustrations of this distinction can be found in Reference
re Manitoba Language Rights, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 721, and R. v. Mercure, [1988]
1 S.C.R. 234.  In the field of taxation the courts have on numerous occasions
at the sub-constitutional level held that payments made under a mistake of law
are irrecoverable.  That rule has also been applied to payments made pursuant
to unconstitutional statutes in at least two lower court decisions in this
country (see Vancouver Growers Ltd. v. G. H. Snow Ltd., [1937]
3 W.W.R. 121; Glidurray Holdings Ltd. v. Qualicum Beach (1981),
32 B.C.L.R. 82 (C.A.)      The
province invited us to apply the rule to this case.  It principally relied on
the Nepean case, supra, to support its
claim that it was entitled to retain the moneys paid under the impugned
legislation in this case.  The action in the Nepean case
arose as a result of a scheme developed by Ontario Hydro for the cost of
power.  Under this scheme, newer municipalities, like Nepean, contributed more
heavily to the capital cost of the hydro system than other municipalities. 
While Nepean rigorously protested the nature of the scheme from 1966 to 1973,
it was only in 1974 that it came to the conclusion that the additional charges
assessed to it had no legal basis in Ontario Hydro's enabling Act.  This Court
agreed with the contention that the additional charge was unlawfully levied by
Hydro against Nepean, but by a 3-2 majority judgment delivered by Estey J., it
concluded (in common with the courts below) that Nepean could not recover the
moneys unlawfully levied by Ontario Hydro on the ground that Nepean had
voluntarily paid them under a mistake of law.  The mistake of law rule,
however, was not itself attacked; it was accepted by the parties; see Estey J.
(pp. 381-82 and 412).  In particular, Estey J. noted (at p. 412) that the only
mention of unjust enrichment made by the appellant was in reference to the in pari
delicto argument, although he did at one stage observe (at p.
413) that in his view the concept of unjust enrichment is not easily associated
with the relationship of public bodies like the parties to the action there.       The
foregoing argument seems to me to rest on a misconception of the Amax case
and of the place of the mistake of law rule in this context.  The facts in Amax were
that the province had by an unconstitutional statute levied taxes which the
taxpayer had, on the assumed facts, paid under compulsion and which, therefore,
it was entitled to recover.  What the statute there impugned did was to bar
actions for taxes paid under an unconstitutional statute that were otherwise
recoverable.  The legislature was, in essence, giving effect to the
unconstitutional statute.  It was doing indirectly what it could not do
directly.  Air Canada v. British Columbia (Attorney General), supra, is of
a similar nature.  The actions of the province there would have had the effect,
by the exercise of the power to grant or refuse a trial, of indirectly giving
effect to an unconstitutional statute.  Whether, and within what limits, the
province may regulate recovery of unconstitutional taxes is really not in issue
here.  The issue is the very different one of the effect of action taken
pursuant to an ultra vires or
unconstitutional statute.      In
developing the law in public areas like this, the courts have not unnaturally
turned to relevant experience in areas of private law, and where it appeared
appropriate, they have, on occasion, simply transplanted such principles of
private law to the realm of public and constitutional law.  This type of
transplantation has been done in other areas of law.  For example, the
principles for determining whether a tax is "within the province" for
the purposes of s. 92(2) of the Constitution Act were
derived in no small measure from the rules developed at common law to determine
which ordinary should have power to administer an estate; see The King
v. National Trust Co., [1933] S.C.R. 670; R. v. Williams, [1942]
A.C. 541.  But this borrowing should not blind us to what the courts are really
doing.  They are defining rules of public and constitutional law.  This is
underlined again by reference to the situs rules. 
Though these were imported from the common law, they have been transformed, and
it is constitutionally impermissible for a province to prescribe the conditions
fixing the situs of property for the purposes of defining what may be taxed
within the province; see Lovitt v. The King (1910), 43 S.C.R.
106, at p. 160; The King v. National Trust Co., supra. 
Similarly, the courts are at liberty to adopt the mistake of law rule, which
finds its origin in private law, to define the effects of ultra
vires or unconstitutional statutes.  Whether this would be
wise or not is another question, one to which I shall return.  But if so
adopted, one should not be misled by the supposed anomaly of the courts using a
common law rule to do what a legislature could not by statute enact.      I
mentioned earlier that it may or may not be wise to incorporate the mistake of
law defence in the constitutional fabric.  This brings me to what I consider
the most weighty point made on behalf of the airlines.  Counsel for Canadian
Pacific Airlines invited us to do away with the mistake of law rule.  As she
noted, the common law has largely permitted recovery of payments made under a
mistake of fact.  The same approach should, she contended, be followed in the
case of a mistake of law.  The distinction between the two, she stated, has
resulted in confusion, ambiguity and injustice, and should no longer be
recognized.  She urged us to adopt the dissenting reasons of Dickson J., as he
then was, in the Nepean case, supra.      I do
not intend to regurgitate what was said by Dickson J. in his judgment.  Suffice
it to say that it constitutes a thorough, scholarly and damning analysis of the
mistake of law doctrine from its beginning and through the egregious error of
Lord Ellenborough C.J. in the case of Bilbie v. Lumley and
Others (1802), 2 East 469, 102 E.R. 448, to the present day;
see Goff and Jones, The Law of Restitution, 3rd ed., at p.
117.  What the judgment reveals is a rule built on inadequate foundations,
lacking in clarity (the distinction between a mistake of fact and mistake of
law can best be described as a fluttering, shadowy will-o'-the-wisp), and whose
harshness has led to a luxuriant growth of exceptions (twelve perhaps, though
the identity and scope of the exceptions I am told has led to considerable
learned esoteric debate).  Despite this, and despite almost universal
criticism, the doctrine has spread from its original place in contract law into
other areas, including public law (such as in Nepean
itself), and it now even more ambitiously threatens to invade the domain of
constitutional law.  This explosion has, as Corbin has observed, probably
occurred because of the temptation under the pressure of work for judges to
seize upon the first plausible rule that becomes handy to dispose of a case that
has no merit; Corbin on Contracts (1960), vol. 3,
para. 617, at p. 756.  The result is that while the rule undoubtedly serves
some useful functions, these could be achieved by other means.  As Dickson J.
himself put it at p. 362:      The
modern justification for the existence of the rule against recovery of monies
paid under a mistake of law has been the stability of contractual relations. 
The rule though is often used as a handy means of disposing of cases where, in
fact, recovery of money should be barred, and would be, under a more
searching analysis of the case.  [Emphasis in original.]      From
his analysis, Dickson J. concluded that the judicial development of the law of 
restitution or unjust (or as Dickson J. noted, "unjustified")
enrichment renders otiose the distinction between mistakes of fact and mistakes
of law.  He would abolish the distinction, and would allow recovery in any case
of enrichment at the plaintiff's expense provided the enrichment was caused by
the mistake and the payment was not made to compromise an honest claim, subject
of course to any available defences or equitable reasons for denying recovery,
such as change of position or estoppel.  Dickson J. considered the finality of
transactions to be an important, but not an absolute value, and its weight in a
particular context was best assessed within the context of the principles of
the law of restitution.  He preferred to do this rather than by engrafting new
exceptions to a rule that has over the years been variously described as "most
unfortunate", "monstrous", "decrepit" and
"unjust".      I am
aware that Dickson J. was speaking in minority (for himself and Laskin C.J.),
but it can scarcely be maintained that the three judges who formed the majority
rejected this position.  Indeed, they never really faced this issue at all. 
The case, we saw, was argued on the basis that it fell within one of the
exceptions to the mistake of law rule, that the parties were not in pari
delicto, and they dealt with it accordingly.  After having read
Dickson J.'s judgment, Estey J. was at pains to note that in the argument
unjust enrichment had only been tangentially mentioned and that the distinction
between mistake of fact and mistake of law was not raised; indeed, it was
accepted.  "Accordingly," he concluded, "my considerations have
been confined to the operation of the doctrine of mistake of law as
argued."       As
Dickson J. stated, however, unjust enrichment, particularly in this field, is
no formula for easy solutions.  The present case illustrates this.  In the Nepean case,
Estey J. made the passing comment that the concept of unjust enrichment was not
easily associated with the relationship of public bodies such as were in issue
there.  I am not prepared to go that far.  Where one party is enriched at the
expense of another, it is appropriate to begin by asking if the principles of
restitution would afford recovery to the deprived party, whether that party is
a public body or not.  However, as my comments below will indicate, where
unconstitutional or ultra vires levies are in
issue, special considerations do arise which may call for a different rule.      In
this case, I have no doubt that the province has been enriched through the
imposition of this unconstitutional tax.  A more difficult issue which could
preclude recovery in this case, even if I were to base my decision solely on
the application of restitutionary principles, is whether the enrichment of the
province was at the expense of the plaintiff airlines.  The Attorney General
argued that the airlines were able to pass on the burden of the tax to their
passengers.  Counsel for Air Canada, however, strongly pressed that the
"passing-on" defence should only be available where the tax has been
specifically charged to other identified parties so as to make those parties
the true taxpayers.  He submits that otherwise the fact that a tax may have
been passed on is no ground on which to deny recovery.  Though the airlines may
have increased their prices to raise revenue to pay the tax, the resulting higher
prices may have had an impact on sales volume which may in turn have an
out-of-pocket impact on the airlines' profit.      While
it will take some time for the courts to work out the limits of the developing
law of restitution, it is useful on this point to examine the American
experience.  Professor George E. Palmer, in his work, The Law of
Restitution, makes the following comment (1986 Supp., at p. 254):  There is
no doubt that if the tax authority retains a payment to which it was not
entitled it has been unjustly enriched.  It has not been enriched at the
taxpayer's expense, however, if he has shifted the economic burden of the tax
to others.  Unless restitution for their benefit can be worked out, it seems
preferable to leave the enrichment with the tax authority instead of putting
the judicial machinery in motion for the purpose of shifting the same
enrichment to the taxpayer.  In my
view there is merit to this observation, and if it were necessary I would apply
it to this case as the evidence supports that the airlines had passed on to
their customers the burden of the tax imposed upon them.  The law of
restitution is not intended to provide windfalls to plaintiffs who have
suffered no loss.  Its function is to ensure that where a plaintiff has been deprived
of wealth that is either in his possession or would have accrued for his
benefit, it is restored to him.  The measure of restitutionary recovery is the
gain the province made at the airlines' expense.  If the airlines have not
shown that they bore the burden of the tax, then they have not made out their
claim.  What the province received is relevant only in so far as it was
received at the airlines' expense.      This
alone is sufficient to deny the airlines' claim.  However, even if the airlines
could show that they bore the burden of the tax, I would still deny recovery. 
It is clear that the principles of unjust enrichment can operate against a
government to ground restitutionary recovery, but in this kind of case, where
the effect of an unconstitutional or ultra vires statute
is in issue, I am of the opinion that special considerations operate to take
this case out of the normal restitutionary framework, and require a rule
responding to the specific underlying policy concerns in this area.      It
is not without significance that an examination of the case law of the United
States, Australia and New Zealand shows that generally there is no recovery of
taxes paid pursuant to legislation which is unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid.  (See Clifford L. Pannam, "The Recovery of Unconstitutional Taxes
in Australia and in the United States" (1964), 42 Texas L.
Rev. 779, George E. Palmer, The Law of
Restitution, vol. III, at p. 248.)  While this rule has most often
been stated in the traditional terms of mistake of law, which I have rejected,
it is noteworthy that even in jurisdictions in the United States where the
mistake of law rule is not followed (Connecticut and Kentucky), or has been
abolished (New York), the courts have nevertheless held that a voluntary
payment of taxes under an unconstitutional statute is not recoverable; (see
Pannam, supra, at pp. 793-94, Palmer, supra, vol.
III, at pp. 248-49).      What
this suggests is that there are solid grounds of public policy for not
according a general right of recovery in these circumstances, and that this
prohibition exists quite independently of the law of restitution.  This policy
was forcefully stated by Logan J. in the Kentucky Court of Appeals (where it
will be remembered there is no general mistake of law doctrine) in Coleman v.
Inland Gas Corp., 21 S.W.2d 1030 (1929), at p. 1031:  . . .
all state governments have been slow indeed to open the doors of their
treasuries and allow money to pass therefrom after it has once found lodgment
within the governmental vaults.  This is as it should be.  The state is the
sovereign and its affairs must be conducted for the best interest and welfare
of the people.  That calls for the expenditure of large sums of money for
governmental affairs, and such sums of money can be obtained only through
taxation.  The state should determine the amount which it will spend by the
probable income it will receive.  When the income is collected it is allocated
to different funds.  The state uses the funds nearly always during the current
year.  It has been universally held, unless a contrary conclusion was forced by
an ironclad statute, that no taxpayer should have the right to disrupt the
government by demanding a refund of his money, whether paid legally or
otherwise . . . .  See also Mercury
Machine Importing Corp. v. City of New York, 144 N.E.2d 400
(1957), especially at p. 404.  Similar sentiments were expressed by M. A.
MacDonald J.A. in Vancouver Growers Ltd. v. G. H. Snow Ltd., supra.  Such
a rule is sensible.  The only practical alternative as a general rule would be
to impose a new tax to pay for the old, which is another way of saying that a
new generation must pay for the expenditures of the old.  At best it is simply
inefficient.      A
related concern, and one prevalent through many of the authorities and much of
the academic literature is the fiscal chaos that would result if the general
rule favoured recovery, particularly where a long-standing taxation measure is
involved.  That this is not an unfounded concern can be seen by reference to
one incident in the United States.  A provision has been inserted in the United
States Internal Revenue Code removing the distinction between mistakes
of fact and mistakes of law because of the harsh and unjust results that had
occurred under the general rule.  This, however, placed a severe strain on the
United States Treasury when the Supreme Court in United States v.
Butler, 297 U.S. 1 (1936), held unconstitutional the
Agricultural Adjustment Act making almost one billion dollars in invalid taxes (a
respectable amount now but overwhelming during the depression) repayable by the
government.  Faced with this situation Congress immediately passed an Act which
provided that no refunds for such taxes would be allowed unless the claimant
could establish the burden of the tax.  In view of Amax, supra, a
province faced with a similar situation could not enact a similar measure.      To
some extent the present case raises difficulties of a similar character.  As
Esson J.A. remarked at p. 390:      It
is instructive to consider what the consequences might be if Professor Hogg's
thesis [which advocates general recovery of unconstitutional taxes] were to be
applied to the Gasoline Tax Act.  The tax imposed under it for decades before
1976 was a tax of broad general application.  It has long been a major
component of the provincial budget.  Every operator of a vehicle contributed to
the provincial coffers in this way.  The total number of such taxpayers must be
in the millions.  The amount involved in these three actions is
"only" something over six million dollars.  In the modern scale of
things, that will not have a major additional impact on the already sorry
financial state of the province.  A few more schoolrooms and a few more
hospital wards may have to be closed and a few roads may go unrepaired; or
perhaps the matter will be dealt with by a further increase in the deficit so
that future generations will bear the burden.  The blow will, however, be
greater than that inflicted by these cases.  We are told that other large
taxpayers, including one of the national railways, commenced action before the
period of limitation expired and await the outcome of these actions to decide
whether to go ahead.  The
situation would be much worse, of course, if the Statute of
Limitations or laches could not be pleaded, a question Esson J.A.
did not resolve and upon which it is unnecessary for me to embark.      Those
who favour recovery of ultra vires taxes concede that
an exception would be required where this would disrupt public finances; see
John D. McCamus, "Restitutionary Recovery of Moneys Paid to Public
Authority Under a Mistake of Law:  Ignorantia Juris in the
Supreme Court of Canada" (1983), 17 U.B.C. Law Rev. 233. 
But how would a court determine this?  Among other complications is the fact
that what can make recovery against the state impractical is the length of time
during which an invalid tax has been collected.  Equitable laches could be
brought into service, but these ordinarily involve some discernible act of
acquiescence to trigger their operation.  The obvious remedy is a period of
limitations, but it would be inappropriate for courts at this late date of
legal development to define such periods which, to be effective, may have to
differ from one type of tax to another.      Professor
Birks has argued that the dominant value should be respect for the principle
that there should be no taxation without parliamentary sanction, and so the
general rule should favour recovery; see Peter Birks, An
Introduction to the Law of Restitution, at p. 294.  Even
Professor Birks, however, concedes that "Where there is a serious danger
that public finances will be disrupted it may be necessary to limit or exclude
a right to restitution" (at p. 298).  I agree that the value he favours is
worthy of protection, but in the context of taxes exacted through
unconstitutional statutes in light of the other policies outlined above, I am
not willing to give it the dominant status that Birks would accord it.      All
in all, I have become persuaded that the rule should be against recovery of ultra
vires taxes, at least in the case of unconstitutional
statutes.  It seems best to function from the basis of that rule with
exceptions where the relationship between the state and a particular taxpayer
resulting in the collection of the tax are unjust or oppressive in the
circumstances.  However, this case does not call for departure from the general
rule.  The tax levied in this case, though unconstitutional, comes close to
raising a mere technical issue.  Had the statute been enacted in proper form
there would have been no difficulty in exacting the tax as actually imposed. 
Though specific evidence was not led on this point, were recovery to be
allowed, the airlines would receive a windfall, and fiscal chaos could well
result.  Many others could well bring suit, for this is a general tax applying
to all purchases of gasoline in the province.  It is true that many of these
would not be in a position to establish their claims but it would be odd if
this factor were taken into account since its general effect would be to favour
the strong against the weak.  Finally, there is not the element of
discrimination, oppression or abuse of authority which would warrant recovery.      This
rule against the recovery of unconstitutional and ultra vires levies
is an exceptional rule, and should not be construed more widely than is
necessary to fulfil the values which support it.  Chief among these are the
protection of the treasury, and a recognition of the reality that if the tax
were refunded, modern government would be driven to the inefficient course of
reimposing it either on the same, or on a new generation of taxpayers, to
finance the operations of government.  Though the drawing of lines is always
difficult, I am persuaded that this rule should not apply where a tax is extracted
from a taxpayer through a misapplication of the law.  Thus, where an otherwise
constitutional or intra vires statute or
regulation is applied in error to a person to whom on its true construction it
does not apply, the general principles of restitution for money paid under a
mistake should be applied, and, subject to available defenses and equitable
considerations discussed earlier, the general rule should favour recovery.  In
exceptional cases public policy considerations may require a contrary holding,
but those exceptional cases do not justify extending the general rule of
non-recovery of unconstitutional or ultra vires levies.  As
Professor Palmer has noted (The Law of Restitution, supra, vol.
III, at p. 247):  The
effect of restitution in dislocating the fiscal affairs of the governmental
unit in such isolated instances of mistake is nothing like it would be where
many payments have been made under a tax law which is unconstitutional or
invalid for some other reason.  In my
view no distinction should be drawn between those cases which would
traditionally be considered as mistakes of fact, as for example where a tax
assessment is based on a misapprehension of the facts which attract the tax, or
where an error has been made in calculation, and those cases where the taxing
statute is construed in error so as to impose liability on a party not liable
on the true construction of the statute.  In both cases recovery should be
available.      If
recovery in all cases is to be the general rule, then that is best achieved
through the route of statutory reform.  If there are limits to the extent to
which, because of the Amax principle, a legislature may limit
recovery of taxes by a taxpayer who is at law entitled to recoup them, there
would appear to be no limit to the legislature's providing for their recovery. 
This could take into account the types of variables already mentioned, the
nature of the tax, the amounts involved, the times within which a claim may be
made, the situation of those who are in a position to recoup themselves from
others, and so on.  Considerable study has gone into the nature of such
legislation in the United States, where several jurisdictions have adopted this
expedient: see Pannam, supra, at pp. 504 et seq.  In
Canada, see the Law Reform Commission of British Columbia's Report on
Benefits Conferred Under a Mistake of Law (1981).   The
parties here did not `agree' to do something prohibited by the Act.  The
respondent submitted a claim for payment of charges for power supplied, which
were not authorized by the Act under which the parties were operating and the
appellant, in all innocence, paid the account so rendered.  The "in pari
delicto" test and its terminology seem most inappropriate
and utterly unconnected to the realities of the transaction.      While
the province may have been in a better position to determine that the statute
was unconstitutional and could therefore be accused, as Esson J.A. calls it, of
"sloppy legislative housekeeping", I do not think that changes the
picture.  The same policy grounds against recovery exist and cannot depend on
the competence or care of its legal advisers at the time.  At all events, as he
notes, it would not be unjust for the province to retain money that it could
have obtained in any event by a statute properly framed to do what it purported
to do; see A. J. Seversen Inc. v. Village of Qualicum Beach (1982),
135 D.L.R. 122 (B.C.C.A.)      Finally,
the airlines contended that they paid the tax as a result of practical
compulsion.  For reasons that are apparent from the views earlier expressed, I
do not accept Lambert J.A.'s view that payment under an ultra
vires statute constitutes "compulsion" within the
meaning of the rule sought to be applied here.  That would substantially amount
to saying, a view I have rejected, that there is a general rule of recovery
when taxes are paid under an ultra vires statute.  What the
rule of compulsion seems to require is that there is no practical choice but to
pay in the circumstances, or to put it another way, before a payment will be
regarded as involuntary there must be some natural or threatened exercise of
power possessed by the party receiving it over the person or property of the
taxpayer for which he has no immediate relief than to make the payment; see
Pannam, supra, pp. 785-87; see in this context Maskell v.
Horner, [1915] 3 K.B. 106; Lynden Transport Inc.
v. R. in Right of British Columbia (1985), 62 B.C.L.R. 314.  Hinkson and
Esson JJ.A. examined the factual basis upon which this contention is founded
and, in my view, correctly arrived at the conclusion that there was no
practical compulsion, and I find it unnecessary to review these again.  Disposition      For
these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal by Air Canada and Pacific Western
Airlines and allow the Crown's cross-appeal against them.  I would also allow
the appeal of the Crown against Canadian Pacific Airlines.  I would order the
airlines to repay the Crown the following amounts, respectively:  Air Canada,
$4,399,642.85; Pacific Western Airlines, $1,934,122.91; Canadian Pacific
Airlines, $7,052,785.88.      I
would reply to the constitutional questions as follows:  1.Is the Gasoline
Tax Act, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 162, as amended by S.B.C. 1976, c.
32 and as subsequently amended, ultra vires in its application
or otherwise constitutionally inapplicable to Air Canada in the circumstances
of this case?  A.The Act, as it existed in 1960, was constitutionally
invalid, but the amendments of 1976 and 1981 are valid.  2.Does
the application of the Gasoline Tax Act to Air Canada in
the circumstances of this case violate s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms ?  A.  No.  3.If so,
is its application justified on the basis of s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  A.It is unnecessary to answer this question.  //Wilson J.//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      WILSON J.
(dissenting in part) -- I have had the benefit of the reasons of my colleague
Justice La Forest on this appeal and I fully agree with his conclusion that the Gasoline
Tax Act, 1948 of British Columbia as it existed in 1974 was ultra
vires the province and cannot be relied upon by the Crown to
justify the collection or retention of the taxes levied against the appellants
between 1974 and 1976.  I agree with him also that this situation was corrected
by the amendments made to the legislation in 1976 and that gasoline tax was
properly exigible after 1976.      I
take a different view, however, from my colleague of what was done by the
province in 1981.  I do not doubt for a moment that the province was free in
1981 to impose a retroactive tax covering the period 1974 to 1976.  I do not
believe, however, that it can do so as a mechanism for the confiscation of
payments made under the earlier unconstitutional legislation.      It
is, in my view, impossible to divorce s. 25(1) to (4) from s. 25(5).  The only
possible basis for the confiscation under s. 25(5) is the imposition of the
retroactive tax under s. 25(1) to (4).  Certainly the payments made under the ultra
vires legislation could not support such a confiscation since
the monies were not as a constitutional matter properly exigible under that
legislation.  Moreover, the fact that the amount payable under s. 25(1) to (4)
coincides exactly with the amount paid under the ultra vires
legislation is not, as my colleague suggests, a matter of "good
fortune" for the legislature, but makes it perfectly clear that s. 25(1)
to (5) were intended to defeat any claim for the return of the money paid under
the ultra vires legislation.  If, of course, such monies are not
recoverable by law in any event, the confiscation provision is unnecessary; the
province is then entitled to retain the money and there is nothing in the
amended legislation to say that such payments must be applied against the new
retroactive tax.  The legislation does not require it nor was any claim of set-off
made by the Crown.  The Crown thus seeks legislatively to have its cake and eat
it too.  By confiscating the earlier payments it hopes to defeat the claim for
their return.  By not pleading a set-off it does not have to acknowledge any
right on the part of the appellants to the return of such monies.  Instead, by
imposing a retroactive tax it purports to create a new base of liability
against which the confiscated payments may but do not have to be applied.  The
imposition of the retroactive tax in the exact amount of the payments made
under the ultra vires legislation
combined with the act of confiscation lead, in my opinion, to the inescapable
conclusion that the intent of the province was to defeat any claim for the
return of the monies paid pursuant to the ultra vires
legislation so as to achieve indirectly what it could not achieve directly,
namely the imposition of an ultra vires tax.  This, in my
view, is a clear violation of the principle in Amax Potash Ltd. v.
Government of Saskatchewan, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 576 (hereinafter Amax).  It
is an attempt, through the combined effect of a retroactive tax and
confiscation of the monies already paid, to give effect to unconstitutional
legislation.      In
case I am wrong in this, I propose to consider, as does my colleague, whether
the doctrine of mistake of law provides an alternate basis on which the
appellants should succeed in their claim for repayment.      My
colleague expresses the view that monies paid under a mistake of law should,
despite the traditional rule to the contrary, be in general recoverable unless
there is some specific reason why they should not be.  My colleague reaches
this conclusion by discarding the traditional common law distinction between
mistake of fact and mistake of law in favour of the equitable doctrine of
unjust enrichment.  Whatever the nature of the mistake, the key question, my
colleague suggests, should be whether the respondent has been unjustly enriched
at the appellants' expense or whether there is some specific reason which makes
restitution inappropriate in the circumstances.  My colleague concludes that
there was unjust enrichment in this case but he finds two reasons why
restitution is inappropriate.  The first is that the appellants in all
likelihood passed on the burden of the ultra vires tax to
their customers; the unjust enrichment of the respondent was therefore not
shown to be at the expense of the appellants.  The second is that the general
rule of recovery should, as a matter of policy, be reversed where the
person unjustly enriched is a governmental body.      Before
dealing with the suggested exceptions to the general rule I would like to
address the underlying rationale for the traditional rule that monies paid
under a mistake of law are irrecoverable.  I think it is clearly and succinctly
expressed by Lord Ellenborough in Bilbie v. Lumley (1802),
2 East 469, 102 E.R. 448, at p. 472 and pp. 449-50 as follows:  Every
man must be taken to be cognizant of the law; otherwise there is no saying to
what extent the excuse of ignorance might not be carried.  It would be urged in
almost every case.  In other
words, the underlying premise on which the rule is based is that ignorance of
the law is no excuse.  The citizen is deemed to know the contents of
legislation.  The appellants in this case knew the law, i.e., that the monies
were payable under the statute then in force and they paid.  What they did not
know was that the law was unconstitutional.  It seems to me, however, that the
appellants were entitled in making their payments to rely on the presumption of
validity of the legislation and that, if the presumption was not by itself
enough, they were entitled to rely on the representation as to its validity by
the legislature enacting and administering it.  It would be my view that the
mistake of law doctrine (if it is to be retained) should certainly not be
extended to monies paid under unconstitutional legislation.  Otherwise
taxpayers will be obliged to check out the constitutional validity of taxing
legislation before they pay their taxes in pain of being unable to recover
anything paid under unconstitutional laws.  In my opinion, this is to place the
onus of inquiry as to constitutionality in the wrong place.      If a
valid distinction is to be made between payments made in error under perfectly
valid legislation (as to which the mistake of law doctrine would seem clearly
to apply) and payments made under unconstitutional legislation quite properly
presumed by the taxpayer to be constitutional (as to which the doctrine of
mistake of law has no application), it is unnecessary for me to consider
whether the traditional rule as to the irrecoverability of monies paid under a
mistake of law should be abolished.  However, I am in complete agreement with
what my colleague has to say on this subject and, were it necessary for me to
do so in order to dispose of this case, I would support the minority view
expressed by Dickson J. in Hydro Electric Commission of Nepean v. Ontario Hydro, [1982]
1 S.C.R. 347.      It
is, however, my view that payments made under unconstitutional legislation are
not "voluntary" in a sense which should prejudice the taxpayer.  The
taxpayer, assuming the validity of the statute as I believe it is entitled to
do, considers itself obligated to pay.  Citizens are expected to be
law-abiding.  They are expected to pay their taxes.  Pay first and object later
is the general rule.  The payments are made pursuant to a perceived obligation
to pay which results from the combined presumption of constitutional validity
of duly enacted legislation and the holding out of such validity by the
legislature.  In such circumstances I consider it quite unrealistic to expect
the taxpayer to make its payments "under protest".  Any taxpayer
paying taxes exigible under a statute which it has no reason to believe or
suspect is other than valid should be viewed as having paid pursuant to the
statutory obligation to do so.      Based
on the foregoing reasoning I conclude that payments made under a statute
subsequently found to be unconstitutional should be recoverable and I cannot,
with respect, accept my colleague's proposition that the principle should be
reversed for policy reasons in the case of payments made to governmental
bodies.  What is the policy that requires such a dramatic reversal of
principle?  Why should the individual taxpayer, as opposed to taxpayers as a
whole, bear the burden of government's mistake?  I would respectfully suggest
that it is grossly unfair that X, who may not be (as in this case) a large
corporate enterprise, should absorb the cost of government's unconstitutional
act.  If it is appropriate for the courts to adopt some kind of policy in order
to protect government against itself (and I cannot say that the idea
particularly appeals to me) it should be one which distributes the loss fairly
across the public.  The loss should not fall on the totally innocent taxpayer
whose only fault is that it paid what the legislature improperly said was due. 
I find it quite ironic to describe such a person as "asserting a right to
disrupt the government by demanding a refund" or "creating fiscal
chaos" or "requiring a new generation to pay for the expenditures of
the old".  By refusing to adopt such a policy the courts are not
"visiting the sins of the fathers on the children".  The
"sin" in this case (if it can be so described) is that of government
and only government and government has means available to it to protect against
the consequences of it.  It should not, in my opinion, be done by the courts
and certainly not at the expense of individual taxpayers.      My
colleague advances another reason why the appellants should be denied recovery
in this case.  He says, in effect, that the appellants would be receiving a
"windfall" if they received their money back because in all
likelihood they have already recouped the payments made on account of the ultra
vires tax from their customers.  In terms of my colleague's
analysis, the appellants are unable to show that the unjust enrichment of the
province was at their expense.  In my view there is no requirement that they be
able to do so.  Where the payments were made pursuant to an unconstitutional
statute there is no legitimate basis on which they can be retained.  As Dickson
J. stated in Amax, supra, at p.
590:  To allow
moneys collected under compulsion, pursuant to an ultra vires
statute, to be retained would be tantamount to allowing the provincial
Legislature to do indirectly what it could not do directly, and by covert means
to impose illegal burdens.  Likewise,
Professor Hogg commenting on Amax in his treatise
Constitutional Law of Canada (2nd ed. 1985) said at p. 349:      Where
a tax has been paid to government under a statute subsequently held to be
unconstitutional, can the tax be recovered by the taxpayer?  In principle, the
answer should be yes.  The government's right to the tax was destroyed by the
holding of unconstitutionality, and the tax should be refunded to the taxpayer.  Indeed,
even on my colleague's unjust enrichment analysis Dickson J. found in Nepean, supra, that
there were no equitable reasons of principle or policy to preclude recovery
from Ontario Hydro.  He said at p. 373:      I do
not think it is any answer in law for Ontario Hydro to say to Nepean
"True, we took your money unlawfully but we do not have to repay it
because we mistakenly paid it out to other people".  The fact is that
Ontario Hydro did receive, and did have the use and benefit of Nepean's money. 
What it did with it is, as Mr. Laidlaw said, a problem for Ontario Hydro.  The
mere spending of the money is not, of itself, sufficient to establish a defence
(Rural Municipality of Storthoaks v. Mobil Oil Canada Ltd., supra).  If this
appeal is properly disposed of on the basis of the equitable doctrine of unjust
enrichment, I see no reason why the same approach taken by Dickson J. towards
the difficulties of Ontario Hydro in making restitution should not be taken to
any similar difficulties faced by the government of British Columbia.      For
all these reasons I would allow the appeal and dismiss the cross-appeal and,
failing agreement as to quantum, I would refer the matter back to the trial
judge to determine the amount owing to the appellants for taxes and interest
from July 1, 1976 to the date of judgment.  I would award the appellants their
costs both here and in the courts below.      I
agree with my colleague for the reasons given by him that s. 7  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  has no application to this case.  I
would answer the constitutional questions as follows:  1. Is
the Gasoline Tax Act, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 162, as amended by S.B.C. 1976, c.
32 and as subsequently amended, ultra vires in its application
or otherwise constitutionally inapplicable to Air Canada in the circumstances
of this case?  A.The Act prior to the 1976 amendments was ultra
vires the Province of British Columbia.  The amendments made
to the Act in 1981 were also ultra vires.  2.Does
the application of the Gasoline Tax Act to Air Canada in
the circumstances of this case violate s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms ?  A.   No.  3.If so,
is its application justified on the basis of s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  A.It is unnecessary to answer this question.       Solicitors
for the appellant Air Canada:  Russell & DuMoulin, Vancouver.      Solicitors
for the appellants Pacific Western Airlines Ltd. and Canadian Pacific Airlines
Ltd.:  Davis & Company, Vancouver.      Solicitor
for the respondents the Province of British Columbia, et al.:  The Attorney
General of British Columbia, Victoria.      Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General for Ontario:  The Attorney General for
Ontario, Toronto.       Solicitor
for the intervener Attorney General of Nova Scotia:  The Attorney General of
Nova Scotia, Halifax.      Solicitor
for intervener the Attorney General for New Brunswick:  The Attorney General
for New Brunswick, Fredericton.      Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba:  The Attorney General of
Manitoba, Winnipeg.       Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General for Alberta:  The Attorney General for
Alberta, Edmonton.       *  Le Dain J. took no part in the judgment.  