Williams v. Canada, [1992] 1
S.C.R. 877  Glenn Williams Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Williams v.
Canada  File No.:  22116.  1991:  October 10;
1992:  April 16.   on appeal from the federal court of
appeal                       The appellant, a
member of an Indian Band, received regular unemployment insurance benefits in
1984 for which he qualified because of his former employment with a logging
company, and his employment by the Band in a "NEED" project.  In both
cases, the work was performed on the reserve, the employer was located on the
reserve, and the appellant was paid on the reserve.  In addition to regular
benefits, the appellant also received "enhanced" unemployment
insurance benefits paid in respect of a job creation project administered on
the reserve by the Band, pursuant to a written agreement between the Band and
the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission.  The regular and enhanced
benefits were paid by the Commission's regional computer centre in Vancouver.                     The appellant
received a notice of assessment by the Minister of National Revenue which
included in his income for 1984 the regular and enhanced unemployment insurance
benefits.  The appellant contested the assessment but his objection was
overruled by the Minister.  The appellant then appealed to the Federal Court,
Trial Division which concluded that, under the Indian Act , both the
regular and enhanced  unemployment insurance benefits were exempt from
taxation.  The Federal Court of Appeal set aside the judgment holding that only
the enhanced portion of those benefits was exempt.  The issue in this case is
the situs of unemployment insurance benefits received by an Indian for
the purpose of the exemption from taxation provided by s. 87  of the Indian
Act .                      The situs of
the receipt of unemployment insurance benefits cannot be determined in the same
way the conflict of laws determines the situs of a debt.  To simply
adopt general conflicts of law principles and to apply the "residence of
the debtor" test in the present context would be entirely out of keeping
with the scheme and purposes of the Indian Act  and Income Tax Act. 
While the residence of the debtor may remain an important factor, or even the
exclusive one, this conclusion cannot be directly drawn from an analysis of how
the conflict of laws deals with such an issue.                     The proper approach
to determining the situs of intangible personal property is for a court
to evaluate the various connecting factors which tie the property to one
location or another.  In the context of the exemption from taxation in the Indian
Act , the connecting factors which are potentially relevant should be
weighed in light of three important considerations:  the purpose of the
exemption; the type of property in question; and the incidence of taxation upon
that property.  Given the purpose of the exemption, the ultimate question is to
what extent each connecting factor is relevant in determining whether taxing
the particular kind of property in a particular manner would erode the
entitlement of an Indian qua Indian to personal property on the reserve.                       The question of the
relevance of the residence of the recipient of the benefits at the time of
receipt does not arise in this case since it was also on the reserve.  The
residence of the debtor and the place where the benefits are paid are
connecting factors of limited weight in the context of unemployment insurance
benefits.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited      Authors Cited   Cheshire,
G. C. and P. M. North. Private International Law, 11th
ed. By P. M. North and J. J. Fawcett. London:  Butterworths,
1987.  Dicey,
A. V. and J. H. C. Morris.  The Conflict of Laws, vol. 2, 11th
ed. By Lawrence Collins and Others. London:  Stevens & Sons, 1987.                      G. S. Snarch and T. R. Wintjes, for the
appellant.                     David Sgayias, Q.C., and Bonnie F.
Moon, for the respondent.                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered by                     //Gonthier J.//                     Gonthier
J. -- At issue in this
case is the situs of unemployment insurance benefits received by an
Indian for the purpose of the exemption from taxation provided by s. 87 of
the Indian Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-6 (now R.S.C., 1985, c. I-5 ).  I -- Facts and Procedural History                     The appellant
received a notice of assessment by the Minister of National Revenue which
included in his income, for the taxation year 1984, certain unemployment
insurance benefits.  The appellant contested the assessment.  His objection was
overruled by the Minister of National Revenue.  The appellant appealed to the
Federal Court, Trial Division:  [1989] 2 F.C. 318, 24 F.T.R. 169, 24 C.C.E.L.
119, 89 D.T.C. 5032, [1989] 1 C.T.C. 117, [1989] 1 C.N.L.R. 184.  The appeal
proceeded on the basis of an agreed statement of facts.                     At all material
times, the appellant was a member of the Penticton Indian Band and resided on
the Penticton Indian Reserve No. 1.  In 1984 he received regular unemployment
insurance benefits for which he qualified because of his former employment with
a logging company situated on the reserve, and his employment by the Band in a
"NEED" project on the reserve.  In both cases, the work was performed
on the reserve, the employer was located on the reserve, and the appellant was
paid on the reserve.  During his employment, contributions to the unemployment
insurance scheme were paid both by the appellant and his employers.                     All of the regular
unemployment insurance benefits were paid by federal government cheques mailed
from the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission's regional computer
centre in Vancouver.  (While the instruments of payment may not technically
have been cheques, this is of no consequence in this appeal.)                     In addition to
regular benefits, the appellant also received "enhanced" unemployment
insurance benefits paid in respect of a job creation project administered on
the reserve by the Band, pursuant to a written agreement between the Band and
the Commission.  The appellant was employed pursuant to this project in work
which took place on the reserve, during a time in which he would otherwise have
received regular benefits.  The Band paid the appellant $60 per week during the
program.  The enhanced benefits constituted the bulk of the appellant's
remuneration for his work in this program.                     Section 38 of the Unemployment
Insurance Act, 1971, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 48, authorized the creation of
such programs on a general basis, without any limitation to Indians.  The
enhanced unemployment insurance benefits were also paid by the Commission's
regional computer centre in Vancouver.                     The issue at trial
was whether the unemployment insurance benefits received by the appellant were
exempt from taxation pursuant to s. 87  of the Indian Act .  With
regard to the requirements of that section, the disputed issue was whether the
benefits received by the appellant were "situated" on a reserve.                     Cullen J.
agreed with the appellant's argument that the situs of the benefits was
on the reserve.  While acknowledging that prior cases had focused on the
residence of the debtor in order to determine the situs of a debt,
Cullen J. was of the view that the residence of the debtor was only one of
a number of "connecting factors" which must be examined in order to
determine situs.  In this case, all the connecting factors except the
residence of the debtor suggested that the situs of the debt was on the
reserve.                     Cullen J. also
found that the enhanced unemployment insurance benefits had been given to the
appellant due, in part, to an agreement between the Band and the government, so
that the benefits in question were deemed to be situated on a reserve by reason
of s. 90  of the Indian Act .                     In the result,
Cullen J. found that the appellant had established that the relevant
provisions of the Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, and the Indian
Act  operated to exempt both the regular and enhanced unemployment insurance
benefits from taxation.                     The respondent
appealed the decision of the Trial Division to the Federal Court of Appeal: 
[1990] 3 F.C. 169, 72 D.L.R. (4th) 336, 109 N.R. 223, 32 C.C.E.L. 1, 90
D.T.C. 6399, [1990] 2 C.T.C. 124, [1991] 2 C.N.L.R. 172.  The Federal Court of
Appeal distinguished between the regular unemployment insurance benefits and
the enhanced unemployment insurance benefits in assessing their liability to
taxation.  Stone J.A. held that the regular benefits were not exempt from
income tax by virtue of s. 87 (b) of the Indian Act  because
they were not "property ... situated on a reserve".  Stone J.A.
rejected the trial judge's "connecting factors" test and stated that
the leading cases had been decided in accordance with the well-established
contract principle that, in the absence of an intention in the contract to the
contrary, the residence of the debtor determines the situs of a simple
contract debt.  The debt in this case was therefore situated off the reserve.                     However, with
regard to the enhanced unemployment insurance benefits, the Federal Court of
Appeal agreed with the trial judge that s. 90(1)(b) can apply to
agreements whereby a band merely participates in a national program.  The court
decided that these enhanced benefits did fall within s. 90(1)(b),
and were therefore exempt from taxation.                     The Federal Court
of Appeal thus allowed the appeal in part, set aside the judgment of the
Federal Court, Trial Division, and referred the matter back to the Minister of
National Revenue for reassessment on the basis that the regular unemployment
insurance benefits received by the appellant were not exempt from income tax
but the enhanced portion of those benefits were exempt.  II -- Relevant Statutory Provisions                     The following
sections of the Indian Act  are relevant to the issues to be determined
in this appeal:                     87.  Notwithstanding any other Act of the
Parliament of Canada or any Act of the legislature of a province, but subject
to section 83, the following property is exempt from taxation, namely:  (a)
the interest of an Indian or a band in reserve or surrendered lands; and  (b)
the personal property of an Indian or band situated on a reserve;  and
no Indian or band is subject to taxation in respect of the ownership,
occupation, possession or use of any property mentioned in paragraph (a)
or (b) or is otherwise subject to taxation in respect of any such
property; and no succession duty, inheritance tax or estate duty is payable on
the death of any Indian in respect of any such property or the succession
thereto if the property passes to an Indian, nor shall any such property be
taken into account in determining the duty payable under the Dominion Succession
Duty Act , being chapter 89 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, or the
tax payable under the Estate Tax Act, on or in respect of other property
passing to an Indian.                     89. (1) Subject to this Act, the real and
personal property of an Indian or a band situated on a reserve is not subject
to charge, pledge, mortgage, attachment, levy, seizure, distress or execution
in favour or at the instance of any person other than an Indian.                     (2)
A person who sells to a band or a member of a band a chattel under an agreement
whereby the right of property or right of possession thereto remains wholly or
in part in the seller, may exercise his rights under the agreement
notwithstanding that the chattel is situated on a reserve.                     90. (1) For the purposes of sections 87 
and 89 , personal property that was  (a)
purchased by Her Majesty with Indian moneys or moneys appropriated by
Parliament for the use and benefit of Indians or bands, or  (b)
given to Indians or to a band under a treaty or agreement between a band and
Her Majesty,  shall
be deemed always to be situated on a reserve.                     (2)
Every transaction purporting to pass title to any property that is by this
section deemed to be situated on a reserve, or any interest in such property,
is void unless the transaction is entered into with the consent of the Minister
or is entered into between members of a band or between the band and a member
thereof.                     (3)
Every person who enters into any transaction that is void by virtue of
subsection (2) is guilty of an offence, and every person who, without the
written consent of the Minister, destroys personal property that is by this
section deemed to be situated on a reserve, is guilty of an offence.  The following section of the Income
Tax Act is relevant to this appeal:                     56.
(1) Without
restricting the generality of section 3, there shall be included in computing
the income of a taxpayer for a taxation year,  (a)
any amount received by the taxpayer in the year as, on account or in lieu of
payment of, or in satisfaction of,                                                                     .
. .  (iv)
a benefit under the Unemployment Insurance Act, 1971 . . .  III -- Framing the Issues                     In order to decide
the basis upon which a situs is to be assigned to the unemployment
insurance benefits in this case, it is necessary to explore the purposes of the
exemption from taxation in s. 87  of the Indian Act , the nature of
the benefits in question, and the manner in which the incidence of taxation
falls upon the benefits to be taxed.  A -- The Nature and Purpose of the
Exemption from Taxation                         La Forest J.
also noted that the protection from seizure is a mixed blessing, in that it
removes the assets of an Indian on a reserve from the ordinary stream of
commercial dealings (at pp. 146-47).                     Therefore, under
the Indian Act , an Indian has a choice with regard to his personal
property.  The Indian may situate this property on the reserve, in which case
it is within the protected area and free from seizure and taxation, or the
Indian may situate this property off the reserve, in which case it is outside
the protected area, and more fully available for ordinary commercial purposes
in society.  Whether the Indian wishes to remain within the protected reserve
system or integrate more fully into the larger commercial world is a choice
left to the Indian.                     The purpose of the situs
test in s. 87  is to determine whether the Indian holds the property in
question as part of the entitlement of an Indian qua Indian on the
reserve.  Where it is necessary to decide amongst various methods of fixing the
location of the relevant property, such a method must be selected having regard
to this purpose.  B -- Nature of Benefit and the
Incidence of Taxation                     Section 56 of the Income
Tax Act is the section which taxes income from unemployment insurance
benefits.  That section specifies that unemployment insurance benefits which
are "received by the taxpayer in the year" are to be included in
computing the income of a taxpayer.  The parties have approached this question
on the basis that what is being taxed is a debt owing from the Crown to the
taxpayer on account of unemployment insurance which the taxpayer has qualified
for.  This is not precisely true, since the liability for taxation arises not
when the debt (if that is what it is) arises, but rather when it is paid, and
the money is received by the taxpayer.  However, it is true that the taxation
does not attach to the money in the hands of the taxpayer, but instead to the
receipt by the taxpayer of the money.  Thus, the incidence of taxation in the
case of unemployment insurance benefits is on the taxpayer in respect of the
transaction, that is, the receipt of the benefit.                     This Court's
decision in Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 29, stands for the
proposition that the receipt of salary income is personal property for the
purpose of the exemption from taxation provided by the Indian Act .  I
can see no difference between salary income and income from unemployment
insurance benefits in this regard, therefore I hold that the receipt of income
from unemployment insurance benefits is also personal property for the purposes
of the Indian Act .                     Nowegijick also stands for the proposition that
the inclusion of personal property in the calculation of a taxpayer's income
gives rise to a tax in respect of that personal property within the meaning of
the Indian Act , despite the fact that the tax is on the person rather
than on the property directly.                     Therefore, most of
the requirements of s. 87  of the Indian Act  have clearly been met
in this case.  The receipt of unemployment insurance benefits is personal
property.  That property is owned by an Indian.  The Indian is being taxed in
respect of that property, since it is being included in his income for the
purpose of income taxation.  The remaining question is whether the property in
question is situated on a reserve.                     Since it is the
receipt of the benefit that is taxed, the simplest argument would be that the situs
of the receipt of the benefit is where it is received, which would generally be
the residence of the taxpayer.  However, the Income Tax Act qualifies
"received" by "in the year".  This suggests that the notion
of "receipt" in the Income Tax Act has more to do with when
the income is received, rather than where.  Thus, aside from the fact that the
incidence of taxation falls upon the transaction itself, rather than the money
in the hands of the employer or the taxpayer, little ought to be made of the
notion of receipt in this context.  C -- Comments on the
"Residence of the Debtor" Test                     The factor
identified in previous cases as being of primary importance to determine the situs
of this kind of property is the residence of the debtor, that is, the person
paying the income.  This was clearly stated by Thurlow A.C.J. in The Queen
v. National Indian Brotherhood, [1979] 1 F.C. 103 (T.D.), at p. 109:                     A
chose in action such as the right to a salary in fact has no situs.  But where
for some purpose the law has found it necessary to attribute a situs, in the
absence of anything in the contract or elsewhere to indicate the contrary, the
situs of a simple contract debt has been held to be the residence or place
where the debtor is found.  See Cheshire, Private International Law,
seventh edition, pp. 420 et seq.                     This conclusion was
cited with approval by this Court in Nowegijick v. The Queen, supra,
at p. 34:  The
Crown conceded in argument, correctly in my view, that the situs of the
salary which Mr. Nowegijick received was sited on the reserve because it
was there that the residence or place of the debtor, the Gull Bay Development
Corporation, was to be found and it was there the wages were payable.  See
Cheshire and North, Private International Law (10th ed., 1979) at
pp. 536 et seq. and also the judgment of Thurlow A.C.J. in R.
v. National Indian Brotherhood, [1979] 1 F.C. 103 particularly at
pp. 109 et seq.                     The only
justification given in these cases for locating the situs of a debt at
the residence of the debtor is that this is the rule applied in the conflict of
laws.  The rationale for this rule in the conflict of laws is that it is at the
residence of the debtor that the debt may normally be enforced.  Cheshire and
North, Private International Law (11th ed. 1987), quote Atkin L.J.
to this effect in New York Life Insurance Co. v. Public Trustee, [1924]
2 Ch. 101 (C.A.), at p. 119:  . .
. the reason why the residence of the debtor was adopted as that which
determined where the debt was situate was because it was in that place where
the debtor was that the creditor could, in fact, enforce payment of the debt.                     Dicey and Morris
adopt the same explanation in The Conflict of Laws (11th ed. 1987), vol.
2, at p. 908, as does Castel in Canadian Conflict of Laws (2nd ed.
1986), at p. 401.  This may be reasonable for the general purposes of conflicts
of laws.  However, one must inquire as to its utility for the purposes
underlying the exemption from taxation in the Indian Act .                     The respondent
argues that the situs of the receipt of unemployment insurance benefits
should be determined in the same way the conflict of laws determines the situs
of a debt.  The debtor is the federal Crown, or the Canada Employment and
Immigration Commission, neither of which reside on a reserve, therefore the
receipt of benefits is not situated on the reserve.                     The appellant
argues that while National Indian Brotherhood and Nowegijick
focus on the residence of the debtor, both cases leave room for additional
factors to be considered.  For instance, National Indian Brotherhood
refers also to "anything in the contract or elsewhere to indicate the
contrary" and Nowegijick refers to where the wages are to be paid. 
It is therefore open to the courts to consider these factors and others in
fixing the situs of a debt for the purposes of this exemption.                     However, the
respondent argues that the other factors referred to in National Indian Brotherhood
and Nowegijick are merely factors used in conflicts law where the debtor
has more than one residence and it is necessary to choose between them (see
Castel, supra, at pp. 401-2, and Cheshire and North, supra,
at pp. 804-5).  The residence of the debtor test would then remain the
primary focus of the test.                     In resolving this
question, it is readily apparent that to simply adopt general conflicts
principles in the present context would be entirely out of keeping with the
scheme and purposes of the Indian Act  and Income Tax Act.  The
purposes of the conflict of laws have little or nothing in common with the
purposes underlying the Indian Act .  It is simply not apparent how the
place where a debt may normally be enforced has any relevance to the question
whether to tax the receipt of the payment of that debt would amount to the
erosion of the entitlements of an Indian qua Indian on a reserve.  The
test for situs under the Indian Act  must be constructed according
to its purposes, not the purposes of the conflict of laws.  Therefore, the
position that the residence of the debtor exclusively determines the situs
of benefits such as those paid in this case must be closely reexamined in light
of the purposes of the Indian Act .  It may be that the residence of the
debtor remains an important factor, or even the exclusive one.  However, this
conclusion cannot be directly drawn from an analysis of how the conflict of
laws deals with such an issue.  IV -- The Proper Test                     Because the
transaction by which a taxpayer receives unemployment insurance benefits is not
a physical object, the method by which one might fix its situs is not
immediately apparent.  In one sense, the difficulty is that the transaction has
no situs.  However, in another sense, the problem is that it has too
many.  There is the situs of the debtor, the situs of the
creditor, the situs where the payment is made, the situs of the
employment which created the qualification for the receipt of income, the situs
where the payment will be used, and no doubt others.  The task is then to
identify which of these locations is the relevant one, or which combination of
these factors controls the location of the transaction.                     The appellant
suggests that in deciding the situs of the receipt of income, a court ought
to balance all of the relevant "connecting factors" on a case by case
basis.  Such an approach would have the advantage of flexibility, but it would
have to be applied carefully in order to avoid several potential pitfalls.  It
is desirable, when construing exemptions from taxation, to develop criteria
which are predictable in their application, so that the taxpayers involved may
plan their affairs appropriately.  This is also important as the same criteria
govern an exemption from seizure.                     Furthermore, it
would be dangerous to balance connecting factors in an abstract manner,
divorced from the purpose of the exemption under the Indian Act .  A
connecting factor is only relevant in so much as it identifies the location of
the property in question for the purposes of the Indian Act .  In
particular categories of cases, therefore, one connecting factor may have much
more weight than another.  It would be easy in balancing connecting factors on
a case by case basis to lose sight of this.                     However, an overly
rigid test which identified one or two factors as having controlling force has
its own potential pitfalls.  Such a test would be open to manipulation and
abuse, and in focusing on too few factors could miss the purposes of the
exemption in the Indian Act  as easily as a test which indiscriminately
focuses on too many.                     The approach which
best reflects these concerns is one which analyzes the matter in terms of
categories of property and types of taxation.  For instance, connecting factors
may have different relevance with regard to unemployment insurance benefits
than in respect of employment income, or pension benefits.  The first step is
to identify the various connecting factors which are potentially relevant. 
These factors should then be analyzed to determine what weight they should be
given in identifying the location of the property, in light of three
considerations:  (1) the purpose of the exemption under the Indian Act ;
(2) the type of property in question; and (3) the nature of the taxation of that
property.  The question with regard to each connecting factor is therefore what
weight should be given that factor in answering the question whether to tax
that form of property in that manner would amount to the erosion of the
entitlement of the Indian qua Indian on a reserve.                     This approach
preserves the flexibility of the case by case approach, but within a framework
which properly identifies the weight which is to be placed on various
connecting factors.  Of course, the weight to be given various connecting
factors cannot be determined precisely.  However, this approach has the
advantage that it preserves the ability to deal appropriately with future cases
which present considerations not previously apparent.  A -- The Test for the Situs of the
Unemployment Insurance Benefits                     Unemployment
insurance benefits are income replacement insurance, paid when a person is out
of work under certain qualifying conditions.  While one often refers to
unemployment insurance "benefits", the scheme is based on employer
and employee premiums.  These premiums are themselves tax-deductible for both
the employer and employee.                     There are a number
of potentially relevant connecting factors in determining the location of the
receipt of unemployment insurance benefits.  The following have been suggested: 
the residence of the debtor, the residence of the person receiving the
benefits, the place the benefits are paid, and the location of the employment
income which gave rise to the qualification for the benefits.  One's attention
is naturally first drawn to the traditional test, that of the residence of the
debtor.  The debtor in this case is the federal Crown, through the Canada
Employment and Immigration Commission.  The Commission argues that the
residence of the debtor in this case is Ottawa, referring to s. 11 of the Employment
and Immigration Department and Commission Act, S.C. 1976-77, c. 54 (now
R.S.C., 1985, c. E-5, s. 17), which mandates that the head office of the
Commission be located in the National Capital Region.                     There are, however,
conceptual difficulties in establishing the situs of a Crown agency in
any particular place within Canada.  For most purposes, it is unnecessary to
establish the situs of the Crown.  The conflict of laws is interested in
situs to determine jurisdictional and choice of law questions.  With
regard to the Crown, no such questions arise, since the Crown is present
throughout Canada and may be sued anywhere in Canada.  Unemployment insurance
benefits are also available anywhere in Canada, to any Canadian who qualifies
for them.  Therefore, the purposes behind fixing the situs of an
ordinary person do not apply to the Crown, and in particular do not apply to
the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission in respect of the receipt of
unemployment insurance benefits.                     This does not
necessarily mean that the physical location of the Crown is irrelevant to the
purposes underlying the exemption from taxation provided by the Indian Act . 
However, it does suggest that the significance of the Crown being the source of
the payments at issue in this case may lie more in the special nature of the
public policy behind the payments, rather than the Crown's situs,
assuming it can be fixed.  Therefore, the residence of the debtor is a
connecting factor of limited weight in the context of unemployment insurance
benefits.  For similar reasons, the place where the benefits are paid is of
limited importance in this context.                     This leaves two
factors to be considered:  the residence of the recipient of the benefits, and
the location of the employment income which was the basis of the qualification
for the benefits.  In order to assess the importance of the second factor, the
location of the qualifying employment, a further analysis of the nature of unemployment
benefits and their taxation is required.                     In Tétreault-Gadoury
v. Canada (Employment and Immigration Commission), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 22, at
p. 41, this Court quoted from the judgment of Lacombe J. in that case to
the effect that the purpose of the Unemployment Insurance Act, 1971 was
"to create a social insurance plan to compensate unemployed workers for
loss of income from their employment and to provide them with economic and
social security for a time, thus assisting them in returning to the labour market." 
It is apparent from this that the purpose behind unemployment benefits looks to
the past, present and future.  Benefits are contingent on qualifying employment
in the past.  They are meant to provide income and security for the present, in
lieu of the employment income which has been lost.  However, the benefits also
look to the future, enabling the recipient to find a new job without hardship
and with a sense of security.                     There is,
therefore, a connection between the receipt of benefits and the place where the
employment which gave rise to those benefits was located.  However, it cannot
be said that unemployment insurance benefits look exclusively to the past. 
They are not a form of delayed remuneration.                    The general scheme
of taxation with regard to unemployment insurance premiums and benefits bears
further examination in this regard.  As noted above, unemployment insurance is
premium based.  The intent of the scheme is that the premiums received will,
overall, largely equal the benefits paid out.  This is not to say that the
scheme is completely self-financing.  However, it is more accurate to
characterize an unemployment insurance benefit as something paid for through
the premiums of employed persons than to characterize it as a benefit granted
by the government out of its general revenues.                     This becomes
important in analyzing the tax implications of the unemployment insurance
benefit scheme.  The treatment of premiums and benefits for the purposes of
taxation is that the premiums paid by employed persons are deductible from
their taxable income, whereas the benefits paid to unemployed persons must be
included in their taxable income.  By allowing premiums to be deducted from
taxable income, and mandating that benefits be included in taxable income, the
effect of the unemployment insurance scheme on general tax revenue is
minimized.  The tax revenues lost by the government due to the deductibility of
premiums are offset by the revenues gained by the taxation of the benefits. 
This is not to say that the unemployment insurance scheme has no effect on
taxation revenues, since premiums may not precisely equal benefits overall, and
the effect of different rates of taxation cannot be ignored.  However, it is
clear that the scheme established by Parliament was intended, in principle, to
minimize the tax implications of unemployment insurance.                     Since unemployment
insurance benefits are based on premiums arising out of previous employment,
not general tax revenue, the connection between the previous employment and the
benefits is a strong one.  The manner in which unemployment insurance benefits
are treated for the purposes of taxation further strengthens this connection,
as there is a symmetry of treatment in the taxation of premiums and benefits, since
premiums are tax-deductible and benefits are taxed, thereby minimizing the
influence of the unemployment insurance scheme on general tax revenues.                     The location of the
qualifying employment income is therefore an important factor in establishing
whether the taxation of subsequent benefits would erode the entitlements of an
Indian qua Indian on the reserve.  For in the case of an Indian whose
qualifying employment income was on the reserve, the symmetry in the tax
implications of premiums and benefits breaks down.  For such an Indian, the
original employment income was tax-exempt.  The taxation paid on the subsequent
benefits therefore does more than merely offset the tax saved by virtue of the
premiums.  Instead, it is an erosion of the entitlements created by the
Indian's employment on the reserve.                     Furthermore, since
the duration and extent of the benefits are tied to the terms of employment
during a specified period, it is the location of the qualifying employment
income during that period that is relevant.                     Having regard to
the importance of the location of the qualifying employment income as a factor
in identifying the location of the unemployment insurance benefits, the
remaining factor of the residence of the recipient of the benefits at the time
of their receipt is only potentially significant if it points to a location
different from that of the qualifying employment.  B -- The Situs of the Appellant's
Unemployment Insurance Benefits                     In the present
case, the residence of the appellant when he received the benefits was on the
reserve.                     It has been assumed
by the parties that the previous employment of the appellant which gave rise to
the qualification for unemployment insurance benefits was also located on the
reserve, since the two employers in question were located on the reserve.  This
question must be reexamined in light of our determination that this conclusion
cannot safely be drawn from the principles of the conflict of laws.                     However, this would
not be an appropriate case in which to develop a test for the situs of
the receipt of employment income.  All the potential connecting factors with
respect to the qualifying employment of the appellant point to the reserve. 
The employer was located on the reserve, the work was performed on the reserve,
the appellant resided on the reserve, and he was paid on the reserve.  A test
for the situs of employment income could therefore only be developed in
an abstract vacuum in this case, since there is no real controversy of relevant
factors pulling in opposite directions.  The same would be true of any
consideration of the weight, if any, to be given to the residence of the
appellant upon receipt of the benefits as this was also on the reserve.                     Furthermore, as can
be seen from our discussion of the test for the situs of unemployment
insurance benefits, the creation of a test for the location of intangible
property under the Indian Act  is a complex endeavour.  In the context of
unemployment insurance we were able to focus on certain features of the scheme
and its taxation implications in order to establish one factor as having
particular importance.  It is not clear whether this would be possible in the
context of employment income, or what features of employment income and its
taxation should be examined to that end.                     Therefore, for the
purposes of the present appeal, we merely note that the employment of the
appellant by which he qualified for unemployment insurance benefits was clearly
located on the reserve, no matter what the proper test for the situs of
employment income is determined to be.  Because the qualifying employment was
located on the reserve, so too were the benefits subsequently received.  The
question of the relevance of the residence of the recipient of the benefits at
the time of receipt does not arise in this case since it was also on the
reserve.  C -- The Situs of the Enhanced
Unemployment Insurance Benefits                     According to
s. 38(3) of the Unemployment Insurance Act, 1971 enhanced benefits
are to be considered unemployment insurance benefits for the purpose of the Income
Tax Act:                     38. . . .                     (3)  For
the purposes of this Part, a week during which the claimant is employed on a
job creation project and is paid benefit under subsection (2) shall be deemed
to be a week of unemployment and for the purposes of this Part, Part IV, the Income
Tax Act and the Canada Pension Plan , any benefit paid to a claimant
under subsection (2) shall be deemed not to be remuneration from employment.                     This is also the
manner in which enhanced benefits should be characterized for the purpose of
the exemption from taxation in the Indian Act , since this only reflects
the reality of the situation.  The appellant only qualified for participation
in the job creation program because he had been receiving regular unemployment
insurance benefits, that is, because of his prior employment that had ceased. 
The benefits which he continued to receive would not have ceased had he quit
his employment with the program.  The program itself was located on the
reserve.  Therefore, the conclusion that the unemployment insurance benefits
received by the appellant were situated on the reserve applies to both the
regular and enhanced benefits.                     For purposes other
than the application of the Income Tax Act, enhanced unemployment
insurance benefits may be characterized in a different manner (see YMHA
Jewish Community Centre of Winnipeg Inc. v. Brown, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1532). 
Also, the portion of the unemployed person's income which is paid to them
directly by the employer in the job creation program is not itself an
unemployment insurance benefit, and should be characterized simply as
employment income.                     The Federal Court
dealt with the further question whether the agreement giving rise to the
enhanced unemployment insurance benefits was the type of agreement referred to
in s. 90  of the Indian Act .  In light of our conclusion that the
enhanced unemployment benefits were located on the reserve in any event, it is
not necessary to discuss this issue.  V -- Conclusion                     Determining the situs
of intangible personal property requires a court to evaluate various connecting
factors which tie the property to one location or another.  In the context of
the exemption from taxation in the Indian Act , there are three important
considerations: the purpose of the exemption; the character of the property in
question; and the incidence of taxation upon that property.  Given the purpose
of the exemption, the ultimate question is to what extent each factor is
relevant in determining whether to tax the particular kind of property in a
particular manner would erode the entitlement of an Indian qua Indian to
personal property on the reserve.                     With regard to the
unemployment insurance benefits received by the appellant, a particularly
important factor is the location of the employment which gave rise to the
qualification for the benefits.  In this case, the location of the qualifying
employment was on the reserve, therefore the benefits received by the appellant
were also located on the reserve.  The question of the relevance of the
residence of the recipient of the benefits at the time of receipt does not
arise in this case.                     The appeal is
therefore allowed and the cross-appeal dismissed, with costs throughout.  The
matter is referred back to the Minister of National Revenue to be reassessed on
the basis that all of the unemployment benefits in question are exempt from
taxation.                      Solicitors for the
appellant:  Snarch & Allen, Vancouver.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  The Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.  