 Ensite Ltd. v. R., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 509  Ensite Limited    Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen    Respondent  indexed as: ensite ltd. v. r.  File No.: 18005.  1986: May 21; 1986: November 6.  Present: Dickson C.J. and Beetz, McIntyre, Chouinard and Wilson JJ.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal                      Appellant, which had to finance its plant in the
Philippines with foreign currency in order to comply with Philippine law,
became involved in an elaborate arrangement to minimize the risks of
devaluation and currency controls. Appellant made U.S. dollar deposits with the
commercial banks, which then made the peso loans in an equivalent amount to
appellant at its Philippine branch and in return received certificates of
deposit for the U.S. dollar deposits which were then used to secure the peso
loans. The certificates were "enforceable" against any branch of the
commercial banks outside the United States. The pesos were obtained in exchange
for U.S. dollars by the commercial banks from the Central Bank of the
Philippines under agreements guaranteeing the rate of exchange of any
conversion back to U.S. dollars.                     In 1976, appellant claimed a "dividend
refund" under s. 129(1)(a). The tax scheme contemplated that an
increase in a corporation's "foreign investment income" might result
in an increase in its "dividend refund". Appellant included the
interest from its U.S. dollar deposits in the Philippines in the calculation of
its "foreign investment income".                     The Minister reassessed the return and refused to
recognize the interest as "foreign investment income", as defined in
s. 129(4)(b), because it was "income from property used or held by
the corporation in the year in the course of carrying on a business".
Appellant's dividend refund was therefore reduced. The Federal Court, Trial
Division, allowed an appeal from that reassessment but its judgment was
overturned on appeal.                     Held: The appeal should
be dismissed.                     The test to distinguish income from carrying on a
business from income derived from property is whether or not the property was
used to fulfil a requirement which had to be met in order to do business and
not whether or not the taxpayer was forced to use a particular property to do
business. The property must be truly employed and risked in the business and
"risk" must mean more than a remote risk and more than a business
purpose for the use of property. The threshold of the test is met when the
withdrawal of the property would "have a decidedly destabilizing effect on
the corporate operations themselves". The investment of profits from trade
in order to achieve some collateral purpose is therefore distinguishable from
an investment made in order to fulfil a mandatory condition precedent to trade.
Here, the property was not for any collateral purpose but rather was employed
and risked in the taxpayer's business in the most intimate way. It was used or
held in the business and fulfilled a mandatory condition precedent to trade.  Cases Cited                     Considered: The
Queen v. Marsh & McLennan, Ltd., [1984] 1 F.C. 609, reversing [1982] 2
F.C. 131; distinguished: Vancouver Pile Driving & Contracting Co.
v. Minister of National Revenue, 63 D.T.C. 1007; referred to: March
Shipping Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, 77 D.T.C. 371; Canadian
Marconi Co. v. The Queen, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 522; Bank Line Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1974), 49 T.C. 307; Liverpool and London
and Globe Insurance Co. v. Bennett, [1913] A.C. 610; Owen v. Sassoon
(1951), 32 T.C. 101; The Queen v. Brown Boveri Howden Inc., 83 D.T.C.
5319.  Statutes and Regulations Cited     Authors Cited  Scace, Arthur R. A. The
Income Tax Law of Canada, 3rd ed. Toronto: Law Society of Upper Canada,
1976.                      APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of
Appeal, 83 D.T.C. 5315, [1983] C.T.C. 296, allowing the Crown's appeal from a
judgment of Jerome A.C.J., 81 D.T.C. 5326, [1981] C.T.C. 445, allowing an
appeal from reassessment by the Minister of National Revenue under the Income
Tax Act. Appeal dismissed.                     John T. Morin, Q.C.,
and Stephen S. Ruby, for the appellant.                     Ian MacGregor
and Gaston Jorré, for the respondent.                     The judgment of the Court was delivered by   1. The Facts  2.                Ensite, which carries on the business of
manufacturing and selling automobile engines, is a private corporation within
the meaning of s. 89(1) of the Income Tax Act. In 1972 Ensite decided to
invest in a stamping plant in the Philippines. In order to comply with
Philippine law it had to bring foreign currency into the Philippines to finance
the stamping plant. In case the Philippine peso might be devalued or the
Philippine government might prevent Ensite from taking foreign funds out of the
Philippines, an elaborate arrangement was made in an attempt to minimize these
risks while at the same time satisfying Philippine law. It involved the
investment by Ensite of up to $5 million of its own money in the stamping plant
and the obtaining of loans to provide the balance of the capital requirement
for the plant. The precise details of the arrangements implemented by Ensite,
which are important to the disposition of the appeal, are set out in the
reasons for judgment of Le Dain J. in the Federal Court of Appeal, 83 D.T.C.
5315, at p. 5317:                     The
loans were made available through "swap arrangements" between the
Central Bank of the Philippines and the commercial banks which made the loans
to the Philippine branch of Ensite. The commercial banks obtained Philippine
pesos from the Central Bank at the prevailing exchange rate upon depositing
U.S. dollars with the Central Bank under arrangements that ensured that the
pesos could be reconverted to U.S. dollars in the future at an agreed exchange
rate, thus affording protection against the risk of devaluation. Ensite made
U.S. dollar deposits with the commercial banks, which then made the peso loans
in an equivalent amount to the Philippine branch. Ensite received certificates
of deposit for the U.S. dollar deposits with the commercial banks which it
turned over to the banks as security for repayment of the peso loans. The
schedule for repayment or withdrawal of the U.S. dollar deposits corresponded
to the schedule for repayment of the peso loans, which was to begin at the end
of an initial period of five years and continue in six annual instalments. The
certificates were declared to be "enforceable" against any branch of
the commercial banks outside of the United States thus ensuring against the
risk of foreign exchange controls that would prevent U.S. dollars from being
taken out of the Philippines. It was not essential to the swap arrangements
that Ensite make the U.S. dollar deposits with the commercial banks. The
required U.S. dollars could have been made available by the commercial banks on
other terms. But the U.S. dollar deposits permitted Ensite to obtain interest
rates that reduced the net cost of the borrowing.  3.                In its return for the 1976 taxation year
Ensite claimed a "dividend refund" under s. 129(1)(a) of the Income
Tax Act. The amount of the refund is, according to the section:  ... equal to the lesser of  (i) 1/3 of all taxable
dividends paid by it in the year on shares of its capital stock, and  (ii) its refundable
dividend tax on hand at the end of the year; ...  The "refundable dividend tax on hand" of a corporation is
calculated following the formula set out in s. 129(3). One of the amounts
included in this complex formula is a corporation's "foreign investment
income", defined in s. 129(4) as follows:                     (4) In
subsection (3),  (a) "Canadian
investment income" of a corporation for a taxation year means the amount,
if any, by which the aggregate of  (i) the amount, if any, by
which the aggregate of such of the corporation's taxable capital gains for the
year from dispositions of property as may reasonably be considered to be income
from sources in Canada exceeds the aggregate of such of the corporation's
allowable capital losses for the year from dispositions of property as may
reasonably be considered to be losses from sources in Canada,  (ii) all amounts each of
which is the corporation's income for the year (other than exempt income or any
dividend the amount of which was deductible under section 112 from its income
for the year) from a source in Canada that is a property (other than a property
used or held by the corporation in the year in the course of carrying on a
business), determined, for greater certainty, after deducting all outlays and
expenses deductible in computing the corporation's income for the year to the
extent that they may reasonably be regarded as having been made or incurred for
the purpose of earning the income from that property,  (iii) all amounts each of
which is the corporation's income for the year (other than exempt income) from a
source in Canada that is a business other than an active business, determined,
for greater certainty, after deducting all outlays and expenses deductible in
computing the corporation's income for the year to the extent that they may
reasonably be regarded as having been made or incurred for the purpose of
earning the income from that business,  exceeds the aggregate of
amounts each of which is a loss of the corporation for the year from a source
in Canada that is a property or business other than an active business; and  (b) "foreign
investment income" of a corporation for a taxation year means the amount,
if any, by which  (i) the amounts that would
be determined under paragraph (a) in respect of the corporation for the
year if the references in paragraph (a) to "in Canada" were
read as references to "outside Canada",  exceeds  (ii) the aggregate of all
amounts deductible under section 113 from the corporation's income for the
year.  4.                As can be seen from this legislative
framework an addition made to a corporation's "foreign investment
income" may well increase the "refundable dividend tax on hand"
of a corporation which may result in an increase in the size of the
"dividend refund" under s. 129(1)(a).  5.                In this case Ensite included interest of
$2,323,140 from its U.S. dollar deposits in the Philippines in its calculation
of "foreign investment income" for the 1976 taxation year. This
inclusion made the amount calculated under paragraph (i) of s. 129(1)(a)
less than the amount under paragraph (ii) of the subsection and so it claimed a
refund of $2,498,931. The Minister, in his reassessment, refused to recognize
the interest as "foreign investment income" as defined in s. 129(4)(b)
because it was income from an active business or was "income from property
used or held by the corporation in the year in the course of carrying on a
business". Ensite's dividend refund was therefore reduced by $972,860.
Ensite appealed the Minister's reassessment.  2. The Courts Below   ... I am of the view that
these benefits were not sufficient to integrate the transaction with the
taxpayer's main business, or to use the language of the statute, to warrant a
finding that these funds were "property used or held by the corporation in
the year in the course of carrying on a business". It is, to me, extremely
significant that the return from these investments would carry on at the
negotiated rate, independent entirely of success or failure of the plant and
that the taxpayer enjoyed the right to recall the invested funds at any time
and to do so in American currency and through offshore rather than Philippines
branches of the banks concerned. These were prima facie
investment transactions. As a result of these precautions, they were insulated
from the taxpayer's main business. In terms of the attention required to manage
them or their effect on the total income, they remain clearly secondary or
incidental to the taxpayer's main business.  7.                The Federal Court of Appeal (83 D.T.C.
5315) allowed the Crown's appeal on the issue whether the dollar deposits were
property used or held by the corporation in the course of carrying on its
business. Le Dain J., with whom Heald J. and Clement D.J. agreed, based his
reasons on the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in The Queen v. Marsh
& McLennan, Ltd., supra, which had reversed Jerome A.C.J.'s
decision below. Le Dain J. was of the view that the case at hand was analogous
to that case. He stated at p. 5319:                     For the
reasons which I briefly indicated in Marsh & McLennan I am of the
opinion that the same view must be taken of the interest on the U.S. dollar
deposits in the present case. Whether or not it was essential to do so, the
fund represented by the U.S. dollar deposits was in fact committed to the
carrying on of Ensite's business in the Philippines. It was employed and risked
in the business because it was an integral part of the arrangements by which
the business was being financed. The U.S. dollar deposits were the means by
which the peso loans were obtained on the most favourable terms, including a
reduced cost of borrowing, and they were security for the repayment of the
loans. For these reasons they were in my opinion property used or held by
Ensite in the carrying on of its business, and the interest earned on them was,
therefore, not foreign investment income within the meaning of section 129.  8.                Leave to appeal was granted by the
Supreme Court of Canada on December 15, 1983.  3. The Issue   10.              In the course of his reasons for judgment
Clement D.J. stated at p. 638:  To use words employed by
Rowlatt J. in Scales (H.M. Inspector of Taxes) v. George Thompson &
Company, Limited (1927), 13 T.C. 83 (Eng. Q.B.) [sic], on the facts of this
case there was between the Broker's business and the investments an
interconnection, an interlacing, an interdependence, a unity embracing the
investments and the business.  Le Dain J. concurred in the result but proposed at p. 621 a differently
worded test:  Was the fund employed and
risked in the business? In my opinion it was, because an amount equivalent to
this notional fund was committed to the carrying on of the business in order to
meet the company's obligations to the insurers.   ... it is only property
that is in one way or another employed in the carrying on of the business and
thus in the earning of the profits of that business that falls within the
exception.                                                                      ...                                                                       ...  Not only were they not
made in the course of carrying on the business, they were not used to pay its
obligations. Nor were they capital invested in or at risk in the business.  11.              The precise difference in substance
between the test employed by Le Dain J. and that of Clement D.J. is not easy to
discern. In many instances property which is "employed or risked" in
the business will be "interconnected, interlaced and interdependent"
with the business. However, the wording of the test employed by Le Dain J.
seems more specific and therefore preferable because it emphasizes that the
holding or using of the property must be linked to some definite obligation or
liability of the business. The test applied by Clement D.J., on the other hand,
is worded so broadly that it might prevent the exception from applying where a
company simply failed to put in place certain organizational and accounting
mechanisms in order to create the formal appearance of a separate and distinct
concern.   13.              It would seem to follow that the
legislative intention underlying the amendment was to catch income from
property that is employed or risked in the taxpayer's business to such an
extent that the income from it could be characterized as active business
income. The use of words such as "employed" and "risked"
appropriately implement Parliament's intention.  14.              Counsel for the appellant argued that in
this case the dollar deposits could be said to be "risked" in the
sense that if the business failed they could be seized. He submitted that this
demonstrated that the test is too wide. If "risked" was the right
test, then all property would meet the test since ultimately all property is
available to the creditors of a corporation. But "risked" means more
than a remote risk. A business purpose for the use of the property is not
enough. The threshold of the test is met when the withdrawal of the property
would "have a decidedly destabilizing effect on the corporate operations
themselves": March Shipping Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, supra,
at p. 374. This would distinguish the investment of profits from trade in order
to achieve some collateral purpose such as the replacement of a capital asset
in the long term (see, for example, Bank Line Ltd. v. Commissioner of Inland
Revenue (1974), 49 T.C. 307 (Scot. Ct. of Session)) from an investment made
in order to fulfil a mandatory condition precedent to trade (see, for example, Liverpool
and London and Globe Insurance Co. v. Bennett, [1913] A.C. 610 (H.L.), and Owen
v. Sassoon (1951), 32 T.C. 101 (Eng. H.C.J.) Only in the latter case would
the withdrawal of the property from that use significantly affect the operation
of the business. The same can be said for a condition that is not mandatory but
is nevertheless vitally associated with that trade such as the need to meet
certain recurring claims from that trade: see, for example, The Queen v.
Marsh & McLennan, Ltd., supra, and The Queen v. Brown Boveri
Howden Inc., 83 D.T.C. 5319 (F.C.A.)  15.              It is true that in this case the taxpayer
could have done business and fulfilled the Philippine requirement that foreign
currency be brought into the country by a means not involving the use of
property. It could have borrowed the U.S. currency abroad and brought it into
the Philippines. But this consideration is irrelevant to our inquiry. The test
is not whether the taxpayer was forced to use a particular property to do
business; the test is whether the property was used to fulfil a requirement
which had to be met in order to do business. Such property is then truly
employed and risked in the business. Here the property was used to fulfil a
mandatory condition precedent to trade; it is not collateral, but is employed
and risked in the business of the taxpayer in the most intimate way. It is
property used or held in the business.  16.              Counsel for the appellant also referred us
to Vancouver Pile Driving & Contracting Co. v. Minister of National
Revenue, 63 D.T.C. 1007 (Ex. Ct.), which suggests that bonds put up as
security are not trading income. There the security was required by the
government if the taxpayer was to be allowed to do construction work. But the
issue in that case was simply whether the proceeds from the sale of the bonds
were capital or income. It was correctly held that they constituted capital.
The issue whether these bonds were used or held in the taxpayer's business was
not in issue. I do not see therefore how the appellant draws any comfort from
that decision.  4. Disposition  17.              For the reasons given I would dismiss the
appeal with costs.                     Appeal dismissed with costs.                     Solicitors for the appellant: Campbell, Godfrey
& Lewtas, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the respondent: Roger Tassé, Ottawa.   