SUPREME COURT OF CANADA The Queen v. Savage, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 428 Date: 1983-11-24 Her Majesty The Queen Appellant; and Elizabeth Joan Savage Respondent. File No.: 16798. 1983: June 21
and 22; 1983: November 24. Present:
Ritchie, Dickson, McIntyre, Lamer and Wilson JJ. ON APPEAL FROM
THE FEDERAL COURT OF APPEAL Taxation — Income tax — Sum paid by employer
to taxpayer for successful completion of examinations — Computation of income —
Income from a source — Whether sum is a benefit in respect of, in the course
of, or by virtue of an office or employment — Whether sum is a
"prize for achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by
taxpayer" — Income Tax Act, 1970-71-72
(Can.). c. 63, ss. 3(a), 5(1), 6(1)(a), 56(1)(n), as amended. In 1976, during the course of her employment
with Excelsior Life Insurance Company, respondent taxpayer took voluntarily and
on her own time three courses designed to provide broad understanding of modern
life insurance and life insurance company operations. She received from
Excelsior $300 as a result of passing the examinations in accordance with a
company policy designed to encourage self-upgrading of staff members. The
taxpayer did not include the $300 in her income for the 1976 taxation year. On being reassessed by the Minister, the
taxpayer appealed to the Tax Review Board which allowed the appeal and referred
the matter back to the Minister for reassessment. Appellant's appeal to the
Federal Court, Trial Division, was allowed. The taxpayer's further appeal to
the Federal Court of Appeal was allowed. Hence this appeal to determine whether
the sum of $300 received by the taxpayer had to be included in the computation
of income. Held: The appeal should be dismissed. Per Ritchie, Dickson, Lamer and Wilson JJ.: Income need not constitute
remuneration for services in order that it be income from employment under ss.
5 and 6 of the Income Tax Act. Section
6(1)(a) taxes "benefits of any kind whatever ... received or enjoyed ...
in respect of . . . an office or employment". The cash payment of $300
easily fell within the category of "benefit". The [page 429] payment was in
respect of her employment because the employee took courses to improve her
knowledge and efficiency in the company business and for better opportunity of
promotion. The fact that the payment was income from employment made it income
from a source under s. 3 of the Act. That sum, however, was a prize for
achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by the taxpayer,
within the meaning of s. 56(1)(n) of the Act. The word prize has to be
construed in the context of the other words of the Act which give it color,
meaning and content. It would place too narrow and inflexible a meaning on the
words "prize for achievement" to hold that they necessarily connote
an award for victory in a competition or contest with others. Section 56(1)(n)
taxes prizes and other amounts that in aggregate exceed $500. The $500
exclusion in s. 56(1)(n) is an exemption from tax. Therefore the
$300 payment is not taxable. Per McIntyre
J.: As the payment received by the taxpayer was less than $500 and a
prize within the meaning of s. 56 (1)(n) of the Income Tax Act, it
was exempted from income tax. Phaneuf Estate v. The Queen, [1978] 2 F.C. 564; Ball (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) v. Johnson (1971), 47
Tax Cas. 155; Laidler v. Perry (Inspector of Taxes), [1965] 2 All
E.R. 121; Hochstrasser (Inspector of Taxes) v. Mayes, [1960] A.C. 376;
Ransom v. Minister of National Revenue, [1968] 1 Ex. C.R. 293;
Seymour v. Reed, [1927] A.C. 554; Nowegijick v. The Queen, [1983] 1
S.C.R. 29; Paterson v. Chadwick, [1974] 2 All E.R. 772; R. v.
Poynton, [1972] 3 O.R. 727; R. v. McLaughlin, [1979] 1 F.C. 470,
referred to. APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal
Court of Appeal, [1981] C.T.C. 332, 37 N.R. 567, allowing the appeal from a
judgment of the Federal Court, Trial Division, [1980] C.T.C. 103, allowing an appeal from a decision of the Tax Review
Board. Appeal dismissed. L. R. Olsson, Q.C., and Ian S. MacGregor, for the appellant. Alan
Schwartz, for the respondent. [page 430] The judgment of
Ritchie, Dickson, Lamer and Wilson JJ. was delivered by DICKSON J.—The question is whether the sum of $300 received by
Elizabeth Joan Savage from her employer, Excelsior Life Insurance Company
("Excelsior"), for successful completion of the Life Office
Management Association series of examinations, is subject to income tax. I Background Mrs. Savage was
employed by Excelsior as a research assistant. During 1976, she took three Life
Office Management Association courses: Life Insurance Law, Economics and
Investment, and Life Insurance Actuary Mathematics. The courses are designed to
provide a broad understanding of modern life insurance and life insurance
company operations, including management practices and personnel needs. The
courses were voluntarily taken by Mrs. Savage to improve her knowledge in the
life insurance field. She received from Excelsior $300 ($100 per course) as a
result of passing the examinations. Such payment per course was available to
all employees of Excelsior in accordance with company policy, designed to
encourage self-upgrading of staff members. The courses, in both study time
required and complexity of material, were comparable to university courses.
Approximately 61 per cent of those taking the examinations in 1976 in the
United States and Canada passed. One hundred or so Excelsior employees wrote
the examinations in the spring and fall of 1976; the percentage passing
slightly exceeded the overall United States and Canadian average results. Excelsior reported
the amount of $300 on a T4A Supplementary under "Other Income",
indicating it was a "Prize for passing LOMA examinations", and
claimed it as an expense of doing business. [page 431] Receipt
of a prize comes under s. 56(1)(n) of the Income Tax Act, 1970-71-72 (Can.), c. 63, which reads: 56. (1) Without restricting the generality of section 3, there shall be included in computing the income of
a taxpayer for a taxation year, […] SCHOLARSHIPS, BURSARIES, ETC. (n) the amount, if any, by which (i) the aggregate of all amounts received by
the taxpayer in the year, each of which is an amount received by him as or on
account of a scholarship, fellowship or bursary, or a prize for
achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by the taxpayer, exceeds (ii) $500; and (Emphasis added.) Mrs.
Savage did not include the payment to her of $300 in the computation of her
income for the 1976 taxation year. The Minister, by Notice of Reassessment,
assessed the amount in the computation of her income on the basis that it
constituted income of the taxpayer from an office or employment. By
Notice of Objection Mrs. Savage took issue with the assessment on the basis
that the amount was a prize for achievement, and as it was less than $500 it
did not have to be included in income. The
Minister confirmed the assessment by Notification "on the ground that the
prize in the amount of $300 paid to you by your employer, the Excelsior Life
Insurance Company, had been properly included in the computation of your income
for the year in accordance with the provisions of Sections 3 and 5 of the
Act". Section 3(a), s. 5(1), and another section to which reference will
be made, s. 6(1)(a), read: 3. The income
of a taxpayer for a taxation year for the purposes of this Part is his income
for the year determined by the following rules: (a) determine the
aggregate of amounts each of which is the taxpayer's income
for the year (other than a taxable capital gain from the disposition of a property) [page 432] from a source
inside or outside Canada, including, without restricting the generality of the
foregoing, his income for the year from each office, employment, business and
property; […] INCOME FROM OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT 5. (1) Subject to this Part, a taxpayer's income
for a taxation year from an office or employment is the salary, wages
and other remuneration, including gratuities, received by him in the year. AMOUNTS TO BE INCLUDED AS INCOME FROM OFFICE
OR EMPLOYMENT 6. (1) There shall be included in computing
the income of a taxpayer for a taxation year
as income from an office or employment such of the following amounts as
are applicable: (a) the value of board, lodging and other benefits
of any kind whatever (except the benefit he derives from his
employer's contributions to or under a registered pension fund or plan, group sickness or accident insurance plan,
private health services plan, supplementary unemployment benefit plan, deferred
profit sharing plan or group term life insurance policy) received or enjoyed by
him in the year in respect of, in the course of, or by virtue of an
office or employment; […] The key words, for the purpose of the present
appeal, are underlined. II The
Tax Review Board Mrs.
Savage appealed the Minister's reassessment to the Tax Review Board. A hearing
was held before Delmer E. Taylor, C.A., a member of the Board. The gist of the
Board's judgment is found in the following two sentences: It has often been said by the Courts that
where no particular meaning has been attributed to a word or phrase in a taxing
statute, it (the word or phrase) should be
given its ordinary meaning, and Courts have shown a great reluctance to
distort that ordinary meaning. I can think of no more appropriate definition
for the $300 amount in issue here than "a prize for achievement in a field
of endeavour ordinarily carried on by the taxpayer". [page 433] The
Board allowed Mrs. Savage's appeal and referred the matter back to the Minister
for reassessment. IIl
The Federal Court, Trial Division The
Crown appealed the Tax Review Board's decision to the Federal Court. Grant D.J.
allowed the appeal. After referring to two dictionary definitions of the word "prize"
he held: In the present case each course was available
to all employees of the Insurance Company and
each one who successfully passed the examination was entitled to the
same amount of $100 for each course in which he was successful. There was
therefore no contest or competition among the employees and superiority in the
examination played no part in the receipt of such money. The
crucial fact, in the view of Grant D.J., was that there was no competition to
determine the winner of the prize. The judge went on to consider, and reject,
the taxpayer's contention that the $300 payment did not fall within the
language of either s. 5 or s. 6 of the Act, taxability being governed entirely
by s. 56(1)(n). He held: The purpose of the company in offering such
education or training in respect of insurance business and the payment of $100 for each course in which the
employee was successful, was that their services would thereby become more learned and valuable in their work with
it. The employee took such course to improve her knowledge and
efficiency in the company business and for better
opportunity of promotion. The employee therefore received such payment "in respect of, in the course of, or by
virtue of her employment". and: Paragraph 56(1)(n) is not an exclusionary
provision. It only provides for inclusion of that portion of the amount described therein which exceeds $500.
Section 8 of the Act sets out the
various deductions which may be made in computing a taxpayer's income
from an office or employment. No such
deduction as the $300 which is the subject of this appeal is therein
contained. Subsection 8(2) provides that except as permitted by the section no
deduction shall be made in computing a taxpayer's income from an office or
employment in any taxation year. The effect of accepting the taxpayer's [page 434] interpretation of paragraph 56(1)(n) would
be to provide an employer with an opportunity of increasing the statutory
exemption of each of his employees by the sum of $500 in any year. With respect, I have considerable doubt that the
sweep of the taxpayer's interpretation of s. 56(1)(n)
is as broad as the final sentence of the foregoing passage would
suggest. Be that as it may, if the taxpayer's interpretation, based on the
legislation and the circumstances of this particular case, is correct, the fact
that it may open doors, hitherto regarded as closed, should not dictate rejection
of that interpretation. IV The Federal Court, Appeal Division Mrs. Savage appealed to the Federal Court of
Appeal. She contended in that Court, as she has contended here, that the sum of
$100 received by her from her employer for the successful completion of each of
the three Life Office Management Association courses was "a prize for
achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by the taxpayer",
within the meaning of s. 56(1)(n) of
the Income Tax Act. The total of such payments did not, therefore, have
to be included as income for 1976 since it was less than the $500 excluded
by s. 56(1)(n). The Crown contended in this Court, as in the Federal Court of Appeal,
that the sum of $300 received by Mrs. Savage was not a prize within the meaning
of s. 56(1)(n); even if it were, it was required to be included in the
computation of her income because it was income from an employment or otherwise
income from a source, within the meaning of ss. 3, 5(1) and 6(1)(a) of
the Act. Mrs. Savage says in response that even if the
sum received by her is not a prize within the meaning of s. 56(1)(n) it
is not taxable as income from an employment or otherwise from a source. Le Dain J. of the Federal Court of Appeal held
that the sum received was not a prize within the meaning of s. 56(1)(n). In his
view, "prize" connoted a reward for superiority in a contest or
competition with others: [page 435] The sum that was paid in this case was
obviously intended to encourage employees to
take a course and successfully complete
it but was not intended to reward relative merit in the course. Mr.
Justice Le Dain, however, found in favour of Mrs. Savage on the ground that the
sum received by her from her employer was not income from her employment within
the meaning of s. 5(1); more particularly, it was not a benefit received by her
"in respect of, in the course of, or by virtue of" employment within
the meaning of s. 6(1)(a). Mr. Justice Le Dain said: "To be income from an
employment within the meaning of subsections 5(1) and 6(1)(a) the payment must
in my opinion be for services as an employee". Kelly
D. J., with whom McKay D. J. concurred, agreed the awards aggregating $300 did
not constitute income made subject to tax by ss. 3, 5 and 6 of the Act, adding: I do not find it necessary to decide and
refrain from deciding whether any or all of the aforesaid awards is a "prize
for achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried
on by the taxpayer". Whether or not all or any one of
the awards were such prizes, the aggregate of the awards received by the taxpayer
in the taxation year in question did not exceed $500 and would not be
income within the meaning of section
56(1)(n). Thus
the $300 minnow has escaped the taxman's net in two of the three tribunals
which have, to date, given thought to the matter. Two main questions arise (i)
were the payments "salary, wages and other remuneration" within s.
5(1) or a benefit "in respect of, in the course of, or by virtue of an
office or employment", within s. 6 (1)(a); (ii) were the payments a
"prize for achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by
the taxpayer", within s. 56(1)(n). V A
Benefit in Respect of Employment As
I noted, all members of the Federal Court of Appeal concluded the payments
aggregating $300 were not within ss. 5(1) or 6(1)(a) because they were not
payments "for services as an employee". Le Dain J. said: [page 436] The sum of $100 paid to the appellant for
successful completion of a course was not a payment for services rendered as an employee. It was not related in any
way to her services as an employee.
The courses were taken voluntarily,
on her own time. There was no obligation as an employee to take them. The interest of the employer was that
the courses would make her a more valuable employee. The payment was in the
nature of a gift to encourage employees to
take the courses and successfully complete them. The employment was
certainly a condition of being able to
receive the payment, but the payment
was not received by reason of the employment but by reason of the successful completion of the course. Le Dain J. relied on Phaneuf Estate v. The Queen, [1978] 2 F.C. 564 (T.D.) and Ball (H.M. Inspector of Taxes) v.
Johnson (1971), 47 Tax Cas. 155 (Ch.D.). The
Ball case was much like the
one at bar. The Midland Bank expected its staff, among whom was Mr. Johnson, to
study and sit for examinations of the Institute of Banks, to qualify themselves
better as bankers. The bank paid cash awards to those who passed, including
Johnson. It was held the reason for the payments was Johnson's personal success
in passing the examinations and they were not remuneration for his services
with the bank. The case is of little relevance, however, because of the
language of Rule 1 of Schedule E of the Income Tax Act, 1952, 15 & 16 Geo. 6 & 1
Eliz. 2, c. 10. The tax, if any, arose under s. 156 of that Act, as amended by
s. 10 of the Finance
Act, 1956,
.4 & 5 Eliz. 2, c. 54. The relevant parts of s. 156 were as follows: 156. The Schedule referred to in this Act as Schedule E is as follows 1. Tax under
this Schedule shall be charged in respect of any office or
employment on emoluments therefrom […] The
result reached by the Court was unexceptional having regard to the language
being construed and in particular "emoluments therefrom". The
significance of these words, not found in our [page 437] Act,
was touched on by Lord Reid in Laidler v. Perry (Inspector of Taxes), [1965] 2 All E.R. 121 (H.L.) at p. 124: Section 156 however, applies only to "emoluments
therefrom", i.e. from the
office or employment of the recipient, and it is well settled that not every
sum or other profit received by an employee from his employer in the course of
his employment is to be regarded as arising from the employment. So the
question in this case is whether these profits or emoluments of X10 did or did
not arise from the taxpayer's employment. There is a wealth of authority on this matter
and various glosses on or paraphrases of the
words in the Act of 1952 appear in judicial opinions, including speeches
in the House. No doubt they were helpful in the circumstances of the cases in
which they were used, but in the end we must always return to the words in the
statute and answer the question—did this profit arise from the employment? The
answer will be no if it arose from something else. And
in Hochstrasser
(Inspector of Taxes) v. Mayes, [1960] A.C. 376 (H.L.) Viscount Simonds adopted, at p. 388, the language of
Upjohn J., before whom the matter first came: "Indeed, in my judgment, the authorities
show that to be a profit arising from the employment the payment must be made
in reference to the services the employee renders by virtue of his office, and
it must be something in the nature of a reward for services past, present or
future." In this passage the single word "past" may be open to
question, but apart from that it appears to me to be entirely accurate. The
Hochstrasser case and Ball v. Johnson are of little
assistance. The provisions of s. 156 of the Income Tax Act, 1952 of England are not unlike s. 5(1) of the Canadian Income Tax Act but our Act goes
further in s. 6(1)(a). In addition to the salary, wages and other remuneration referred to in s.
5(1), s. 6(1)(a) includes in income the value of benefits "of any kind whatever .. . received or
enjoyed ... in respect of, in the course of, or by virtue of an office or
employment". [page 438] In Phaneuf, supra, the issue was whether Mr. Phaneuf was liable for income
tax in respect of a benefit received by him on the purchase of shares. He
acquired the shares in Charles Ogilvy Limited, his employer, pursuant to a
bequest of the Company's principal shareholder. The bequest gave the right to
the Company's employees to acquire a number of shares at par value. The Company's
Board of Directors revised the list of employees entitled to purchase shares
and approved a formula for distribution based on service to some extent. Mr.
Phaneuf bought shares of a par value of $2 although they had a market value at
the time of $17.25. In the Federal Court, Mr. Justice Thurlow, then A.C.J. of
the Trial Division, held that the benefit was conferred on Mr. Phaneuf as a
person and not as an employee and as a personal gift rather than as
remuneration, and hence not a taxable benefit. Thurlow A.C.J. followed Ransom v. Minister of National Revenue, [1968] 1 Ex. C.R. 293. In Ransom Noël J. referred to the difference between Rule I of
Schedule E of the English statute and the provisions of our Income Tax Act and then observed, at p. 307: I now come to section 5(1)(a) and (b) of the
Act which, as already mentioned, is couched in language which appears to be wider than the English taxation rule on which
the taxpayers in Hochstrasser v. Mayes [[1959] 1 Ch. D. 22] and Jennings v. Kinder [[1958] 3 W.L.R. 215] were held not to be taxable. The
Canadian taxation section indeed uses
such embracing words that at first
glance it appears extremely difficult to see how anything can slip
through this wide and closely interlaced legislative net. In order, however, to properly evaluate its
intent it is, I believe, necessary to bear in mind firstly, that section 5 of the Act is concerned solely with the taxation
of income identified by its relationship to a certain entity, namely, an office or employment and in order to be
taxable as income from an office or employment, money received by an employee must not merely constitute
income as distinct from capital, but it must arise from his office or
employment. Similar comments were made in Hochstrasser
v. Mayes with reference to the English legislation by Viscount Simonds at p. 705 and by Lord Radcliffe, at p. 707. Secondly, the question
whether a [page 439] payment arises from an office or employment
depends on its causative relationship to an office or employment, in other
words, whether the services in the employment are the effective cause of the
payment. I should add here that the question of what was the effective cause of
the payment is to be found in the legal source of the payment, and here this
source was the agreement which resulted from the open offer of the employer to
compensate its employee for his loss and the acceptance by him of such offer.
The cause of the payment is not the services rendered, although such services
are the occasion of the payment, but the fact that because of the manner in
which the services must be rendered or will be rendered, he will incur or have
to incur a loss which other employees paying taxes do not have to suffer. Thurlow
A.C.J. adopted that
passage and the following words of Viscount Cave L.C. in Seymour v. Reed, [1927] A.C. 554 (H.L.) at p. 559: The question, therefore, is whether the sum
of 939 1. 16s. fell within the description, contained in r. 1 of Sch. E, of
"salaries, fees, wages, perquisites or profits whatsoever therefrom"
(i.e., from an office or employment of profit) "for the year of
assessment," so as to be liable to income tax under that Schedule. These
words and the corresponding expressions contained in the earlier statutes
(which were not materially different) have been the subject of judicial
interpretation in cases which have been cited to your Lordships; and must now
(I think) be taken as settled that they include all payments made to the holder
of an office or employment as such, that is to say, by way of remuneration for
his services, even though such payments may be voluntary, but that they do not
include a mere gift or present (such as a testimonial) which is made to him on
personal grounds and not by way of payment for his services. The question to be
answered is, as Rowlatt J. put it: "Is it in the end a personal gift or is
it remuneration?" If the latter, it is subject to the tax; if the former,
it is not. Mr.
Justice Thurlow then said, at p. 572: While the language of the statutes differ,
the test expressed by Viscount Cave L.C. (supra)
appears to me to express, as well as it can be expressed, the
essence of what falls within the taxing provision of the Income Tax Act.
Is the payment made "by way of remuneration for his
services" or is it "made to him on personal grounds [page 440] and not by way of payment for his
services"? It may be made to an
employee but is it made to him as employee or simply as a person. Another way of stating it is
to say is it received in his capacity
as employee, but that appears to me to be the same test. To be received
in the capacity of employee it must,
as I see it, partake of the character of remuneration for services. That is
the effect that, as it seems to
me, the words "in respect of, in the
course of or by virtue of an office or employment" in paragraph 6(1)(a)
have. I
agree that the appropriate test in Phaneuf was whether the benefit
had been conferred on Mr. Phaneuf as an employee or simply as a person. It
would seem that Mr. Phaneuf received, as a person, the right to acquire the
shares and therefore the case was correctly decided. With great respect,
however, I do not agree with the latter part of the passage last quoted and in
particular the statement that, to be received in the capacity of employee, the
payment must partake of the character of remuneration for services. Such was
the conclusion in the English cases but based on much narrower language. Our
Act contains the stipulation, not found in the English statutes referred to,
"benefits of any kind whatever . . . in respect of, in the course of, or
by virtue of an office or employment". The meaning of "benefits of
whatever kind" is clearly quite broad; in the present case the cash
payment of $300 easily falls within the category of "benefit".
Further, our Act speaks of a benefit "in
respect of" an office or employment. In Nowegijick
v. The Queen, [1983] l S.C.R. 29 this Court said, at p.
39, that: The words
"in respect of" are, in my opinion, words of the widest possible scope. They import such
meanings as "in relation to", "with
reference to" or "in connection with".
The phrase "in respect of" is probably
the widest of any
expression intended to convey some connection between two related
subject matters. See
also Paterson v. Chadwick, [1974] 2 All E.R. 772 (Q.B.D.) at p. 772. [page 441] I agree with what was said by Evans J.A. in R. v. Poynton,
[1972] 3 O.R. 727 at
p. 738, speaking of benefits received or enjoyed in respect of, in the course
of, or by virtue of an office or employment: I do not believe
the language to be restricted to benefits that are related to the office or employment in
the sense that they respresent [sic] a form of remuneration for services
rendered. If it is a material acquisition which confers an economic benefit on
the taxpayer and does not constitute an exemption, e.g., loan or gift, then it is within the all-embracing definition of
s.3. It is difficult to conclude that the payments by
Excelsior to Mrs. Savage were not in relation to or in connection with her
employment. As Mr. Justice Grant said, the employee took the course to improve
his or her knowledge and efficiency in the company business and for better
opportunity of promotion. As Crown counsel submits, the sum of $300
received by Mrs. Savage from her employer was a benefit and was received or
enjoyed by her in respect of, in the course of or by virtue of her employment
within the meaning of s. 6(1)(a) of the Income
Tax Act; it was paid by her employer in accordance with company
policy upon the successful completion of courses "designed to provide a
broad understanding of modern life insurance and life insurance company
operations" and "to encourage self-upgrading of staff members";
the interest of the employer "was that the courses would make her a more
valuable employee"; Mrs. Savage took the courses to "improve [her]
knowledge and efficiency in the company business and for better opportunity for
promotion". Distinguishing this case from Phaneuf, there was no element of gift, personal bounty or of
considerations extraneous to Mrs. Savage's employment. I would hold that the payments received by Mrs.
Savage were in respect of employment. That, of [page 442] itself, makes them income from a source under s.
3 of the Act. I conclude on this point that, unless s.
56(1)(n) of the Income Tax Act relieves, Mrs. Savage is subject
to income tax in respect of the $300 which she received from her employer. VI A Prize for Achievement I turn then to the question of whether the sum
received by Mrs. Savage was a prize within the meaning of s. 56(1)(n) of the Income Tax Act.
The Crown takes two points: (i) the word "prize" connotes
a reward for superiority in a contest or competition with others, and (ii) in
any event, s. 56(1)(n) is not
an exemption provision and does not affect payments which fall within the other
taxing provisions of the statute. On the first point, the case of R. v. McLaughlin,
[1979] 1 F.C. 470 is cited. The taxpayer had been given $10,000 as
an award for his achievements as chairman of the Ontario Milk Marketing Board.
Judge Marceau upheld the decision of the Tax Review Board which had held that
the award did not come within the terms of s. 56(1)(n) of the Act, because it
was not a prize for an endeavour ordinarily carried on by the taxpayer: In my opinion, the word "prize" connotes something striven for
in a competition, in a contest, and I don't think
there can be a competition, or a contest in the real sense without the participants being aware that
they are involved. The word "prize", in ordinary
parlance, is not limited to a reward for superiority in a contest with others.
A "prize" for achievement is nothing more nor less than an award for
something accomplished. There is no need to pluck the word "prize"
out of context and subject it to minute philological examination, or to think
of "prize" in the context of the medal or book one may have won at an
earlier date on a field day or at school or in a music competition. [page 443] The word
"prize" is surrounded in the Income Tax Act by other words
which give it colour and meaning and content. I repeat them: "as or on
account of a scholarship, fellowship, or bursary, or a prize for achievement in
a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by the taxpayer". Three comments.
First, s. 56(1)(n) is not concerned with the identity of the payer or
the relationship, if any, between donor and donee. There is nothing in the
section which renders the scholarship, fellowship, bursary or prize taxable on
the ground that the donor or payer is the employer of the taxpayer. Second, the
words "scholarship, fellowship or bursary", with which the word "prize"
is associated, are normally employed in speaking of educational attainments,
usually in the sphere of advanced studies, and "polite" learning.
Third, the prize must be for "achievement", defined in the Shorter
Oxford Dictionary (3rd ed.) as "the action of achieving, anything
achieved, a feat, a victory". "To achieve" is variously defined,
including "to carry out successfully", "to attain". The
"achievement" must be in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on
by the taxpayer. This rules out, for example, prizes won in games of chance or
at a costume party or for athletic achievement. We are concerned with the field
of endeavour ordinarily carried on by the taxpayer, in this instance, the life
insurance business. Funk and Wagnalls
Standard College Dictionary (Canadian Edition) defines "prize" as: 1. That which is offered or won as an honor and reward for superiority or success, as in a contest; an award. 2. Anything to be striven for… [page 444] Black's Law Dictionary, (5th ed.) gives, among others, this
definition of a "prize": "An award or recompense for some act
done; some valuable thing offered by a person for something done by others".
This is broad language. In my view, a
"prize for achievement" does not necessarily connote an award for
victory in a competition or contest with others. That places too narrow and
inflexible a meaning on the words. In the case at bar the award was in
recognition of bona fide accomplishment,
successful completion of course studies, and examinations in a challenging and
difficult field of endeavour, in which about 61 per cent of those writing were
successful and about 39 per cent failed. Only the successful candidates were
eligible to receive a prize. It is important also
to say that it is not suggested here that the system of awards was introduced
as a colourable device intended to provide the employer with an opportunity of
increasing the statutory exemption of employees by $500 per year. If and when
such a case arises it can be considered on its facts. The French version
of s. 56(1)(n) of the Income Tax Act as amended by 1973-74 (Can.), c. 14, s. 15 should
be read. It is, it seems to me, in terms at least as broad as the English
version: 56. (1) Sans restreindre la portée générale
de l'article 3, sont à inclure dans le calcul du revenu d'un contribuable pour
une année d'imposition, […] (n) la fraction, si fraction il y a, (i) du total de toutes les sommes reçues dans l'année
par le contribuable et dont chacune est une somme qu'il a reçue à titre ou au
titre de bourse d'études, de bourse de perfectionnement (fellowship) ou de
récompense couronnant une oeuvre remarquable réalisée dans son domaine
d'activité habituel, qui est en sus de (ii) $500; et […] [page 445] The payment which Mrs. Savage received falls
well within the words "récompense
couronnant une oeuvre remarquable réalisée dans son domaine d'activité habituel". For the foregoing reasons the Crown's
contention, that the word "prize" in s. 56(1)(n) has application only
in a contest or competition with others, in my opinion, fails. The further submission on the part of the Crown
is that, in any event, the $500 exclusion
in s. 56(1)(n) is not an
exemption, and does not affect payments which fall within other taxing
provisions of the statute. In terms of this case, the Crown's position is that
even if the $300 is a prize not taxable under s. 56(1)(n), the $300 is
nonetheless taxable under ss. 5 and
6 as income from employment. It is true that the opening words of s. 56(1)
speak in terms of inclusion and not exclusion: 56. (1) Without restricting the generality
of section 3, there shall be included in computing the
income of a taxpayer for a taxation year, .. . Section 56 falls
within Division B, Subdivision d headed "Other Sources of Income",
The section enumerates examples of income that fall within s. 3, repeated below
for ease of reference, as constituting "income . . . from a source": 3. The income of a taxpayer for a taxation
year for the purposes of this Part is his income for the year determined by the following rules: (a) determine
the aggregate of amounts each of which is the taxpayer's income for the year (other than a
taxable capital gain from the disposition of a property) from a source inside
or outside Canada, including, without restricting the generality of the foregoing, his income for the year from each office, employment, business
and property; I agree with counsel for Mrs. Savage that the
opening words "Without restricting the generality of section 3", in
subs. 56(1) would seem to have
been inserted to defeat an argument of "expressio
unius est exclusio alterius", in order to relate income items
contained in subs. 56(1) to the
arithmetical [page 446] calculation set out
in s. 3. Income can still be income from a source if it does not fall within s.
56. Moreover, s. 56 does not enlarge what is taxable under s. 3, it
simply specifies. When s. 56 is seen in this context, it is clear the Crown's
submission cannot be sustained. The Crown's position, to repeat, is that a
prize for achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by the
taxpayer, if less than $500,
and if obtained in
respect of, in the course of, or by reason of an office or employment, is
taxable under ss. 5 and 6, notwithstanding s. 56(1)(n). Section 56(1)(n) makes it clear that a prize for achievement is income from a source
under s. 3 just as income from an office or employment is income from a source
under s. 3. If a prize under $500 would still be taxable under ss. 5 and 6, it
would have to follow on the Crown's argument that a prize under $500 would
equally be taxable under s. 3. That cannot be right. That would mean that a
prize over $500 would be taxable under s. 56(1)(n) and a prize up to $500
would be taxable under
s. 3. The $500 exclusion in s. 56(1)(n) would never have any effect. It seems clear that
the first $500 of income received during the year
falling within the terms of s. 56(1)(n) is exempt
from tax. Any amount in excess of $500 falls under
s. 56(1)(n) and is taxable accordingly. If that is
not the effect, what purpose is served by the subsection? I would dismiss the
appeal. Pursuant to the terms on which leave to appeal to this Court was
granted, the respondent is entitled to her costs on a solicitor and client
basis. The matter is referred back to the Minister of National Revenue for
appropriate action in accordance with these reasons for judgment. The following are
the reasons delivered by MCINTYRE J.—I agree with my colleague Dickson J. that the $300
payment received by the [page 447] respondent was a
prize "for achievement in a field of endeavour ordinarily carried on by
the taxpayer" within the meaning of s. 56(1)(n) of the Income Tax Act. Since it is less than $500, it is exempt
from tax. I would therefore dismiss the Crown's appeal without expressing any
opinion on the other matters referred to by my colleague. Appeal dismissed with costs. Solicitor for the appellant: R. Tassé, Ottawa. Solicitors for the respondent: Fasken
& Calvin, Toronto.  