                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v.
  Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC 54  Date:  20051019 Docket:  30290  Between: Her Majesty the
Queen Appellant v. Canada Trustco
Mortgage Company Respondent  Coram:
McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella
and Charron JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 81)   McLachlin C.J. and Major J.
  (Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ. concurring)   ______________________________ Canada Trustco
Mortgage Co. v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC
54  Her Majesty
The Queen                                                                                  Appellant  v.  Canada
Trustco Mortgage Company                                                           Respondent  Indexed
as:  Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v. Canada  Neutral
citation:  2005 SCC 54.  File
No.:  30290.  2005:  March 8;
2005:  October 19.  Present:  McLachlin
C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and
Charron JJ.  on appeal from
the federal court of appeal    Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.    Once the provisions of the Income Tax Act  are properly
interpreted, it is a question of fact for the Tax Court judge whether the
Minister, in denying the tax benefit, has established abusive tax avoidance
under s. 245(4) .  Provided the Tax Court judge has proceeded on a proper
construction of the provisions of the Act and on findings supported by the
evidence, appellate tribunals should not interfere, absent a palpable and
overriding error. [46]   Cases Cited  Not followed:  OSFC Holdings Ltd. v. Canada,
[2002] 2 F.C. 288, 2001 FCA 260; referred
to:  Mathew v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 643,
2005 SCC 55; 65302 British Columbia Ltd. v. Canada, [1999]
3 S.C.R. 804; Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. Duke of
Westminster, [1936] A.C. 1; Shell Canada Ltd. v. Canada, [1999]
3 S.C.R. 622; Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984]
1 S.C.R. 536; Craven v. White, [1989] A.C. 398; W. T.
Ramsay Ltd. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1981] 1 All
E.R. 865; Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997]
2 S.C.R. 336; Water’s Edge Village Estates (Phase II) Ltd. v.
Canada, [2003] 2 F.C. 25, 2002 FCA 291.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Budget Implementation
Act, 2004, No. 2, S.C. 2005, c. 19, s. 52 .  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .), ss. 13(7.1) , (7.2) , 20(1) (a), 245(1)  to (5) ,
248(10) .  Authors
Cited  Canada.  Department of Finance.  Explanatory
Notes to Legislation Relating to Income Tax.  Ottawa:  Queen’s Printer,
1988.   Hogg, Peter W., and
Joanne E. Magee.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law,
4th ed.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 2002.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (Rothstein, Evans
and Pelletier JJ.A.) [2004] 2 C.T.C. 276,
2004 D.T.C. 6119, [2004] F.C.J. No. 249 (QL),
2004 FCA 67, affirming a decision of Miller J.T.C.C., [2003]
4 C.T.C. 2009, 2003 D.T.C. 587, [2003] T.C.J. No. 271
(QL), 2003 TCC 215.  Appeal dismissed.   Al Meghji, Monica Biringer and Gerald Grenon,
for the respondent.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  The Chief Justice and Major J.
—  1.      Introduction  1                                  
This appeal and its companion case, Mathew v. Canada, [2005] 2
S.C.R. 643, 2005 SCC 55 (hereinafter “Kaulius”), raise the issue of the
interplay between the general anti-avoidance rule (“GAAR”) and the application
of more specific provisions of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .).  The Act continues to permit legitimate tax minimization;
traditionally, this has involved determining whether the taxpayer brought
itself within the wording of the specific provisions relied on for the tax
benefit.  Onto this scheme, the GAAR has superimposed a prohibition on abusive
tax avoidance, with the effect that the literal application of provisions of
the Act may be seen as abusive in light of their context and purpose. The task
in this appeal is to unite these two approaches in a framework that reflects
the intention of Parliament in enacting the GAAR and achieves consistent,
predictable and fair results.  2.      Facts  2                                  
The respondent, Canada Trustco Mortgage Company (“CTMC”), carries on
business as a mortgage lender.  As part of its business operations, CTMC
enjoyed large revenues from leased assets.  In 1996 it purchased a number of
trailers which it then circuitously leased back to the vendor, in order to
offset revenue from its leased assets by claiming considerable capital cost
allowance (“CCA”) on the trailers in the amount of $31,196,700 against $51,787,114
for the 1997 taxation year.  The essence of the transaction is explained in the
memorandum of Michael Lough, CTMC’s officer in charge of the recommendation to
proceed: “The transaction provides very attractive returns by generating CCA
deductions which can be used to shelter other taxable lease income generated by
Canada Trust.”  This arrangement allowed CTMC to defer paying taxes on the
amount of profits reduced by the CCA deductions which would be subject to
recapture into income when the trailers were disposed of at a future date and
presumably in excess of the amount claimed as CCA.  3                                  
The details of the transaction are complex and described in greater
detail in the Appendix.  Briefly stated, on December 17, 1996, CTMC, with the
use of its own money and a loan of approximately $100 million from the Royal
Bank of Canada, purchased trailers from Transamerica Leasing Inc. (“TLI”) at
fair market value of $120 million.  CTMC leased the trailers to Maple Assets
Investments Limited (“MAIL”) who in turn subleased them to TLI, the original
owner.  TLI then prepaid all amounts due to MAIL under the sublease.  MAIL
placed on deposit an amount equal to the loan for purposes of making the lease
payments and a bond was pledged as security to guarantee a purchase option
payment to CTMC at the end of the lease. These transactions allowed CTMC to
substantially minimize its financial risk. They were also accompanied by
financial arrangements with various other parties, not relevant to this appeal.  4                                  
On October 18, 2002, the Minister of National Revenue reassessed CTMC on
its 1997 taxation year and denied the CCA claim of $31,196,700 on the basis
that CTMC had not acquired title to the trailers and, in the alternative, that
the GAAR applied to deny the deduction.  CTMC appealed to the Tax Court of
Canada.  5                                  
The Crown abandoned the argument that CTMC had failed to obtain title to
the trailers and the appeal before the Tax Court proceeded solely on the issue
of whether the GAAR applied to deny the deduction.  A similar reassessment with
respect to CTMC’s 1996 taxation year was statute-barred.  The Tax Court found in
favour of CTMC, as did the Federal Court of Appeal.  For the reasons that
follow, we would dismiss the Crown’s appeal.  3.      Legislative Provisions  6                                  
This appeal and its companion case Kaulius were brought and
argued under s. 245  of the Income Tax Act .  The relevant provisions of
the Act, as they applied to the parties, read in part:  245. (1) [Definitions] In this section,  “tax benefit” means a reduction, avoidance or
deferral of tax or other amount payable under this Act or an increase in a
refund of tax or other amount under this Act;                                                                     .
. .  “transaction” includes an arrangement or event.   (3) [Avoidance transaction] An avoidance
transaction means any transaction  (a) that, but for this section, would result, directly or
indirectly, in a tax benefit, unless the transaction may reasonably be
considered to have been undertaken or arranged primarily for bona fide purposes
other than to obtain the tax benefit; or  (b) that is part of a series of transactions, which series, but
for this section, would result, directly or indirectly, in a tax benefit,
unless the transaction may reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or
arranged primarily for bona fide purposes other than to obtain the tax
benefit.  (4)  [Where s. (2) does not apply] For greater
certainty, subsection (2) does not apply to a transaction where it may
reasonably be considered that the transaction would not result directly or
indirectly in a misuse of the provisions of this Act or an abuse having regard
to the provisions of this Act, other than this section, read as a whole.  (5)  [Determination of tax consequences] Without
restricting the generality of subsection (2),  (a) any deduction in computing income, taxable income, taxable
income earned in Canada or tax payable or any part thereof may be allowed or
disallowed in whole or in part,  (b) any such deduction, any income, loss or other amount or part
thereof may be allocated to any person,  (c) the nature of any payment or other amount may be
recharacterized, and  (d) the tax effects that would otherwise result from the
application of other provisions of this Act may be ignored,  in determining the tax consequences to a person as is reasonable in the
circumstances in order to deny a tax benefit that would, but for this section,
result, directly or indirectly, from an avoidance transaction.                                                                     .
. .  248. . . .  (10) [Series of transactions] For the purposes of
this Act, where there is a reference to a series of transactions or events, the
series shall be deemed to include any related transactions or events completed
in contemplation of the series.  7                                  
A recent amendment to s. 245  (Budget Implementation Act, 2004, No. 2,
S.C. 2005, c. 19, s. 52 ) has no application to the judgments under appeal. 
Although this amendment was enacted to apply retroactively, it cannot apply at
this stage of appellate review, after the parties argued their cases and the
Tax Court judge rendered his decision on the basis of the GAAR as it read prior
to the amendment.  Furthermore, even if this amendment were to apply, it would
not warrant a different approach to the issues on appeal.  In our view, this
amendment to s. 245  serves inter alia to make it clear that the GAAR
applies to tax benefits conferred by Regulations enacted under the Income
Tax Act .  The Tax Court judge in the instant case proceeded on this
assumption, which was not challenged by the parties in submissions before us. 4.      Judicial Decisions  4.1    Tax Court of Canada, [2003] 4 C.T.C.
2009, 2003 TCC 215  8                                  
The Tax Court judge found an avoidance transaction giving rise to a tax
benefit under s. 245(1) and (3) of the Act.  He inquired into the purpose of
the CCA provisions of the Income Tax Act  as applied to sale-leaseback
arrangements, in order to determine if the transaction was abusive under s.
245(4) of the Act.  He held that the purpose of the CCA provisions permitted
the deduction of CCA based on the “cost” of the trailers, as defined by the
transactions documents.  He went on to conduct a detailed analysis of the legal
transactions. He found that CTMC had acquired title and became the legal owner
of the trailers, and declined to recharacterize the legal nature of the
transaction.  The transactions in issue, in his view, amounted to an ordinary
sale-leaseback.  The Tax Court judge found that the transaction fell within the
spirit and purpose of the CCA provisions of the Act, and concluded that the
GAAR did not apply to disallow the tax benefit.  4.2    Federal Court of Appeal, [2004] 2
C.T.C. 276, 2004 FCA 67  9                                  
The Federal Court of Appeal unanimously dismissed the appeal, relying on
the reasons in OSFC Holdings Ltd. v. Canada, [2002] 2 F.C. 288, 2001 FCA
260 (“OSFC”), in which the court had set out a two-stage analysis for
abuse under the GAAR, focussed first on interpretation of the specific
provisions at issue, second on the overarching policy of the Income Tax Act . 
Evans J.A., for the court, held that the Tax Court judge had not erred in
concluding that, for the purposes of s. 245(4) of the Act, the transactions at
issue did not constitute a misuse of a provision of the Act or an abuse of the
CCA scheme as a whole.  He noted that counsel for the appellant did not seek to
recharacterize the transactions and did not allege that they were a sham, but
argued instead that the policy underlying s. 20(1) (a) and the CCA
provisions as a whole was “to permit taxpayers to claim CCA in respect of the
‘real’ or ‘economic’ cost that they incurred in acquiring an asset, and not the
‘legal’ cost, that is, on the facts of this case, the purchase price paid by
the taxpayer” (para. 2).  Going on to consider policy, Evans J.A. found that
there was no clear and unambiguous policy underlying s. 20(1) (a) or the
CCA scheme read as a whole that rendered the transaction a misuse or abuse of
those provisions.  5.      Analysis  5.1    General Principles of Interpretation  10                              
It has been long established as a matter of statutory interpretation
that “the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their
grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the
object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament”: see 65302
British Columbia Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 804, at para. 50.  The
interpretation of a statutory provision must be made according to a textual,
contextual and purposive analysis to find a meaning that is harmonious with the
Act as a whole.  When the words of a provision are precise and unequivocal, the
ordinary meaning of the words play a dominant role in the interpretive
process.  On the other hand, where the words can support more than one
reasonable meaning, the ordinary meaning of the words plays a lesser role. The
relative effects of ordinary meaning, context and purpose on the interpretive
process may vary, but in all cases the court must seek to read the provisions
of an Act as a harmonious whole.  11                              
As a result of the Duke of Westminster principle (Commissioners of
Inland Revenue v. Duke of Westminster, [1936] A.C. 1 (H.L.)) that taxpayers
are entitled to arrange their affairs to minimize the amount of tax payable,
Canadian tax legislation received a strict interpretation in an era of more
literal statutory interpretation than the present. There is no doubt today that
all statutes, including the Income Tax Act , must be interpreted in a
textual, contextual and purposive way.  However, the particularity and detail
of many tax provisions have often led to an emphasis on textual interpretation.
Where Parliament has specified precisely what conditions must be satisfied to
achieve a particular result, it is reasonable to assume that Parliament
intended that taxpayers would rely on such provisions to achieve the result
they prescribe.  12                              
The provisions of the Income Tax Act  must be interpreted in order
to achieve consistency, predictability and fairness so that taxpayers may
manage their affairs intelligently.  As stated at para. 45 of Shell Canada
Ltd. v. Canada, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 622:  [A]bsent a specific provision to the contrary, it is not the
courts’ role to prevent taxpayers from relying on the sophisticated structure
of their transactions, arranged in such a way that the particular provisions of
the Act are met, on the basis that it would be inequitable to those taxpayers
who have not chosen to structure their transactions that way. [Emphasis added.]  See also 65302
British Columbia, at para. 51, per Iacobucci J. citing
P. W. Hogg and J. E. Magee, Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law
(2nd ed. 1997), at pp. 475-76:  It would introduce intolerable uncertainty into the Income Tax Act  if
clear language in a detailed provision of the Act were to be qualified by
unexpressed exceptions derived from a court’s view of the object and purpose of
the provision.  13                              
The Income Tax Act  remains an instrument dominated by explicit 
provisions dictating specific consequences, inviting a largely textual
interpretation. Onto this compendium of detailed stipulations, Parliament has
engrafted quite a different sort of provision, the GAAR. This is a broadly
drafted provision, intended to negate arrangements that would be permissible
under a literal interpretation of other provisions of the Income Tax Act ,
on the basis that they amount to abusive tax avoidance.  To the extent that the
GAAR constitutes a “provision to the contrary” as discussed in Shell (at
para. 45), the Duke of Westminster principle and the emphasis on textual
interpretation may be attenuated.  Ultimately, as affirmed in Shell,
“[t]he courts’ role is to interpret and apply the Act as it was adopted by
Parliament” (para. 45).  The court must to the extent possible
contemporaneously give effect to both the GAAR and the other provisions of the Income
Tax Act  relevant to a particular transaction.  5.2    Interpretation of the GAAR  14                              
The GAAR was enacted in 1988, principally in response to Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, which rejected a
literal approach to interpreting the Act.  At the same time, the Court rejected
the business purpose test, which would have restricted tax reduction to
transactions with a real business purpose.  Instead of the business purpose
test, the Court proposed guidelines to limit unacceptable tax avoidance
arrangements.  Parliament deemed the decision in Stubart an inadequate
response to the problem and enacted the GAAR.  15                              
The Explanatory Notes to Legislation Relating to Income Tax issued
by the Honourable Michael H. Wilson, Minister of Finance (June 1988)
(“Explanatory Notes”) are an aid to interpretation.  The Explanatory Notes
state at the outset that they “are intended for information purposes only and
should not be construed as an official interpretation of the provisions they
describe”.  They state the purpose of the GAAR at p. 461:  New section 245 of the Act is a general anti-avoidance rule which is
intended to prevent abusive tax avoidance transactions or arrangements but at
the same time is not intended to interfere with legitimate commercial and
family transactions.  Consequently, the new rule seeks to distinguish between
legitimate tax planning and abusive tax avoidance and to establish a reasonable
balance between the protection of the tax base and the need for certainty for
taxpayers in planning their affairs.  16                              
The GAAR draws a line between legitimate tax minimization and abusive
tax avoidance.  The line is far from bright.  The GAAR’s  purpose is to deny
the tax benefits of certain arrangements that comply with a literal
interpretation of the provisions of the Act, but amount to an abuse of the
provisions of the Act. But precisely what constitutes abusive tax avoidance
remains the subject of debate.  Hence these appeals.  17                              
The application of the GAAR involves three steps.  The first step is to
determine whether there is a “tax benefit” arising from a “transaction” under
s. 245(1)  and (2) .  The second step is to determine whether the transaction is
an avoidance transaction under s. 245(3), in the sense of not being “arranged
primarily for bona fide purposes other than to obtain the tax benefit”. 
The third step is to determine whether the avoidance transaction is abusive
under s. 245(4).  All three requirements must be fulfilled before the GAAR can
be applied to deny a tax benefit.  5.3    Tax Benefit  18                              
The first step in applying the GAAR is to determine whether there is a
tax benefit arising from a transaction or series of transactions of which the
transaction is part.  19                              
“Tax benefit” is defined in s. 245(1)  as “a reduction, avoidance or deferral
of tax” or “an increase in a refund of tax or other amount” paid under the Act.
Whether a tax benefit exists is a factual determination, initially by the
Minister and on review by the courts, usually the Tax Court.  The magnitude of
the tax benefit is not relevant at this stage of the analysis.  20                              
If a deduction against taxable income is claimed, the existence of a tax
benefit is clear, since a deduction results in a reduction of tax. In some
other instances, it may be that the existence of a tax benefit can only be
established by comparison with an alternative arrangement.  For example,
characterization of an amount as an annuity rather than as a wage, or as a
capital gain rather than as business income, will result in differential tax
treatment.  In such cases, the existence of a tax benefit might only be
established upon a comparison between alternative arrangements. In all cases,
it must be determined whether the taxpayer reduced, avoided or deferred tax
payable under the Act.  5.4    Avoidance Transaction  21                              
The second requirement for application of  the GAAR is that the
transaction giving rise to the tax benefit be an avoidance transaction within
s. 245(3).  The function of this requirement is to remove from the ambit of the
GAAR transactions or series of transactions that may reasonably be considered
to have been undertaken or arranged primarily for a non-tax purpose.  The
majority of tax benefits claimed by taxpayers on their annual returns will be
immune from the GAAR as a result of s. 245(3).  The GAAR was enacted as a
provision of last resort in order to address abusive tax avoidance, it was not
intended to introduce uncertainty in tax planning.  22                              
A “transaction” is defined under s. 245(1)  to include an arrangement or
event.  Section 245(3) specifically defines “avoidance transaction” as a
transaction that results in a tax benefit, either by itself or as part of a series
of transactions, “unless the transaction may reasonably be considered to
have been undertaken or arranged primarily for bona fide purposes
other than to obtain the tax benefit”.  These two underlined expressions
warrant further discussion.  5.4.1    Series of Transactions  23                              
Section 245(2) reads:   24                              
Section 245(3) reads in part:  (3) [Avoidance transaction] An avoidance
transaction means any transaction  (a)  that, but for this section, would result, directly or
indirectly, in a tax benefit . . .; or  (b)  that is part of a series of transactions, which
series, but for this section, would result, directly or indirectly, in a tax
benefit . . . .  25                              
The meaning of the expression “series of transactions” under s. 245(2) 
and (3)  is not clear on its face.  We agree with the majority of the Federal
Court of Appeal in OSFC and endorse the test for a series of
transactions as adopted by the House of Lords that a series of transactions
involves a number of transactions that are “pre-ordained in order to produce a
given result” with “no practical likelihood that the pre-planned events would
not take place in the order ordained”: Craven v. White, [1989] A.C. 398,
at p. 514, per Lord Oliver; see also W. T. Ramsay Ltd. v. Inland
Revenue Commissioners, [1981] 1 All E.R. 865.  26                              
Section 248(10) extends the meaning of “series of transactions” to
include “related transactions or events completed in contemplation of the
series”.  The Federal Court of Appeal held, at para. 36 of OSFC, that
this occurs where the parties to the transaction “knew of the . . . series,
such that it could be said that they took it into account when deciding to
complete the transaction”.  We would elaborate that “in contemplation” is read
not in the sense of actual knowledge but in the broader sense of “because of”
or “in relation to” the series.  The phrase can be applied to events either
before or after the basic avoidance transaction found under s. 245(3). As has
been noted:  It is highly unlikely that Parliament could have intended to include in
the statutory definition of “series of transactions” related transactions
completed in contemplation of a subsequent series of transactions, but not
related transactions in the contemplation of which taxpayers completed a prior
series of transactions.   5.4.2    Primarily for Bona Fide Purposes  27                              
According to s. 245(3), the GAAR does not apply to a transaction that “may
reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or arranged primarily for bona
fide purposes other than to obtain the tax benefit”.  If there are both tax
and non-tax purposes to a transaction, it must be determined whether it was
reasonable to conclude that the non-tax purpose was primary.  If so, the GAAR
cannot be applied to deny the tax benefit.  28                              
While the inquiry proceeds on the premise that both tax and non-tax
purposes can be identified, these can be intertwined in the particular
circumstances of the transaction at issue.  It is not helpful to speak of the
threshold imposed by s. 245(3) as high or low.  The words of the section simply
contemplate an objective assessment of the relative importance of the driving
forces of the transaction.  29                              
Again, this is a factual inquiry.  The taxpayer cannot avoid the
application of the GAAR by merely stating that the transaction was undertaken
or arranged primarily for a non-tax purpose. The Tax Court judge must weigh the
evidence to determine whether it is reasonable to conclude that the transaction
was not undertaken or arranged primarily for a non-tax purpose.  The
determination invokes reasonableness, suggesting that the possibility of
different interpretations of the events must be objectively considered.  30                              
The courts must examine the relationships between the parties and the
actual transactions that were executed between them.   The facts of the
transactions are central to determining whether there was an avoidance
transaction. It is useful to consider what will not suffice to establish an
avoidance transaction under s. 245(3).  The Explanatory Notes state, at p. 464:  Subsection 245(3) does not permit the “recharacterization” of a
transaction for the purposes of determining whether or not it is an avoidance
transaction.  In other words, it does not permit a transaction to be considered
to be an avoidance transaction because some alternative transaction that might
have achieved an equivalent result would have resulted in higher taxes.  31                              
According to the Explanatory Notes, Parliament recognized the Duke of
Westminster principle “that tax planning — arranging one’s affairs so as to
attract the least amount of tax — is a legitimate and accepted part of Canadian
tax law” (p. 464).  Despite Parliament’s intention to address abusive tax
avoidance by enacting the GAAR, Parliament nonetheless intended to preserve
predictability, certainty and fairness in Canadian tax law.  Parliament intends
taxpayers to take full advantage of the provisions of the Income Tax Act  that
confer tax benefits.  Indeed, achieving the various policies that the Income
Tax Act  seeks to promote is dependent on taxpayers doing so.  32                              
 Section 245(3) merely removes from the ambit of the GAAR transactions
that may reasonably be considered to have been undertaken or arranged primarily
for a non-tax purpose.  Parliament did not intend s. 245(3) to operate simply
as a business purpose test, which would have considered transactions that
lacked an independent bona fide business purpose to be invalid.  33                              
The expression “non-tax purpose” has a broader scope than the expression
“business purpose”.  For example, transactions that may reasonably be
considered to have been undertaken or arranged primarily for family or
investment purposes would be immune from the GAAR under s. 245(3).  Section
245(3) does not purport to protect only transactions that have a real business
purpose.  Parliament wanted many schemes that do not have any business purpose
to endure.  Registered Retirement Savings Plans (RRSPs) are one example. 
Parliament recognized that many provisions of the Act confer legitimate tax
benefits notwithstanding the lack of a real business purpose.  This is apparent
from the general language used throughout s. 245 , as opposed to language which
would have adopted a broad anti-avoidance test subject to exemptions for
specific schemes like RRSP transactions.  34                              
If at least one transaction in a series of transactions is an “avoidance
transaction”, then the tax benefit that results from the series may be denied
under the GAAR.  This is apparent from the wording of s. 245(3).  Conversely,
if each transaction in a series was carried out primarily for bona fide
non-tax purposes, the GAAR cannot be applied to deny a tax benefit.  35                              
Even if an avoidance transaction is established under the s. 245(3)
inquiry, the GAAR will not apply to deny the tax benefit if it may be
reasonable to consider that it did not result from abusive tax avoidance under
s. 245(4), as discussed more fully below.  5.5       Abusive Tax Avoidance  36                              
The third requirement for application of the GAAR is that the avoidance
transaction giving rise to a tax benefit be abusive.  The mere existence of an
avoidance transaction is not enough to permit the GAAR to be applied.  The
transaction must also be shown to be abusive under s. 245(4).  37                              
It is this requirement that has given rise to the most difficulty in the
interpretation and application of the GAAR.  A number of features have provoked
judicial debate.  The section is cast in terms of a double negative, stating
that the GAAR does “not apply to a transaction where it may reasonably be considered
that the transaction would not result directly or indirectly in a misuse . . .
or an abuse”.   It is tempered by the word “reasonably”, suggesting some
ministerial and judicial leeway in determining abuse.   It does not precisely
define abuse or misuse.  To further complicate matters, the English and French
versions of s. 245(4) differ.  Overarching these particular difficulties is the
central issue of the relationship between the GAAR and more specific provisions
of the Act.  5.5.1    “Misuse and Abuse”: Two Different
Concepts?  38                              
We turn first to the debate about “misuse” and “abuse” which has arisen
from the different English and French versions of s. 245(4).  This arises from
the apparently disjunctive version of the subsection in English (“misuse of the
provisions of this Act” or “abuse having regard to the provisions of this Act .
. . read as a whole”) and the non-disjunctive French version (“d’abus dans
l’application des dispositions de la présente loi lue dans son ensemble”). 
This discrepancy led the majority of the Federal Court of Appeal to conclude in
OSFC that s. 245(4) mandates two different inquiries.  The first was
whether there was a misuse of the particular provisions of the Act that were
relied upon to achieve the tax benefit.  The second was whether there was an
abuse of any policy of the Act read as a whole.  The term “policy” was used to
refer collectively to purpose, object, spirit, scheme or policy (OSFC,
at para. 66).  39                              
With respect, we cannot agree with this interpretation of s. 245(4).
Parliament could not have intended this two-step approach, which on its face
raises the impossible question of how one can abuse the Act as a whole without
misusing any of its provisions.  We agree with the Tax Court judge, in the
present case, at para. 90, that “[i]n effect, the analysis of the misuse of the
provisions and the analysis of the abuse having regard to the provisions of the
Act read as a whole are inseparable.”   As discussed more fully below,
the interpretation of specific provisions of the Act cannot be separated from
contextual considerations arising from other provisions.  The various
provisions of the Income Tax Act  must be interpreted in their contextual
framework, so that the Act functions as a coherent whole, with respect to the
particular statutory scheme engaged by the transactions.  40                              
There is but one principle of interpretation: to determine the intent of
the legislator having regard to the text, its context, and other indicators of
legislative purpose.  The policy analysis proposed as a second step by the
Federal Court of Appeal in OSFC is properly incorporated into a unified,
textual, contextual, and purposive approach to interpreting the specific
provisions that give rise to the tax benefit.  41                              
The courts cannot search for an overriding policy of the Act that is not
based on a unified, textual, contextual and purposive interpretation of the
specific provisions in issue.  First, such a search is incompatible with the
roles of reviewing judges. The Income Tax Act  is a compendium of highly
detailed and often complex provisions.  To send the courts on the search for
some overarching policy and then to use such a policy to override the wording
of the provisions of the Income Tax Act  would inappropriately place the
formulation of taxation policy in the hands of the judiciary, requiring judges
to perform a task to which they are unaccustomed and for which they are not
equipped.  Did Parliament intend judges to formulate taxation policies that are
not grounded in the provisions of the Act and to apply them to override the
specific provisions of the Act?  Notwithstanding the interpretative challenges
that the GAAR presents, we cannot find a basis for concluding that such a
marked departure from judicial and interpretative norms was Parliament’s
intent.  42                              
Second, to search for an overriding  policy of the Income Tax Act  that
is not anchored in a textual, contextual and purposive interpretation of the
specific provisions that are relied upon for the tax benefit would run counter
to the overall policy of Parliament that tax law be certain, predictable and
fair, so that taxpayers can intelligently order their affairs.  Although
Parliament’s general purpose in enacting the GAAR was to preserve legitimate
tax minimization schemes while prohibiting abusive tax avoidance, Parliament
must also be taken to seek consistency, predictability and fairness in tax
law.  These three latter purposes would be frustrated if the Minister and/or
the courts overrode the provisions of the Income Tax Act  without any
basis in a textual, contextual and purposive interpretation of those
provisions.  43                              
For these reasons we conclude, as did the Tax Court judge, that the
determinations of “misuse” and “abuse” under s. 245(4) are not separate
inquiries.  Section 245(4) requires a single, unified approach to the textual,
contextual and purposive interpretation of the specific provisions of the Income
Tax Act  that are relied upon by the taxpayer in order to determine whether
there was abusive tax avoidance.  5.5.2    Abusive Tax Avoidance: A Unified
Interpretative Approach  44                              
The heart of the analysis under s. 245(4) lies in a contextual and
purposive interpretation of the provisions of the Act that are relied on by the
taxpayer, and the application of the properly interpreted provisions to the
facts of a given case. The first task is to interpret the provisions giving
rise to the tax benefit to determine their object, spirit and purpose. The next
task is to determine whether the transaction falls within or frustrates that
purpose. The overall inquiry thus involves a mixed question of fact and law. 
The textual, contextual and purposive interpretation of specific provisions of
the Income Tax Act  is essentially a question of law but the application
of these provisions to the facts of a case is necessarily fact-intensive.  45                              
This analysis will lead to a finding of abusive tax avoidance when a
taxpayer relies on specific provisions of the Income Tax Act  in order to
achieve an outcome that those provisions seek to prevent.  As well, abusive tax
avoidance will occur when a transaction defeats the underlying rationale of the
provisions that are relied upon.  An abuse may also result from an arrangement
that circumvents the application of certain provisions, such as specific
anti-avoidance rules, in a manner that frustrates or defeats the object, spirit
or purpose of those provisions.  By contrast, abuse is not established where it
is reasonable to conclude that an avoidance transaction under s. 245(3)  was
within the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions that confer the tax
benefit.  46                              
Once the provisions of the Income Tax Act  are properly
interpreted, it is a question of fact for the Tax Court judge whether the
Minister, in denying the tax benefit,  has established abusive tax avoidance
under s. 245(4) .  Provided the Tax Court judge has proceeded on a proper
construction of the provisions of the Act and on findings supported by the
evidence, appellate tribunals should not interfere, absent a palpable and
overriding error.  47                              
The first part of the inquiry under s. 245(4) requires the court to look
beyond the mere text of the provisions and undertake a contextual and purposive
approach to interpretation in order to find meaning that harmonizes the
wording, object, spirit and purpose of the provisions of the Income Tax Act . 
There is nothing novel in this.  Even where the meaning of  particular
provisions may not appear to be ambiguous at first glance, statutory context
and purpose may reveal or resolve latent ambiguities.   “After all, language
can never be interpreted independently of its context, and legislative purpose
is part of the context.  It would seem to follow that consideration of legislative
purpose may not only resolve patent ambiguity, but may, on occasion, reveal
ambiguity in apparently plain language.”  See P. W. Hogg and J. E.
Magee, Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law (4th ed. 2002), at p. 563. 
In order to reveal and resolve any latent ambiguities in the meaning of
provisions of the Income Tax Act , the courts must undertake a unified
textual, contextual and purposive approach to statutory interpretation.  48                              
As previously stated, the predominant issue in this and its companion  appeal
is what constitutes abusive tax avoidance. The Explanatory Notes state in part,
at pp. 464-65:  Subsection 245(4) recognizes that the provisions of the Act are
intended to apply to transactions with real economic substance, not to transactions
intended to exploit, misuse or frustrate the Act to avoid tax.  It also
recognizes, however, that a number of provisions of the Act either contemplate
or encourage transactions that may seem to be primarily tax-motivated. . . . 
It is not intended that section 245  will apply to deny the tax benefits that
result from these transactions as long as they are carried out within the
object and spirit of the provisions of the Act read as a whole.  Nor is it
intended that tax incentives expressly provided for in the legislation would be
neutralized by this section.  Where a taxpayer carries out transactions primarily in order to obtain,
through the application of specific provisions of the Act, a tax benefit that
is not intended by such provisions and by the Act read as a whole, section 245 
should apply.  This would be the case even though the strict words of the
relevant specific provisions may support the tax result sought by the
taxpayer.  Thus, where applicable, section 245  will override other provisions
of the Act since, otherwise, its object and purpose would be defeated.  . . . Thus, in reading the Act as a whole, specific provisions
will be read in the context of and in harmony with the other provisions of the
Act in order to achieve a result which is consistent with the general scheme of
the Act.  Therefore, the application of new subsection 245 must be determined by
reference to the facts in a particular case in the context of the scheme of the
Act. . . .  This can be discerned from a review of the scheme of the Act, its
relevant provisions and permissible extrinsic aids.  49                              
In all cases where the applicability of s. 245(4) is at issue, the
central question is, having regard to the text, context and purpose of the
provisions on which the taxpayer relies, whether the transaction frustrates or
defeats the object, spirit or purpose of those provisions.  The following
points are noteworthy:  (1) While the Explanatory Notes use the phrase “exploit, misuse or
frustrate”, we understand these three terms to be synonymous, with their sense
most adequately captured by the word “frustrate”.  (2) The Explanatory Notes elaborate that the GAAR is intended to apply
where under a literal interpretation of the provisions of the Income Tax Act ,
the object and purpose of those provisions would be defeated.  (3) The Explanatory Notes specify that the application of the GAAR must
be determined by reference to the facts of a particular case in the context of
the scheme of the Income Tax Act .  (4) The Explanatory Notes also elaborate that the provisions of the Income
Tax Act  are intended to apply to transactions with real economic
substance.  50                              
As previously discussed, Parliament sought to address abusive tax
avoidance while preserving consistency, predictability and fairness in tax law
and the GAAR can only be applied to deny a tax benefit when the abusive nature
of the transaction is clear.  51                              
The interpretation of the provisions giving rise to the tax benefit
must, in the words of s. 245(4) of the Act, have regard to the Act “read as a
whole”. This means that the specific provisions at issue must be interpreted in
their legislative context, together with other related and relevant provisions,
in light of the purposes that are promoted by those provisions and their
statutory schemes.  In this respect, it should not be forgotten that the GAAR
itself is part of the Act.  52                              
In general, Parliament confers tax benefits under the Income Tax Act 
to promote purposes related to specific activities.  For example, tax benefits
associated with business losses, CCA and RRSPs, are conferred for reasons
intrinsic to the activities involved.  Unless the Minister can establish that
the avoidance transaction frustrates or defeats the purpose for which the tax
benefit was intended to be conferred, it is not abusive.  53                              
Care must be taken in assessing the purposes for which the provisions at
issue confer a tax benefit. “The [Income Tax Act ] is a complex statute
through which Parliament seeks to balance a myriad of principles” (Shell,
at para. 43).  The conferring of particular tax benefits can serve a variety of
independent and interlocking purposes.  These range from imposing fair business
accounting principles and promoting particular kinds of commercial activity, to
providing family and social benefits.  54                              
In interpreting the provisions of the Income Tax Act , the
statutory language must be respected and should be interpreted according to its
well-established legal meaning.  In some cases, a contextual and purposive
interpretation may  add nuance to the well-established legal meaning of the
statutory language. Section 245(4)  does not rewrite the provisions of the Income
Tax Act ; it only requires that a tax benefit be consistent with the object,
spirit and purpose of the provisions that are relied upon.  55                              
In summary, s. 245(4) imposes a two-part inquiry.  The first step is to
determine the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions of the Income Tax
Act  that are relied on for the tax benefit, having regard to the scheme of
the Act, the relevant provisions and permissible extrinsic aids. The second
step is to examine the factual context of a case in order to determine whether
the avoidance transaction defeated or frustrated the object, spirit or purpose
of the provisions in issue.  56                              
 The Explanatory Notes elaborate that the provisions of the Income
Tax Act  are intended to apply to transactions with real economic
substance.  Although the expression “economic substance” may be open to
different interpretations, this statement recognizes that the provisions of the
Act were intended to apply to transactions that were executed within the
object, spirit and purpose of the provisions that are relied upon for the tax
benefit.  The courts should not turn a blind eye to the underlying facts of a
case, and become fixated on compliance with the literal meaning of the wording
of the provisions of the Income Tax Act .  Rather, the courts should in
all cases interpret the provisions in their proper context in light of the
purposes they intend to promote.  57                              
Courts have to be careful not to conclude too hastily that simply
because a non-tax purpose is not evident, the avoidance transaction is the
result of abusive tax avoidance.  Although the Explanatory Notes make reference
to the expression “economic substance”, s. 245(4) does not consider a
transaction to result in abusive tax avoidance merely because an economic or
commercial purpose is not evident.  As previously stated, the GAAR was not
intended to outlaw all tax benefits; Parliament intended for many to endure.  The
central inquiry is focussed on whether the transaction was consistent with the
purpose of the provisions of the Income Tax Act  that are relied upon by
the taxpayer, when those provisions are properly interpreted in light of their
context.  Abusive tax avoidance will be established if the transactions
frustrate or defeat those purposes.  58                              
Whether the transactions were motivated by any economic, commercial,
family or other non-tax purpose may form part of the factual context that the
courts may consider in the analysis of abusive tax avoidance allegations under
s. 245(4).  However, any finding in this respect would form only one part of
the underlying facts of a case, and would be insufficient by itself to
establish abusive tax avoidance.  The central issue is the proper
interpretation of the relevant provisions in light of their context and purpose. 
When properly interpreted, the statutory provisions at issue in a given case
may dictate that a  particular tax benefit may apply only to transactions with
a certain economic, commercial, family or other non-tax purpose.  The absence
of such considerations may then become a relevant factor towards the inference
that the transactions abused the provisions at issue, but there is no golden
rule in this respect.  59                              
Similarly, courts have on occasion discussed transactions in terms of
their “lack of substance” or requiring “recharacterization”.  However, such
terms have no meaning in isolation from the proper interpretation of specific
provisions of the Income Tax Act .  The analysis under s. 245(4)  requires
a close examination of the facts in order to determine whether allowing a tax
benefit would be within the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions relied
upon by the taxpayer, when those provisions are interpreted textually,
contextually and purposively.  Only after first, properly construing the provisions
to determine their scope and second, examining all of the relevant facts, can a
proper conclusion regarding abusive tax avoidance under s. 245(4)  be reached.  60                              
A transaction may be considered to be “artificial” or to “lack substance”
with respect to specific provisions of the Income Tax Act , if
allowing a tax benefit would not be consistent with the object, spirit or
purpose of those provisions.  We should reject any analysis under s. 245(4) 
that depends entirely  on “substance” viewed in isolation from the proper
interpretation of specific provisions of the Income Tax Act  or the
relevant factual context of a case.   However, abusive tax avoidance may be
found where the relationships and transactions as expressed in the relevant documentation
lack a proper basis relative to the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions
that are purported to confer the tax benefit, or where they are wholly
dissimilar to the relationships or transactions that are contemplated by the
provisions.  61                              
A proper approach to the wording of the provisions of the Income Tax
Act  together with the relevant factual context of a given case achieve
balance between the need to address abusive tax avoidance while preserving
certainty, predictability and fairness in tax law so that taxpayers may manage
their affairs accordingly.  Parliament intends taxpayers to take full advantage
of the provisions of the Act that confer tax benefits.  Parliament did not
intend the GAAR to undermine this basic tenet of tax law.  62                              
The GAAR may be applied to deny a tax benefit only after it is
determined that it was not reasonable to consider the tax benefit to be within
the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions relied upon by the taxpayer.
The negative language in which s. 245(4) is cast indicates that the starting
point for the analysis is the assumption that a tax benefit that would be
conferred by the plain words of the Act is not abusive.  This means that a
finding of abuse is only warranted where the opposite conclusion — that the
avoidance transaction was consistent with the object, spirit or purpose of the
provisions of the Act that are relied on by the taxpayer — cannot be reasonably
entertained.  In other words, the abusive nature of the transaction must be
clear.  The GAAR will not apply to deny a tax benefit where it may reasonably
be considered that the transactions were carried out in a manner consistent
with the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions of the Act, as interpreted
textually, contextually and purposively.  5.6    Burden of Proof  63                              
The determination of the existence of a tax benefit and an avoidance
transaction under s. 245(1) , (2)  and (3)  involves factual decisions.  As such,
the burden of proof is the same as in any tax proceeding where the taxpayer
disputes the Minister’s assessment and its underlying assumptions of facts. 
The initial obligation is on the taxpayer to “refute” or challenge the
Minister’s factual assumptions by contesting the existence of a tax benefit or
by showing that a bona fide non-tax purpose primarily drove the
transaction: see Hickman Motors Ltd. v. Canada, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 336, at
para. 92.  It is not unfair to impose this burden, as the taxpayer would
presumably have knowledge of the factual background of the transaction.  64                              
By contrast, the inquiry into abusive tax avoidance under s. 245(4)
involves a textual, contextual and purposive analysis of the provisions on
which the tax benefit is based.  We see no reason to maintain the distinction
between a theoretical and practical perspective on the burden of proof, adopted
by the majority of the Federal Court of Appeal in OSFC.  The
Federal Court of Appeal held that there is no burden on either party at the
stage of interpreting the provisions at issue, since this is a question of law,
which is ultimately for the court to decide. It went on to state at para. 68
that “from a practical perspective, . . . [t]he Minister should set
out the policy with reference to the provisions of the Act or extrinsic aids
upon which he relies”.  65                              
For practical purposes, the last statement is the important one.   The
taxpayer, once he or she has shown compliance with the wording of a provision,
should not be required to disprove that he or she has thereby violated the
object, spirit or purpose of the provision.  It is for the Minister who seeks
to rely on the GAAR to identify the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions
that are claimed to have been frustrated or defeated, when the provisions of
the Act are interpreted in a textual, contextual and purposive manner.  The
Minister is in a better position than the taxpayer to make submissions on
legislative intent with a view to interpreting the provisions harmoniously
within the broader statutory scheme that is relevant to the transaction at
issue.  5.7    Summary  66                              
The approach to s. 245  of the Income Tax Act  may be summarized as
follows.  1.                                
Three requirements must be established to permit application of the
GAAR:  (1)   A tax benefit resulting from a
transaction or part of a series of transactions (s. 245(1)  and (2) );  (2)   that the transaction is an avoidance
transaction in the sense that it cannot be said to have been reasonably
undertaken or arranged primarily for a bona fide purpose other than to
obtain a tax benefit; and  (3)   that there was abusive tax avoidance in
the sense that it cannot be reasonably concluded that a tax benefit would be
consistent with the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions relied upon by
the taxpayer. 2.                                
The burden is on the taxpayer to refute (1) and (2), and on the Minister
to establish (3).  3.                                
If the existence of abusive tax avoidance is unclear, the benefit of the
doubt goes to the taxpayer.  4.                                
The courts proceed by conducting a unified textual, contextual and
purposive analysis of the provisions giving rise to the tax benefit in order to
determine why they were put in place and why the benefit was conferred.  The
goal is to arrive at a purposive interpretation that is harmonious with the
provisions of the Act that confer the tax benefit, read in the context of the
whole Act.  5.                                
Whether the transactions were motivated by any economic, commercial,
family or other non-tax purpose may form part of the factual context that the
courts may consider in the analysis of abusive tax avoidance allegations under
s. 245(4).  However, any finding in this respect would form only one part of
the underlying facts of a case, and would be insufficient by itself to
establish abusive tax avoidance.  The central issue is the proper
interpretation of the relevant provisions in light of their context and
purpose.  6.                                
Abusive tax avoidance may be found where the relationships and
transactions as expressed in the relevant documentation lack a proper basis
relative to the object, spirit or purpose of the provisions that are purported
to confer the tax benefit, or where they are wholly dissimilar to the
relationships or transactions that are contemplated by the provisions.  7.                                
Where the Tax Court judge has proceeded on a proper construction of the
provisions of the Income Tax Act  and on findings supported by the
evidence, appellate tribunals should not interfere, absent a palpable and
overriding error.  6.      Application to the Facts of This Case  67                              
The appellant Crown agreed with the finding of the Tax Court judge that
there was a tax benefit and an avoidance transaction.  Therefore, the only
issue is whether there was abusive tax avoidance under s. 245(4).  68                              
The respondent purchased and leased trailers in order to generate CCA
deductions, which were then used to shelter other taxable lease income
generated by CTMC.  It is common ground that on their face, the CCA provisions
permit the deductions claimed.  It is also common ground that a standard
sale-leaseback transaction, involving qualifying assets, where the vendor is
also the lessee, is consistent with the object, spirit or purpose of the CCA
provisions.   However, the appellant submits that the manner in which the
respondent structured and financed the purchase, lease and sublease of the trailers
contravened the object, spirit or purpose of the CCA regime and resulted in
abusive tax avoidance under s. 245(4)  of the Income Tax Act .  69                              
As discussed above, the practical burden of showing that there was
abusive tax avoidance lies on the Minister.  The abuse of the Act must be
clear, with the result that doubts must be resolved in favour of the taxpayer. 
The analysis focusses on the purpose of the particular provisions that on their
face give rise to the benefit, and on whether the transaction frustrates or
defeats the object, spirit or purpose of those provisions.  70                              
The appellant submits that the object and spirit of the CCA provisions
are “to provide for the recognition of money spent to acquire qualifying assets
to the extent that they are consumed in the income-earning process”, relying on
the reasons of Noël J.A. in Water’s Edge Village Estates (Phase II) Ltd. v.
Canada, [2003] 2 F.C. 25, 2002 FCA 291, at para. 44.  The appellant submits
that the transaction involved no real risk and that CTMC thus did not actually
spend $120 million to purchase the trailers from TLI.  In the appellant’s view,
CTMC created  a “cost for CCA purposes that is an illusion” without incurring
any “real” expense.  This, the appellant argues, contravenes the object and
spirit of the CCA provisions and constitutes abusive tax avoidance within s.
245(4) of the Act.  The appellant summarizes its main submission as follows:  In this case, the pre-ordained series of
transactions misuses and abuses the CCA regime because it manufactures a cost
for CCA purposes that does not represent the real economic cost to CTMC of the
trailers.  CTMC borrowed $97.4 million from the Royal Bank, but . . . the loan
was effectively repaid in its entirety on the day it was made.  The assignment
by CTMC to the Bank of MAIL’s rent payments under the lease continued the
circular flow of money . . . . There was no risk at all that the rent
payments would not be made.  Even the $5.9 million that CTMC apparently
paid in fees was fully covered as it, along with the rest of CTMC’s
contribution of $24.9 million in funding, will be reimbursed when the $19
million bond pledged to CTMC matures in December 2005 at $33.5 million.  CTMC incurred no real economic cost, and thus
was not entitled to any “recognition for money spent to acquire qualifying
assets”.  [Emphasis added; paras. 80-81.]  71                              
The respondent takes a different view of the purpose of the CCA
provisions and the transaction.  It relies on the Tax Court judge’s conclusion
that the transaction was a profitable commercial investment and fully
consistent with the object and spirit of the Act.  The respondent submits that
its deductions were permitted under the “Leasing Property Rules” and the
“Specified Leasing Property Rules” of the Act.  It argues that the specific
rules enacted by Parliament to address CCA on leased assets are plainly a vital
part of the statutory scheme, and that the GAAR cannot be utilized to change
the scope of those rules.  The respondent submits that it is the policy of the
Act that “cost” means the price that the taxpayer gave up in order to get the
asset, except in specific and precisely prescribed circumstances not here
applicable.  The respondent argues that the GAAR cannot be used to override
Parliament’s explicit policy decision to limit the scope of the rules.  72                              
The respondent argues that the transaction was consistent with the
object and spirit of the legislation.  The Act’s inclusion of specific provisions
that take “cost” to mean the amount “at risk” in limited circumstances
illustrates the general policy of the Act that the term “cost” outside of those
specific provisions means cost as understood at law, namely the amount paid.  A
cost is not reduced to reflect a mitigation of economic risk.  In the result,
the respondent argues that on the facts of this case “it may reasonably be
considered that the transaction would not result directly or indirectly in a
misuse . . . or an abuse . . .” under s. 245(4) .  73                              
We are of the view that the appellant’s arguments do not reflect a
proper interpretation of the GAAR and that the respondent’s position should
prevail.  We are led to this conclusion by a textual, contextual and purposive
interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act .  74                              
Textually, the CCA provisions use “cost” in the well-established sense
of the amount paid to acquire the assets.  Contextually, other provisions of
the Act support this interpretation.  Finally, the purpose of the CCA
provisions of the Act, as applied to sale-leaseback transactions, was, as found
by the Tax Court judge, to permit deduction of CCA based on the cost of the
assets acquired.  This purpose emerges clearly from the scheme of the CCA provisions
within the Act as a whole. The appellant’s argument was not that the purpose of
these provisions was unclear, but rather that the GAAR ought to override their
accepted purpose and effect, for reasons external to the provisions themselves.  75                              
The appellant suggests that the usual result of the CCA provisions of
the Act should be overridden in the absence of real financial risk or “economic
cost” in the transaction.  However, this suggestion distorts the purpose of the
CCA provisions by reducing them to apply only when sums of money are at
economic risk.  The applicable CCA provisions of the Act do not refer to
economic risk.  They refer only to “cost”.  Where Parliament wanted to
introduce economic risk into the meaning of cost related to CCA provisions, it
did so expressly, as, for instance, in s. 13(7.1) and (7.2) of the Act, which
makes adjustments to the cost of depreciable property when a taxpayer receives
government assistance.   “Cost” in the context of CCA is a well-understood
legal concept.  It has been carefully defined by the Act and the
jurisprudence.  Like the Tax Court judge, we see nothing in the GAAR or the
object of the CCA provisions that permits us to rewrite them to interpret
“cost” to mean “amount economically at risk” in the applicable provisions.  To
do so would be to invite inconsistent results.  The result would vary with the
degree of risk in each case.  This would offend the goal of the Act to provide
sufficient certainty and predictability to permit taxpayers to intelligently
order their affairs.  For all these reasons, we agree with the Tax Court
judge’s conclusion that the “cost” was $120 million, not zero as argued by the
appellant.  76                              
The appellant’s submissions on this point amount to a narrow consideration
of the “economic substance” of the transaction, viewed in isolation from a
textual, contextual and purposive interpretation of the CCA provisions.  It did
not focus on the purpose of the CCA provisions read in the context of the Act
as a whole, to determine whether the tax benefit fell outside the object,
spirit or purpose of the relevant provisions.  Instead, it simply argued that
since there was (as it alleged) no “real economic cost”, the GAAR must apply. 
As discussed earlier, the application of the GAAR is a complex matter of
statutory interpretation in which the object, spirit and purpose of the
provisions giving rise to the tax benefit are assessed in light of the
requirements and wording of the GAAR.  While the “economic substance” of the
transaction may be relevant at various stages of the analysis, this expression
has little meaning in isolation from the proper interpretation of specific
provisions of the Act.  Any “economic substance” must be considered in relation
to the proper interpretation of the specific provisions that are relied upon
for the tax benefit.  77                              
The appellant originally suggested that the GAAR should be used to
override the usual effect of the CCA provisions for a second reason — namely
that the relationships and transactions that are expressed in the documents are
abusive of the provisions of the Income Tax Act  and should be set
aside.  It properly abandoned this argument and the submission that the
transaction was a sham before the Federal Court of Appeal.  Here the documents
detailing the transaction left no uncertainty as to the relationships between
the parties.  CTMC paid $120 million to TLI for the equipment, partly with
borrowed funds and partly with its own money.  Having become the owner of the
equipment, it leased it to MAIL.  MAIL then subleased it back to the vendor,
TLI.  The relationships between the parties as expressed in the relevant
documentation were not superfluous elements; they were the very essence of the
transaction.  78                              
As the Tax Court judge concluded, under the CCA scheme, “[l]eases of
such [exempt] properties will continue to be viewed as acceptable means of
providing lower cost financing” (para. 67).  TLI’s use of the money ultimately
reduced the risk, but a company in the financing business is expected to do
what it can to reduce risk.  Therefore, the way the borrowed money was used
provided no grounds for concluding that there was abusive tax avoidance.  The
Tax Court judge, after considering all the circumstances, found that the
transaction was not so dissimilar from an ordinary sale-leaseback to take it
outside the object, spirit or purpose of the relevant CCA provisions of the Act
and Regulations.  79                              
In determining the result in this appeal, the Tax Court judge’s
conclusions on matters of fact should not be displaced provided that they are
based on the correct legal analysis and find support in the evidence.  80                              
The Tax Court judge’s analysis on the issue of abuse under s. 245(4)  is
largely consistent with the approach to the application of the GAAR we have
adopted.  He rejected the two-stage overriding-policy approach to abuse and
misuse.  He went on to inquire into the policy or purpose underlying the CCA
treatment in sale-leaseback arrangements.  Construing the CCA provisions as a
whole, he rejected the submission that “cost” in the relevant provisions of the
Act should be reread as “money at risk”, and he also rejected the argument that
the “economic substance” of the transaction determined that there was abusive
tax avoidance.   He conducted a detailed analysis of the transactions to
determine whether they fell within the object, spirit or purpose of the CCA
provisions.  In the end, he concluded that a tax benefit was consistent with
the object, spirit and purpose of the CCA provisions and held that the GAAR
could not apply to disallow the tax benefit.  These conclusions were based on a
correct view of the law and were grounded in the evidence.  They should be
confirmed.  7.      Conclusion  81                              
We would dismiss the appeal with costs.  APPENDIX  I.                 The following parties weave
through the multiple transactions at one point or another:  Canada Trustco Mortgage Company (“CTMC” or “Purchaser” or “Lessor” or
“Borrower”), respondent, was a large diversified financial institution carrying
on business in Canada.  Royal Bank of Canada (Canadian branch) (“RBC” or “Lender”).  Transamerica Leasing Inc. (“TLI” or “Vendor” or “Sublessee”), a
corporation in the United States.  Maple Assets Investments Limited (“MAIL” or “Lessee” or “Sublessor”), a
limited liability company incorporated under the laws of England.  Maple Assets Charitable Trust (“MACT” or “Trust”), constituted by an
instrument of trust dated December 17, 1996, owns 100 percent of the shares in
MAIL.  Royal Bank of Canada Trust Company (Jersey) Limited (“RBC Jersey” or
“Trustee”) is the trustee of MACT and is a wholly owned subsidiary of RBC,
incorporated in Jersey.  Royal Bank of Canada Trust Corporation Limited (“RBCTC” or “Manager”),
a company incorporated in England, undertook to manage and fulfil the affairs
and obligations of MAIL under the relevant transactions and to provide the
directors and officers of MAIL.  Transamerica Finance Corporation (“TFC” or “Guarantor”), the parent
corporation of TLI, who guaranteed to MAIL the performance of all TLI’s
obligations under the sublease agreement and to CTMC all TLI’s obligations
under the “Equipment Purchase Agreement”.  Macquarie Corporate Finance (USA) Inc. (“Lease Arranger”). II.                CTMC held as part of its ongoing
business a portfolio of loans and leases to generally larger corporations and
government agencies.  CTMC testified that it was looking for a leasing
arrangement in the range of $100 million.  It specified the type of equipment
(long-term assets that were easy to value, such as tractors or trailers), the
duration of the lease and the strength of the proposed lessee.  The structure
of the leasing arrangement was left to the Lease Arranger.  The trailers
remained in the possession of TLI and CTMC continued to own the trailers, to
lease them out, and to earn income from them.  CTMC previously entered into
similar arrangements to the one implemented in this case. The Lease Arranger
arranged the TLI deal which was approved by CTMC’s Board of Directors.  The key
transactions proceeded as follows:  The
Purchase and Sale of the Trailers  III.               On December 17, 1996, CTMC and
TLI entered into an agreement for the purchase and sale of trailers at a fair
market value of $120 million.  TLI agreed to sell and CTMC agreed to purchase
the trailers absolutely and ownership in the trailers passed from TLI to CTMC.  IV.              On December 17, 1996, for
administrative convenience, CTMC appointed TLI as trustee and agent of CTMC to
hold in TLI’s name, the certificate of title, certificate of ownership,
registration and like documentation in respect of the trailers.  Lease of
the Trailers to MAIL and the Option to Purchase V.                The terms of the Lease between
CTMC and MAIL included the following:  1.    the term was for an initial period ending
December 1, 2014;  2.    the rent payments under the Lease were based
upon an effective interest rate of 8.5 percent;  3.    MAIL, as lessee, was required to make
semi-annual payments to CTMC; and  4.    MAIL was provided with an option to purchase
the trailers, $84 million being the First Option Value on December 1, 2005 and
another option exercisable at the fair market value on December 1, 2014.  Sublease of
the Trailers to TLI  VI.              Most of the terms of the Sublease
to TLI are similar to those in the Lease to MAIL.  The Sublease provided TLI
with purchase options similar to those provided to MAIL.  Security
for the Sublease  VII.             On December 17, 1996, pursuant to
the terms of the Sublease, TLI prepaid all amounts due to MAIL under the
Sublease (approximately $120 million).  As a result of the prepayment, TLI had
no ongoing Sublease payment obligations and there was no credit risk to MAIL
under the terms of the Sublease.  TLI maintained certain obligations with
respect to indemnities and early termination.  TLI retained a net present value
benefit of 3.35 percent of the cost of the trailers being the difference between
the payment TLI received from CTMC for the sale of the trailers and the
prepayment of rent TLI paid to MAIL.  Security
for the Lease  VIII.            On December 17, 1996, MAIL applied
the prepayment it received from TLI as follows:  1.    MAIL placed on deposit with the RBC an
amount equal to the Loan (approximately $100 million); and  2.    MAIL paid the balance of the prepayment
(approximately $20 million) to RBC Jersey on the condition that RBC Jersey use
these funds to purchase a Government of Ontario Bond (“Bond”), maturing on
December 1, 2005.  IX.              On December 17, 1996, the Bond was
pledged to CTMC as security for MAIL’s obligation to pay the Purchase Option
Payments or the Termination Values under the Lease.  The risk of the inability
of MAIL to pay the First Option Value was removed by the acquisition of the
Bond and the provision to CTMC of a security interest in the Bond.  Security
for the Loan  X.                On December 17, 1996, CTMC
assigned to RBC the rent payments owed to CTMC from MAIL under the Lease.  CTMC
also provided MAIL with an irrevocable instruction to pay the assigned rent
payments to RBC such that RBC would apply the rent payments directly to the
installment payments due by CTMC to RBC under the terms of the Loan Agreement. 
RBC’s recourse under the Loan was limited to the rent payments assigned to it
by CTMC.  XI.              The rent payments under the Lease
and a portion of the First Option Value would be applied to pay off the RBC
loan and the remainder of the purchase option price would be covered by the
Bond.  The Effect
of Non-Recourse Debt on Regulatory Capital Requirements  XII.             The use of non-recourse debt to
finance the purchase of the trailers significantly improved CTMC’s management
of regulatory capital requirements.  Guarantees  XIII.            On December 18, 1996, TFC, the
parent corporation of TLI, unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed to MAIL
and to CTMC the performance of TLI’s obligations under the relevant
transactions.  Reversibility
of the Transactions  XIV.            The transactions in issue could be
unwound if there were adverse changes affecting CTMC.  Return on
Investment  XV.             CTMC would realize a before-tax
return of approximately $8.5 million from the transactions.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellant:  Deputy Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Osler, Hoskin &
Harcourt, Toronto.   