 Canderel Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 147  Canderel Limited         Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Canderel Ltd. v. Canada  File No.:  24663.  1997:  December 2; 1998:  February 12.  Present:  Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci, Major and Bastarache JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal   Canderel, a developer of
commercial real estate, deducted from its income for the 1986 taxation year
tenant inducement payments (TIPs) totalling just over $4 million.  The TIPs 
had been made in response to a pressing need to attract tenants in an
increasingly competitive rental market, a need which was intensified by certain
conditions imposed upon the financing of the rental project.  For financial
accounting purposes, Canderel treated the TIPs as capitalized, but opted to
deduct the entire amount from taxable income in 1986, the year in which they
were paid.  The deduction was disallowed by the Minister of National Revenue
(the “Minister”) in a
reassessment and Canderel appealed to the Tax Court of Canada.  The Tax Court
allowed the appeal, but this decision was overturned on further appeal by the
Minister to the Federal Court of Appeal.  At issue on this appeal was whether
the TIPs were deductible from income entirely in the year in which they were
incurred or whether the Minister of National Revenue was entitled to insist
that they be amortized over the terms of the leases to which they related.  To
answer this question, it was first necessary to examine the fundamental
principles of profit computation under the Income Tax Act.  Held: The appeal should be allowed.  The determination of profit
is a question of law.  The profit of a business for a taxation year is to be
determined by setting against the revenues from the business for that year the
expenses incurred in earning said income.  In seeking to ascertain profit, the
goal is to obtain an accurate picture of the taxpayer’s profit for the given year.  In
ascertaining profit, the taxpayer is free to adopt any method which is not
inconsistent with: (a) the provisions of the Income Tax Act; (b)
established case law principles or “rules of law”; and (c) well-accepted business
principles.  Well-accepted business principles, which include but are not
limited to the formal codification found in generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP), are not rules of law but interpretive aids.  They are
non-legal tools, external to the legal determination of profit, whereas the
provisions of the Act and other established rules of law form its very
foundation.  To the extent that well-accepted business principles may influence
the calculation of income, they will do so only on a case-by-case basis,
depending on the facts of the taxpayer’s financial situation, and only for the
purpose of achieving an accurate picture of profit.  It is not for the court to
decide that one such principle is paramount, or applicable to the subordination
of all others, by deeming it a rule of law.  That is exclusively within the
province of Parliament.  On reassessment, once the
taxpayer has shown that he has provided an accurate picture of income for the
year which is consistent with the Act, the case law, and well-accepted business
principles, the onus shifts to the Minister to show either that the figure
provided does not represent an accurate picture, or that another method of
computation would provide a more accurate picture.  If neither of these is
established, then the Minister is not entitled to insist that one method be
employed over another, equally supported method.  Canderel’s method of
income calculation provided an accurate picture of its income for the year in
question.  It was not inconsistent with any provision of the Income Tax Act
or other rule of law.  The accounting evidence disclosed that  GAAP, at the
time of the payments, allowed for various alternative and acceptable methods of
accounting for TIPs and endorsed the options contended for by both parties.  No
specific conclusion could be drawn as to which method was preferable in terms
of yielding the more accurate picture of Canderel’s income.  The payments were found at
trial to have yielded some benefits, including the generating of rental
revenues, that would be realized over a period of years, and others, such as
the satisfaction of interim financing requirements, that were immediately
realized in the year the payments were made.  No specific legal formula,
however, exists for apportioning the expenses among the various benefits and
such a device would have to be created by statute.  The fact that the payments
were amortized for financial accounting purposes does not mean that they must
be similarly amortized for taxation purposes because the two portrayals of
profit are substantially different in nature and purpose.   The TIPs were not principally referable to any
particular items of income.  Since they qualified as running expenses, to which
the matching principle does not apply, they could be deducted entirely in the
year in which they were incurred and therefore did not need to be amortized
over the terms of the leases which they induced.  Cases Cited  Considered:  Symes
v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695; West Kootenay Power and Light Co. v.
Canada, [1992] 1 F.C. 732; Friesen v. Canada, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 103; referred
to:  Toronto College Park Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 183, and
at trial (1993), 94 D.T.C. 6172; Ikea Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R.
196; Vallambrosa Rubber Co. v. Farmer (1910), 5 T.C. 529; Naval
Colliery Co. v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue (1928), 12 T.C. 1017; Oxford
Shopping Centres Ltd. v. The Queen, 79 D.T.C. 5458; Cummings v. The
Queen, 81 D.T.C. 5207; Neonex International Ltd. v. The Queen, 78
D.T.C. 6339; Mattabi Mines Ltd. v. Ontario (Minister of Revenue), [1988]
2 S.C.R. 175;  M.N.R. v. Tower Investment Inc., [1972] F.C. 454;
Maritime Telegraph and Telephone Co. v. The Queen, 92 D.T.C. 6191; Friedberg
v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 285; Commissioners of Inland Revenue v.
Gardner Mountain & D’Ambrumenil, Ltd. (1947), 29 T.C. 69; M.N.R. v.
Irwin, [1964] S.C.R. 662; Associated Investors of Canada Ltd. v. M.N.R.,
[1967] 2 Ex. C.R. 96; Royal Bank of Canada  v. Sparrow Electric Corp.,
[1997] 1 S.C.R. 411; M.N.R. v. Canadian Glassine Co., [1976] 2
F.C. 517; Johnston v. M.N.R., [1948] S.C.R. 486.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income
Tax Act, S.C.
1970-71-72, c. 63, ss. 9(1), 18(1)(a), (9) [ad. 1980-81-82-83, c. 48, s.
9],  (a) [ad. idem], (b) [ad. idem].  Authors Cited  Hogg, Peter W., and Joanne E.
Magee.  Principles of Canadian Income Tax Law, 2nd ed. Scarborough,
Ont.: Carswell, 1997.  McDonnell, T. E.  “Running
Headlong into the GAAP (Again)” (1995), 43 Can. Tax J. 738.  Thomas, Richard B.  “The Matching
Principle:  Legal Principle or a Concept?” (1996), 44 Can. Tax J. 1693.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal
[1995] 2 F.C. 232, 95 D.T.C. 5101, [1995] 2 C.T.C. 22, 179 N.R. 134, [1995]
F.C.J. No. 221 (QL), allowing an appeal from a judgment of Brulé J., 94 D.T.C.
1133, [1994] 1 C.T.C. 2336, [1994] T.C.J. No. 7 (QL).  Appeal allowed.  Guy Du Pont and Samuel
Minzberg, for the appellant.  Roger Taylor and J.
S. Gill, for the respondent.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Iacobucci J. -- In a
narrow sense, this appeal raises one issue: how is a taxpayer to treat a
payment made to a prospective tenant for the purpose of inducing that tenant to
lease space in the taxpayer’s premises?  More specifically, is the expenditure,
commonly referred to as a tenant inducement payment (“TIP”), to be deducted
from income entirely in the year in which it was made, or is it to be amortized
over the term of the lease to which it relates?  2                                  
More broadly, however, this Court is required to revisit the fundamental
concept of profit computation for income tax purposes.  The appeal raises
serious questions about the ability of the taxpayer to calculate his or her
income in accordance with well-accepted principles of business practice and
with the provisions of the Income Tax Act, as interpreted by the
courts.  In the absence of statutory provisions or overriding legal principles
to the contrary, is the Minister of National Revenue entitled to insist on a
particular method of profit computation?  Put another way, what is the
analytical framework within which taxpayers can compute, and the Minister can
dispute, profit?  3                                  
This appeal was heard along with the appeals in Toronto College Park
Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 183, and Ikea Ltd. v.
Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 196, reasons for which are being released
simultaneously herewith.  I.  Facts  4                                  
The following summary of facts is taken substantially from the
comprehensive factual summary of the trial judge, Brulé J., in the Tax Court of
Canada.  5                                  
In 1984, the appellant, Canderel Limited (“Canderel”), a company engaged
in the development and management of commercial real estate, entered into an
agreement with Mount-Batten Properties Limited to develop a commercial office
development which eventually became Churchill Office Park (“COP”).  The
development was to be located in west-end Ottawa, where rental rates were
generally around 30 percent  lower than in downtown Ottawa.  The project was
part of a general business strategy in the area to provide private sector
buildings and thereby centralize an area of business outside the downtown
core.  It was anticipated that lower rents and property taxes would attract
tenants from downtown.  6                                  
The duties assumed by Canderel in connection with the development of the
project were wide-ranging, and included marketing, advertising, and negotiation
of leases (subject to written approval and execution by the owners), among
other things.  Part of Canderel’s development fee was contingent upon 90
percent leasing.  A separate agreement provided for Canderel to serve as
property manager as well, and among its managerial duties was the ongoing
negotiation and renewal of leases.  7                                  
The projects in which Canderel participated were generally financed with
mortgages to minimize equity requirements.  Because the co-venturers did not
supplement the cash flow of less successful projects, each project was required
to succeed on its own merits and consequently, an early positive cash flow was
imperative.  The key to the success of a project, therefore, was leasing
velocity.  COP was no exception to this rule.  8                                  
In a document entitled “Executive Summary of Carling Churchill Project”,
dated January 18, 1984, prepared by Canderel and used to create and administer
a construction budget by allocating projected expenses and costs, a “downside”
view of capitalized losses by velocity of lease-up was projected.  A total
capitalized loss of $2,034,604 for the first two years was projected, and an
allowance for this loss was accordingly made.  The estimated time for the
project to break even was in the ninth to tenth month of the second year.  9                                  
For the development stage of the project, short-term “bridge financing”
was arranged in the form of what essentially amounted to a demand loan. 
Jonathan Wener, the sole owner of Canderel, estimated that once the building
was 75 percent to 85 percent leased, permanent financing would be obtainable,
but testified at trial that if it had taken more than three years to obtain
permanent financing, the co-venture would have risked seizure of the debt.  10                              
When construction of COP was commenced, there were no commitments to
lease, owing to an aberration in the Ottawa market whereby prospective tenants
generally required substantial completion before leasing.  However, market
surveys conducted by Royal LePage and verified by Canderel indicated that there
was only a 1.67 percent vacancy in downtown Ottawa of the class of space
offered by COP for the 1983 market, and a 3.42 percent  vacancy in 1982.  The
short supply of space in the downtown area at the time construction commenced
led Canderel to anticipate that the project would reach its break-even point by
the time it opened.  However, throughout construction and at completion, the
amount of space available downtown was rising.  Six to eight months into
construction, Canderel realized that there were problems with the market: by
1984, the vacancy rate had risen to 11.2 percent and continued to rise,
reaching 14 percent in 1986.  When COP opened in June, 1985, only 2.3 percent
of the building was leased.  Several new office developments, both downtown and
in the west end, created intense competition for tenants, and the absorption by
the west end of downtown clients therefore came later than Canderel had
initially expected.  11                              
In response to these developments, and to its intense need to attract
tenants to its new complex, Canderel decided to reallocate budgeted losses to
tenant inducement payments.  A leasing blitz was commenced, and whereas about
$2 million had initially been allocated to TIPs, just over $4 million was in
fact paid out in the end.  This tactic proved successful, because by the end of
June, 1986, COP was 59 percent leased, and by June, 1987, it was 85 percent
leased.  Had Canderel failed to secure tenants at project completion or shortly
thereafter, several adverse consequences could have occurred with respect to
the interim financing provided by the Toronto Dominion Bank.  The operating and
financing costs of approximately $2.9 million might have had to be borne
entirely by the joint venturers, permanent financing would not likely have been
obtained, and the project could have become known as not having gained market
acceptance, which would have reduced the likelihood of attracting stable
tenants.  Instead, on June 17, 1989, the project received a permanent financing
commitment from Sunlife of Canada.  12                              
In the auditor’s report of January, 1986, an operating loss of $1,219,000
was shown, reflecting in part the treatment of the TIPs as capitalized.  By
1986, $4 million had been capitalized and amortized, and income before
amortization was minus $800,000.  For income tax purposes, however, Canderel
adopted a different approach, opting to deduct the TIPs from income entirely in
1986, the year in which they were paid.  The deduction was disallowed by the
Minister of National Revenue (the “Minister”) in a reassessment, and Canderel
appealed to the Tax Court of Canada.  The Tax Court allowed the appeal, but
this decision was overturned on further appeal by the Minister to the Federal
Court of Appeal.  II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  13                              
Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (now R.S.C., 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .))  9. (1)   Subject to
this Part, a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a business or property
is his profit therefrom for the year.  18. (1)  In computing the income of a
taxpayer from a business or property no deduction shall be made in respect of  (a) an outlay or expense except to the extent that it was made
or incurred by the taxpayer for the purpose of gaining or producing income from
the business or property;                                                                     .
. .  (9) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act,  (a) in computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from a
business or property (other than income from a business computed in accordance
with the method authorized by subsection 28(1)), no deduction shall be made in
respect of an outlay or expense to the extent that it can reasonably be
regarded as having been made or incurred  (i)     as consideration for services to be rendered after the end of
the year, (ii)    as, on account or in lieu of payment of, or in satisfaction of,
interest, taxes ..., rent or royalty in respect of a period after the end of
the year, or  (iii)    as consideration for insurance in respect of a period after
the end of the year ...;  (b) such portion of each outlay or expense made or incurred as
would, but for paragraph (a), have been deductible in computing a
taxpayer’s income for a taxation year shall be deductible in computing his
income for the subsequent year to which it can reasonably be considered to
relate. . . .  III.  Judicial History  (1)  Tax Court of Canada (Brulé J.), 94
D.T.C. 1133  14                              
Brulé J. began by noting that it has generally been held that an expense
is deductible although it may not give rise to any directly resulting income: Vallambrosa
Rubber Co. v. Farmer (1910), 5 T.C. 529 (Ct. of Sess.).  However, he
recognized that the instant case turned not on deductibility itself but on the
timing of the deduction, and found that this required a determination of
whether the TIPs were running expenses and whether or not there should have
been “matching” of the expense and revenue.  He relied on Naval Colliery Co.
v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue (1928), 12 T.C. 1017 (H.L.), and Oxford
Shopping Centres Ltd. v. The Queen, 79 D.T.C. 5458 (F.C.T.D.), for the
proposition that running expenses are those which cannot be linked directly to
any corresponding items of revenue, and therefore are not matched to revenue
but are deductible in full in the year incurred.  That is, the “matching
principle” of accounting does not apply to such expenses.  15                              
Relying on the case of Cummings v. The Queen, 81 D.T.C. 5207, and
the interpretation thereof in the trial judgment in Toronto College Park
Ltd. v. Canada (a companion case to the instant appeal), Brulé J. found
that in certain cases, TIPs may be classified as running expenses, which in
some cases may be deducted in the year of the expense.  Further, he found that
the matching principle had been held not to apply to such expenses.  To Brulé
J., these cases were determinative, such that the TIPs here at issue qualified
as running expenses.  16                              
Brulé J. rejected the Minister’s argument that the TIPs were incurred
for the purpose of earning income over the whole terms of the leases and
therefore, to arrive at true profits, each lease should have the TIPs amortized
over its terms.  He noted that in support of this argument the Minister had
relied on Neonex International Ltd. v. The Queen, 78
D.T.C. 6339 (F.C.), but that Neonex did not deal with a running expense
situation and was therefore inapplicable.  He relied in this regard (at p.
1141) on the judgment of this Court in Symes v. Canada,
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 695, at p. 733, where the words of Wilson J. in Mattabi
Mines Ltd. v. Ontario (Minister of Revenue), [1988] 2 S.C.R.
175, at p. 189, were interpreted as “rejecting both the need for a causal
connection between a particular expenditure and a particular receipt, and the
suggestion that a receipt must arise in the same year as an expenditure is
incurred”.  17                              
In response to the Minister’s argument that matching should have been
employed in this case because it gave a better picture of Canderel’s true
income, Brulé J. observed that although accounting theory may be helpful in
considering the appropriate treatment of income for tax purposes, it is not
determinative.  He agreed with the submission by Canderel, relying on Oxford
Shopping Centres, supra, that even if the law in many cases seemed
to require matching, the expenses in this case should be matched against
current benefits, as was in fact done here, since the use of the matching
principle in cases such as M.N.R. v. Tower Investment Inc.,
[1972] F.C. 454 (T.D.), gave rise to no general principle of law.  18                              
Brulé J. found that the benefits generated by the TIPs for Canderel
included (1) the prevention of a “hole in income” caused by maintaining a
vacant building; (2) the satisfaction of its interim financing requirements and
the ability to obtain permanent financing; (3) the ability to maintain its
market position and reputation; and (4) the ability to earn revenues through
rental, management, and development fees.  Therefore, he concluded (at p. 1142)
that “the expenses deducted by the Appellant were running expenses, that
matching is not in this case the appropriate method for tax purposes, and that
the Appellant should be allowed to adopt the expensing method”.  Noting also
that “there is no requirement under the law for consistency in accounting
methods between financial statements and income tax calculation”, Brulé J.
allowed the appeal and referred the matter back to the Minister for
reconsideration and reassessment in accordance with the law as set out in his
reasons.  (2)  Federal
Court of Appeal, [1995] 2 F.C. 232  (a)  Reasons of Stone J.A., for the majority  19                              
Stone J.A. began by asserting at p. 236 that “the matching principle of
accounting has, at least in this Court, been elevated to the status of a legal
principle”.  He found support for this position in the Court’s decision in
West Kootenay Power and Light Co. v. Canada, [1992] 1 F.C. 732 (C.A.),
where MacGuigan J.A. stated at p. 745:  The approved principle is that whichever method presents the “truer
picture” of a taxpayer’s revenue, which more fairly and accurately portrays
income, and which “matches” revenue and expenditure, if one method does, is the
one that must be followed.  While
acknowledging that West Kootenay was concerned with the time in which to
report earned but unbilled income, Stone J.A. saw no reason to limit its
application to that scenario and found that it should also apply when the issue
is whether a taxpayer is required to match expenditures against revenue in
computing profit for tax purposes.  20                              
Stone J.A. agreed with the trial judge that “running expenses” need not
be matched with corresponding items of revenue for tax purposes, but found that
the TIPs here at issue did not fit the classical description of “running
expenses” in Naval Colliery, supra.  He recognized, at pp. 237-38,
that it could be argued that the TIPs were “in the nature of running expenses
on the basis that they represented a cost of doing business in the 1986
taxation year and also that [Canderel] would likely have faced significant
financial disadvantages if they had not been laid out and did achieve
significant financial advantages by laying them out”.  However, he found that
the expenditures were not incurred in earning income solely in 1986, but in all
of the years during which the leases were to run.  21                              
Moreover, Stone J.A. found that the present case was not analogous to Oxford
Shopping Centres, supra, as in that case it was not possible to
match the expenses with particular items of revenue.  While acknowledging that
in Cummings, supra, Heald J.A. was prepared in obiter to
characterize lease pick-up expenses as running expenses, Stone J.A. was of the
opinion that this too assumed that the expenses in question could not be
allocated directly to corresponding revenue.  In the present case, because the
TIPs could be matched with revenue from the respective leases in accordance
with the matching principle, and were in fact so matched for accounting
purposes, Stone J.A. (Robertson J.A. concurring) would have allowed the appeal.  (b)  Concurring reasons of Desjardins J.A. 22                              
Desjardins J.A. began with a brief discussion, based largely on that in Symes,
supra, of the limited role to be played by generally accepted accounting
principles (“GAAP”) in the determination of profit for tax purposes.  She found
at p. 244 that the trial judge erred in applying to the case at bar the
interpretation in Symes of Wilson J.’s rejection in Mattabi Mines,
supra, of “both the need for a causal connection between a particular
expenditure and a particular receipt, and the suggestion that a receipt must
arise in the same year as an expenditure is incurred”, as Symes was not
concerned with the timing of a deduction, which was the only issue in the case
at bar.  23                              
Desjardins J.A. turned next to the cases relied upon by the Minister in
support of the proposition that where there are two methods acceptable both
under GAAP and for tax purposes, the court will prefer the one that results in
a “truer picture” of the taxpayer’s profit, including West Kootenay, supra, 
Maritime Telegraph and Telephone Co. v. The Queen,  92 D.T.C.
6191, and Friedberg v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 285.  She concluded at p.
256 that “[i]n essence, what the courts have been looking for is the true
realized gains and losses of a taxpayer in the relevant taxation year”, and
that to determine whether matching is the appropriate method in any given case
would require an analysis of the specific facts in light of the cases in which
the matching principle had been specifically developed.  In this connection,
she relied on Symes for the proposition that the determination of profit
for tax purposes is a question of law, to be determined in accordance with
“well accepted principles of business (or accounting) practice” (p. 257),
unless they run counter to an express statutory provision or a principle of tax
law.  24                              
Thus, Desjardins J.A. identified the key question as assessing which
method most accurately shows the taxpayer’s actual profit.  After reviewing Oxford
Shopping Centres, supra, in which the taxpayer’s disbursement was
considered to be a running expense and the matching principle therefore did not
apply, even though amortization was available at the taxpayer’s option and
would have provided a more accurate picture of income for the particular year,
she found that where an expense could be related to a particular item of
income, the matching principle would apply.  She concluded, at p. 264,  that
TIPs are “clearly” related to particular items of income, as there is a “direct
contractual relationship between the TIP and the stream of revenues gained over
the period of the lease”. Therefore, in her view at p. 264, “[m]atching of TIPs
is compulsory”.  25                              
Canderel had argued that the foundation on which rests the compulsory
matching of expenses when related to a particular item of income, namely  Commissioners
of Inland Revenue v. Gardner Mountain & D’Ambrumenil, Ltd.
(1947), 29 T.C. 69 (H.L.), was inapplicable because it dealt with costs of
inventory, for which special rules have developed.  Desjardins J.A. disagreed,
noting that Viscount Simon’s words in that case were directed to both “services
completely rendered or goods supplied”, and that Canderel was in a type of
service industry, namely the rental of commercial premises.  Therefore, she
held that the TIPs were to be deducted as the services were rendered -- that
is, over the period of the lease.  She distinguished Vallambrosa Rubber,
supra, and Naval Colliery, supra, as cases in which the
expenses in question truly could not be matched to specific items of revenue. 
Further, she found that because timing was not raised in Cummings, supra,
which dealt only with whether lease pick-up expenses were on account of income
or capital, the obiter comments in that case concerning TIPs were
neither binding nor persuasive.  26                              
Therefore, Desjardins J.A. was in agreement with the majority that the
TIPs paid by Canderel in 1986 were to be amortized over the life of the
respective leases, and that such would be (at p. 270) “the only method
acceptable for income tax purposes”.  IV.  Issues  27                              
As already stated, this appeal raises only one direct issue: whether
tenant inducement payments are deductible from income entirely in the year in
which they are incurred, or whether the Minister of National Revenue is
entitled to insist that they be amortized over the terms of the leases to which
they relate.  To answer this question, however, it will first be necessary to
examine the fundamental principles of profit computation under the Income
Tax Act.  V.  Analysis  (1)  General
Principles of Profit Computation  28                              
In the relatively recent case of Symes, supra, this Court
considered the general principles which govern the computation of profit for
income tax purposes. However, because some of the principles enunciated in Symes
may have been misinterpreted, I propose to review these general principles in
order to resolve the issue in this appeal and to clarify the critical issue of
profit computation for the purposes of the Income Tax Act.  (a)  The Interpretive Framework  29                              
It is appropriate to begin the consideration of profit with s. 9(1) of
the Act, which defines a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from a business
or property source as “his profit therefrom for the year”.  Significantly,
“profit” is not defined in s. 9(1) or anywhere else in the Act.  It seems to me
that this approach was a deliberate legislative choice, particularly given that
the Act contains exhaustive definitions of numerous other concepts and terms
with which it deals.  This choice reflects the reality that no single
definition can adequately apply to the millions of different taxpayers bound by
the Act.  Under our self-assessment system, each taxpayer must be able to
compute his or her income in such a way as to constitute an accurate picture of
his or her income situation, subject, of course, to express provisions in the Act
which require specific treatment of certain types of expenses or receipts.  30                              
What, then, is the true nature of “profit” for tax purposes?  While the
concept has been variously expressed, perhaps the clearest and most concise
articulation of the term is to be found in the oft-quoted decision of this
Court in M.N.R. v. Irwin, [1964] S.C.R. 662, at p. 664,
where profit in a year was taken to consist of “the difference between the
receipts from the trade or business during such year ... and the
expenditure laid out to earn those receipts” (emphasis in original).  This
definition was echoed by Jackett P. in Associated Investors of Canada Ltd.
v. M.N.R., [1967] 2 Ex. C.R. 96, where he stated at p. 102:  Ordinary commercial principles dictate, according to
the decisions, that the annual profit from a business must be ascertained by
setting against the revenues from the business for the year, the expenses
incurred in earning such revenues.  31                              
Accepting this fundamental definition, in Symes, supra, at
pp. 722-23, the majority made the following observations about the computation
of profit:  . . . the “profit” concept in s. 9(1) is inherently a net
concept which presupposes business expense deductions.  It is now generally
accepted that it is s. 9(1) which authorizes the deduction of business
expenses; the provisions of s. 18(1) are limiting provisions only.
. . .  Under s. 9(1), deductibility is ordinarily
considered as it was by Thorson P. in Royal Trust, [Royal Trust Co.
v. Minister of National Revenue, 57 D.T.C. 1055 (Ex. Ct.)] (at p.
1059):  ... the first approach to the question whether a particular
disbursement or expense was deductible for income tax purpose was to ascertain
whether its deduction was consistent with ordinary principles of commercial
trading or well accepted principles of business ... practice ...
(Emphasis added.)  Thus, in a deductibility analysis, one’s first recourse is to s. 9(1),
a section which embodies, as the trial judge suggested, a form of “business
test” for taxable profit.  This is a test which has been variously phrased.  As
the trial judge rightly noted, the determination of profit under s. 9(1) is a question
of law: Neonex International Ltd. v. The Queen.... 
Perhaps for this reason, and as Neonex itself impliedly suggests, courts
have been reluctant to posit a s. 9(1) test based upon “generally accepted
accounting principles” (G.A.A.P.)....  Any reference to G.A.A.P. connotes a
degree of control by professional accountants which is inconsistent with a legal
test for “profit” under s. 9(1).  Further, whereas an accountant questioning
the propriety of a deduction may be motivated by a desire to present an
appropriately conservative picture of current profitability, the Act is
motivated by a different purpose: the raising of public revenues.  For these
reasons, it is more appropriate in considering the s. 9(1) business test to
speak of “well accepted principles of business (or accounting) practice” or
“well accepted principles of commercial trading”.  [Emphasis in original.]  32                              
The great difficulty which seems to have plagued the courts in the
assessment of profit for income tax purposes bespeaks the need for as much
clarity as possible in formulating a legal test therefor.  The starting
proposition, of course, must be that the determination of profit under s. 9(1)
is a question of law, not of fact.  Its legal determinants are two in number:
first, any express provision of the Income Tax Act which dictates some
specific treatment to be given to particular types of expenditures or receipts,
including the general limitation expressed in s. 18(1)(a),  and second,
established rules of law resulting from judicial interpretation over the years
of these various provisions.  33                              
Beyond these parameters, any further tools of analysis which may provide
assistance in reaching a determination of profit are just that: interpretive
aids, and no more.  Into this category fall the “well-accepted principles of
business (or accounting) practice” which were mentioned in Symes, also
referred to as “ordinary commercial principles” or “well-accepted principles of
commercial trading”, among other terms.  A formal codification of these
principles is to be found in the “generally accepted accounting principles”
(“GAAP”) developed by the accounting profession for use in the preparation of
financial statements.  These principles are accepted by the accounting
profession as yielding accurate financial information about the subject of the
statements, and become “generally accepted” either by actually being followed
in a number of cases, by finding support in pronouncements of professional
bodies, by finding support in the writings of academics and others, or by more
than one of these methods: see Peter W. Hogg and Joanne E. Magee, Principles
of Canadian Income Tax Law (2nd ed. 1997), at pp. 180-81.  What must be
remembered, however, is that these are non-legal tools and as such are external
to the legal determination of profit, whereas the provisions of the Act and
other established rules of law form its very foundation.  34                              
That is not to minimize the key role played by such well-accepted
business principles (as I shall hereafter refer to them) in the
profit-computation process.  In Friesen v. Canada, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 103,
Major J. made the following observation at para. 41:  The Act does not define “profit” nor does it provide
any specific rules for the computation of profit.  Tax jurisprudence has
established that the determination of profit under s. 9(1) is a question of law
to be determined according to the business test of “well-accepted principles of
business (or accounting) practice” or “well-accepted principles of commercial
trading” except where these are inconsistent with the specific provisions of
the Income Tax Act. . . .  35                              
I think this statement aptly describes the proper relationship between
tax law and business principles.  In the absence of a statutory definition of
profit, it would be unwise for the law to eschew the valuable guidance offered
by well-established business principles.  Indeed, these principles will, more
often than not, constitute the very basis of the determination of profit. 
However, well-accepted business principles are not rules of law and thus a
given principle may not be applicable to every case.  More importantly, these
principles must necessarily take a subordinate position relative to the legal
rules which govern.  36                              
The reason for this is simple: generally speaking, well-accepted
business principles will have their roots in the methodology of financial
accounting, which, as was expressed in Symes, is motivated by factors
fundamentally different from taxation.  Moreover, financial accounting is
usually concerned with providing a comparative picture of profit from
year to year, and therefore strives for methodological consistency for the
benefit of the audience for whom the financial statements are prepared:
shareholders, investors, lenders, regulators, etc.  Tax computation, on the
other hand, is solely concerned with achieving an accurate picture of income
for each individual taxation year for the benefit of the taxpayer and the tax
collector.  Depending on the taxpayer’s commercial activity during a particular
year, the methodology used to calculate profit for tax purposes may be
substantially different from that employed in the previous year, which in turn
may be different from that which was employed the year before.  Therefore,
while financial accounting may, as a matter of fact, constitute an accurate
determinant of profit for some purposes, its application to the legal
question of profit is inherently limited.  Caution must be exercised when
applying accounting principles to legal questions.  37                              
I do not wish to be taken, however, as minimizing the role of GAAP in
the determination of profit for income tax purposes.  Some have inferred from
my reasons in Symes an intention that GAAP are to be rejected entirely:
see, for example, Hogg and Magee, supra, at pp. 185-87.  This is not
what I intended.  In fact, the better view is that GAAP will generally form the
very foundation of the “well-accepted business principles” applicable in
computing profit.  It is important, however, for the courts to avoid delegating
the criteria for the legal test of profit to the accounting profession,
and therefore a distinction must be maintained.  That is, while GAAP may more
often than not parallel the well-accepted business principles recognized by the
law, there may be occasions on which they will differ, and on such occasions
the latter must prevail: see, for example, Friedberg v. Canada, supra.  38                              
Moreover, there will, of course, be situations in which GAAP will offer
various acceptable options in the preparation of financial statements, and the
taxpayer will be free, for financial accounting purposes, to adopt whichever
option best suits his financial objectives at the given time.  In such cases,
GAAP will surely not be determinative as to the method by which an accurate
picture of profit may be obtained for taxation purposes, though it may still be
useful as a guide to the various acceptable methods of computation, one of
which may yield the appropriate result for taxation.  39                              
A good example of the relationship among the provisions of the Act, the
principles developed in the case law, and GAAP or well-accepted business
principles can be found in s. 18(9) of the Act, which requires the amortization
of certain prepaid expenses over the periods of time to which they relate.  It
is possible, although I express no specific opinion on this matter, that some
of these expenses could be treated otherwise for the purposes of GAAP or
business practice; perhaps they might be deducted entirely in the year
incurred, or even capitalized.  However, this possibility is negated for tax
purposes by their specific legislative treatment.  40                              
I pause here for a moment to distinguish the role of the courts in this
regard from that of Parliament.  Generally speaking, the courts are free, in
the absence of contrary legislation or established rules of law, to assess the
taxpayer’s computation of income in accordance with well-accepted business
principles.  Obviously, this will require an assessment in each case of which
of these principles apply to the particular circumstances which present
themselves.  However, it is not for the court to decide that one principle is
paramount, or applicable to the exclusion or subordination of all others by
saying that it has been elevated to the status of a rule of law which is to be
applied in all situations.  That is exclusively within the province of
Parliament, and the willingness of Parliament to exercise this power is
exemplified by s. 18(9) and by countless other codifications in the Act of what
would otherwise likely be considered well-accepted business principles: see Symes,
supra, at pp. 723-25.  41                              
For the court to usurp this inherent power of Parliament is rife with
unnecessary danger.  As was observed in Royal Bank of Canada v. Sparrow
Electric Corp., [1997] 1 S.C.R. 411, at para. 112:  All that is needed to effect the desired result is clear language of
that kind.  In the absence of such clear language, judicial innovation is
undesirable, both because the issue is policy charged and because a legislative
mandate is apt to be clearer than a rule whose precise bounds will become fixed
only as a result of expensive and lengthy litigation.  The law of
income tax is sufficiently complicated without unhelpful judicial incursions
into the realm of lawmaking.  As a matter of policy, and out of respect for the
proper role of the legislature, it is trite to say that the promulgation of new
rules of tax law must be left to Parliament.  As one eminent jurist of the United
States Supreme Court once observed, “we are a Supreme Court, not a Supreme
Legislature”.  42                              
Of course, this is distinct from the interpretation of such
rules, such as, for example, the elucidation of the otherwise undefined concept
of  “profit”, which is well within the jurisdiction of the courts.  Such
interpretive jurisprudence will fall within the category of “rules of law”
which, as a matter of course, will predominate over well-accepted business
principles.  However, when no specific legal rule has been developed, either in
the case law or under the Act, the taxpayer will be free to calculate his or
her income in accordance with well-accepted business principles, and to adopt
whichever of these is appropriate in the particular circumstances, is not inconsistent
with the law, and, as I shall elaborate upon below, yields an accurate picture
of his profit for the year.  The simple application by a court of one or
another well-accepted business principle to a particular case or cases,
moreover, will not ordinarily amount to the elevation of that principle to the
status of a “rule of law”.  In general, the Minister will not be entitled to
insist that one method supported by business practice and commercial principles
be employed over another, equally supported method, unless, as I will develop
below, the method chosen by the taxpayer fails to yield an accurate picture of
his or her income for the taxation year.  (b)  The Interpretive Goal: An Accurate Picture of Income  43                              
Having established an appropriate framework for analysis, I should now
like to discuss what exactly is the question that must be answered when
attempting to assess a taxpayer’s profit for tax purposes.  A good place to
begin is with the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in West Kootenay,
supra, where MacGuigan J.A. stated at p. 745:  The approved principle is that whichever method presents the “truer
picture” of a taxpayer’s revenue, which more fairly and accurately portrays
income, and which “matches” revenue and expenditure, if one method does, is the
one that must be followed.  44                              
In the court below, Stone J.A. took this passage as grounding his
conclusion that the matching principle of accounting has been elevated to a
rule of law.  Obviously, in light of my previous comments, I do not, with
respect, subscribe to that point of view.  To my mind, the significance of this
statement is to confirm a much sounder proposition: that the goal of the legal
test of “profit” should be to determine which method of accounting best depicts
the reality of the financial situation of the particular taxpayer.  If this is
accomplished by applying the matching principle, then so be it.  On the other
hand, if some other method is appropriate, is permissible under well-accepted
business principles, and is not prohibited either by the Act or by some
specific rule of law, then there is no principled basis by which the Minister
should be entitled to insist that the matching principle -- or any other
method, for that matter -- be employed.  MacGuigan J.A. in West Kootenay seemed
to advert to this notion at pp. 745-46, in the passage immediately following
the above-quoted portion:  The result often will not be different from what it
would be using a consistency principle, but the “truer picture” or “matching
approach” is not absolute in its effect, and requires a close look at the
facts of a taxpayer’s situation. [Emphasis added.]  45                              
As an aside, I would also observe that the compartmentalization of
income calculation has led to a process that is far more complicated than
necessary.  To attempt to achieve a useful picture of profit by reference only
to rigid categories of expenses -- running expenses, matchable expenses, etc.
-- can become a frustrating exercise in futility: see Richard B. Thomas, “The
Matching Principle: Legal Principle or a Concept?” (1996), 44 Can. Tax J.
1693.  Rather than trying to discern into which pigeonhole a particular income
expenditure falls, the taxpayer’s focus should be on attempting to portray his
or her income in the manner which best reflects his or her true financial
position for the year, that is, which gives an “accurate picture” of profit. 
To do otherwise is to lose sight of the taxation forest for the practice or
principle trees. In other words, the competing concepts of running expenses and
matching which appear to be at play in this appeal fall into the category of
well-accepted business principles, no more, no less.  They are simply
important  interpretive aids which may assist, but are not determinative, in
the illumination of an accurate picture of the taxpayer’s income.  46                              
This should not be taken as casting doubt upon those previous decisions
which have applied such well-accepted business principles to the computation of
profit, even where this might appear to have been the determining factor in the
end.  In Oxford Shopping Centres, supra, for example, an amount
paid by the taxpayer to the City of Calgary to effect a certain traffic
diversion for the benefit of its business was held to be a running expense.  In
his reasons, Thurlow A.C.J. (as he then was) held that the matching principle
did not apply to a running expense even though deducting the expense entirely
in the year incurred would distort the income for that particular year.  While
on first glance, this decision might appear to fly in the face of the “accurate
picture” principle, in my view, the facts of the case gave rise to a choice
between two difficult positions: either to permit the distortion of the
taxpayer’s income for a single year by allowing the immediate deduction of a
running expense, or to require the distortion of its income for a number of
years by forcing the arbitrary amortization of an expense which was not clearly
referable to any particular item of future revenue.  Given this choice, it is
apparent that Thurlow A.C.J. recognized that to apply the matching principle of
accounting, as a well-accepted business principle, not a rule of law,
would not have assisted in obtaining an accurate picture of the taxpayer’s
income.  Thus, he ruled it inapplicable to the circumstances of the case before
him while expressly adverting to the freedom of the taxpayer to so amortize in
appropriate cases, as had been held previously in Tower Investment,
supra, and in M.N.R. v. Canadian Glassine Co., [1976] 2 F.C. 517.  47                              
To my mind, this is an excellent example of the proper approach to be
taken to the computation of profit.  To the extent that they may be applicable
to particular circumstances, well-accepted business principles are to be
assessed and applied only on a case-by-case basis, and only for the purpose of
achieving an accurate picture of profit for the year in question for income tax
purposes.  In this light, I have no hesitation in finding that to the extent
that the majority decision of the Federal Court of Appeal was premised on the
view of the matching principle as a rule of law, it was clearly in error.  48                              
In reaching these conclusions, I am well aware of my remarks in Friesen,
supra, at para. 118, to the following effect:  The appellant’s interpretation would also undermine
the matching principle underpinning s. 9 of the Act: Neonex International
Ltd. v. The Queen . . . (for an affirmation of the importance of this
principle and an invalidation of an attempt to claim expenses in a year in
which they were not incurred); see also West Kootenay Power and Light Co.
v. Canada. . . .  This principle emphasizes that receipts and
expenditures which produce the net income are to be properly “matched” in the
same time period: [V. Krishna, The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax
(4th ed. 1993)], at p. 279.  The importance of the “match” flows from the
critical role timing considerations play in taxation matters.  49                              
While at first glance this statement might be taken to support the
recognition of the matching principle as a rule of law, such was not the true
meaning of these remarks.  Rather, I was simply acknowledging the general
principle that the computation of profit involves the offsetting of revenues
against the expenditures incurred in earning them.  This is hardly a novel
concept (see Irwin, supra, for example), and clearly goes to the
quest for an accurate picture of the taxpayer’s income.  In circumstances where
an expenditure is incurred principally for the specific purpose of earning a
discrete and identifiable item of revenue, it will generally yield a more
accurate picture of profit to deduct that expenditure from taxable income in
the year in which the revenue is realized.  However, it will always be a matter
of debate, in light of well-accepted business principles, whether a particular
expenditure was in fact made principally for this purpose, and whether it is
possible or appropriate to “match” the expenditure against some specific
revenue, either current or future.  Nothing in my remarks in Friesen
serves to cast doubt upon this fundamental premise.  50                              
It follows from all of this that in calculating his or her income for a
taxation year, the taxpayer must adopt a method of computation which is not
inconsistent with the Act or established rules of law, which is consistent with
well-accepted business principles, and which will yield an accurate picture of
his or her income for that year.  In the simplest cases, it will not even be
necessary to resort formally to the various well-accepted business principles,
as the simple formula by which revenues are set against the expenditures
incurred in earning them is always the basic determinant.  51                              
However, where the income picture is more complicated, as is frequently
the case, the taxpayer is free to employ whichever well-accepted business
principles will be most useful in depicting profit, provided again that the
method adopted is not inconsistent with the law.  As a general rule, and as I
have already stated, the Minister is in no position to insist on the
application of one principle or another, in the absence of some legal rule so
requiring, unless, as I shall discuss next, the application of an alternative
rule would yield a more accurate picture of income than that which was obtained
by the taxpayer.  52                              
Revenue Canada is free to indicate its disapproval of the taxpayer’s
chosen method of computation by means of assessment.  In Johnston v. M.N.R.,
[1948] S.C.R. 486, this Court held that the onus is on the taxpayer, in the
face of an assessment, to establish that the factual findings on which the
assessment is based are wrong.  However, to satisfy this onus where the dispute
is over the appropriate method of computation, the taxpayer need only show that
his or her income was calculated in a manner consistent with the foregoing
paragraph, that is, that the figure attained was in conformity with the
then-existing legal framework and represents an accurate picture of his or her
financial position for the year in question.  The onus then shifts to the
Minister to prove either that the figure does not constitute an accurate
picture of income or that some other method of computation would yield a more
accurate picture.  In so doing, however, I emphasize that the Minister is not
entitled to rely on particular well-accepted business principles as being inherently
preferable over others.  If the method chosen by the taxpayer is otherwise
acceptable by law and in accordance with such well-accepted principles, then it
is no answer for the Minister to say that other principles should have been
employed unless to do so would have yielded a more accurate picture of income.  53                              
The outlined framework for analysis is, of course, only as useful as its
application to actual cases.  Turning to the facts of this case will illustrate
how this principled approach to the computation of income is intended to
operate.  Before I do this, however, it may be both convenient and useful to
summarize the principles which I have set out above:  (1)       The determination of profit is a
question of law.  (2)       The profit of a business for a taxation
year is to be determined by setting against the revenues from the business for
that year the expenses incurred in earning said income: M.N.R. v. Irwin,
supra, Associated Investors, supra.  (3)       In seeking to ascertain profit, the goal
is to obtain an accurate picture of the taxpayer’s profit for the given year.  (4)       In ascertaining profit, the taxpayer is
free to adopt any method which is not inconsistent with  (a)  the provisions of the Income Tax Act;  (b) established case law principles or “rules of law”; and  (c) well-accepted business principles.  (5)       Well-accepted business principles, which
include but are not limited to the formal codification found in GAAP, are not
rules of law but interpretive aids.  To the extent that they may influence the
calculation of income, they will do so only on a case-by-case basis, depending
on the facts of the taxpayer’s financial situation.  (6)       On reassessment, once the taxpayer has
shown that he has provided an accurate picture of income for the year, which is
consistent with the Act, the case law, and well-accepted business principles,
the onus shifts to the Minister to show either that the  figure provided does
not represent an accurate picture, or that another method of computation would
provide a more accurate picture.  (2)  Application of General Principles to this Case  54                              
It is evident that the method of income calculation adopted by
Canderel in the instant case was not inconsistent with any provision of the Income
Tax Act or other rule of law.  The general income provision, s. 9(1),
provides no definition of “profit”, and no other section of the Act touches,
either directly or indirectly, upon the income treatment to be given TIPs. 
Section 18(9) of the Act does require the amortization of certain “prepaid
expenses”, but TIPs are not included in this provision.  55                              
To my mind, this exclusion not only exempts TIPs from any statutory
amortization requirement, but also provides a valuable hint as to Parliament’s
lack of intention to require such treatment of TIPs.  I do not mean to suggest
that the expressio unius maxim of statutory interpretation applies here,
as s. 18(9) certainly does not purport to be an exhaustive compendium of
amortizable expenses, and it is arguable that TIPs do not really fall into the
same category as the prepaid expenses touched upon by the section, but the fact
that Parliament has directed its mind to requiring the amortization of some
expenses without requiring this of TIPs is nonetheless telling to some extent. 
Parliament would be free to institute this requirement, but has not done so.  56                              
The case law also supports this method of computation.  In Cummings,
supra, the court considered the timing of deduction of lease pick-up
payments, by which the appellant taxpayer agreed to pay rent to the landlords
whose premises were vacated by the appellant’s new tenant.  The rents which the
tenant was still obliged to pay under existing leases was a major obstacle in
lease negotiations and was resolved only by the appellant’s agreement to assume
the lease pick-up payments; that is, the assumption of the payments was a
necessary inducement for the tenant to enter the lease.  After considering
expert accounting evidence to the effect that immediate deduction of such
expenses was permissible for tax purposes, Heald J.A. concluded, at p. 5211:  . . . that subject expenditure was a “running expense”
and in the same category as for example, an extensive advertising campaign to
obtain tenants or an offer to a prospective tenant of a rent-free period as an
inducement to enter into a long-term lease or a finder’s fee for obtaining
tenants and leases.  57                              
While the analogies contained in the last part of the quotation are
obviously obiter dicta, as was correctly pointed out by both Stone and
Desjardins JJ.A. in the court below, I believe the implication of the decision
is clear nonetheless.  To distinguish the lease pick-up payments from the cash
TIPs advanced in the instant case is, in my opinion, virtually impossible. 
Both are contractual payments voluntarily incurred by landlords for the purpose
of inducing tenants to enter into long-term leases.  While both payments may
give rise to benefits which are realized in years subsequent to that in which
they are incurred, the fact that in Cummings the Federal Court of Appeal
found the expenses in question to be running expenses, not referable to any
specific items of income, and thus fully deductible in the year incurred, is
most instructive.  There is simply no meaningful distinction between the two
cases: see also T. E. McDonnell, “Running Headlong into the GAAP (Again)”
(1995), 43 Can. Tax J. 738.  58                              
The decision of the Federal Court--Trial Division in Tower Investment
Inc., supra, in which advertising expenses incurred for the purpose
of attracting tenants to new buildings were held to be amortizable over a
period of years, poses no analytical problem in this regard.  All that appears
to have been decided in that case was that in the particular circumstances,
amortization was an acceptable way to obtain an accurate picture of income.  No
general rule of law was thereby developed, nor was amortization held to be the only
acceptable treatment of the expenses.  Again, the appropriate treatment will
turn on the facts of each individual case.  59                              
At this stage, then, Canderel was free to deduct the payments
entirely in the year incurred.  But that does not end the matter.  It remains
to be seen whether the method chosen by Canderel was in accordance with the
case law principles as outlined above and with well-accepted business
principles,  and whether it provided an accurate picture of its income for the
year in question.  Even if that were so, the Minister would still be entitled
to insist on an alternative treatment of the expenditures if it could be shown
that such would provide a more accurate picture.  To answer these
questions will require an examination of the evidence and the findings of the
trial judge.  60                              
The accounting evidence adduced by the parties was somewhat inconclusive
at best.  It disclosed that at the time of the payments, GAAP allowed for three
alternative and acceptable methods of accounting for TIPs.  The payer was
entitled to treat the payments either as operating expenses, fully chargeable
to the results of operations in the year incurred, as capital expenditures to
be added to the cost of the building and depreciated, or as deferred expenses
to be amortized over the life of the relevant leases.  The experts called by
Canderel were of the opinion that the first option was to be preferred because
the expenditures were incurred in the ordinary course of generating revenue
from Canderel’s business and that this method would thus give the most accurate
picture of income.  Those called by the Minister, as might be expected,
testified that the preferred method was the third, as the payments were
causally linked to rental revenue while any other benefits to which they gave
rise were not revenue and could not be the subject of “matching”.  To my mind,
this evidence is useful only to demonstrate that GAAP at the time endorsed the
options contended for by both parties.  However, I cannot draw from this alone
any specific conclusion as to which method was preferable in terms of yielding
the more accurate picture of Canderel’s income.  61                              
But the findings of fact made by the trial judge are more instructive. 
Brulé J. found that the payments yielded four primary benefits for Canderel:
the prevention of a “hole in income” which otherwise would have been caused by
maintaining a vacant building, the ability to satisfy the underlying
requirements of its interim financing and to obtain permanent financing, the
ability to meet its competition and to maintain its market position and
reputation, and the generating of revenues through rentals and through
management and development fees (which were to some extent contingent upon the
rate of lease-up).  From this, he concluded that the payments constituted
“running expenses”, as they could not be causally linked to any single or
specific stream of revenue, and that the matching principle therefore did not
apply in the circumstances, as contended for by the Minister.  62                              
It is immediately apparent that, while some of the benefits identified
by Brulé J. are of a type that would be realized over a period of years,
others, such as the satisfaction of interim financing requirements and the
maintenance of market position and reputation, are benefits that were
immediately realized by Canderel in the year the payments were made.  From this
observation emerges one serious practical difficulty inherent in the Federal
Court of Appeal’s view of the law: even if it can properly be argued that the payments
are “directly referable” to some future revenues, what is to be made of a
situation where they are also referable to other, immediate benefits? 
It would be unduly arbitrary to allocate the expenses only to the specific
revenues while ignoring the other, less tangible benefits.  But there also
exists no specific legal formula for the apportionment of the expenses among
the various benefits.  Perhaps some appropriate amortization formula could be
devised to cover such an apportionment, but any such device would need to be a
creature of statute; anything less would constitute judicial legislation of a
very intrusive variety.  It is similarly no answer to suggest that because the
payments were amortized by Canderel for financial accounting purposes, they can
be similarly amortized for taxation purposes.  As I have already explained, the
two portrayals of profit are substantially different in nature and purpose.  63                              
In its submissions before this Court, Canderel posited a variety of
other questions which would arise out of the treatment of the matching
principle as a compulsory rule of law.  For example, if an induced tenant were
to break its lease before the end of the term, how, and pursuant to what
authority,  would the balance of the TIP be deducted from income?  What if the
rate of rent varied over the term of the lease; would this affect the rate of
amortization?  Additionally, without any clear, principled distinction between
this case and Cummings, supra, what other expenses incurred in
the course of securing tenants for a building would be required to be amortized
rather than currently deducted?  Moreover, what would happen if the leased
premises were disposed of before the TIPs were fully deducted?  These are
questions which simply cannot be answered by reference to the law as it
presently exists, and for good reason: in a case such as this, there is simply
no uniform solution by which the most accurate picture of the taxpayer’s profit
may be obtained.  It is therefore an artificial and arbitrary solution to
impose the matching principle, as a matter of law, upon circumstances where its
application quite evidently creates serious difficulty.  To my mind, the uncertainties
created by the type of judicial legislation engaged in by the Federal Court of
Appeal stand as clear examples of the difficulties contemplated in Sparrow
Electric, supra.  64                              
In light of all of this, I find it difficult, particularly given the
findings of the trial judge as to the various benefits generated by the TIPs,
to conclude that the amortization of the payments over the terms of the leases,
as contended for by the Minister, would provide a more accurate picture of
Canderel’s income than would their immediate deduction in the year expended. 
In such a case, where no one method emerges as clearly superior or more
properly applicable than another, the taxpayer should retain the option of
ordering its affairs in accordance with any method which is in accordance with
well-accepted business principles and which is acceptable in light of the
reality of its business.  That is to say, just because a particular tactic is
acceptable under well-accepted business principles will not necessarily justify
its application in a given context if it is out of step with the actual manner
in which the taxpayer conducts its affairs.  However, once the taxpayer has
established that the method adopted gives an accurate picture of its income,
the onus is clearly on the Minister to prove that the method adopted by the
taxpayer is inappropriate in the particular circumstances of each case.  In the
instant case, I believe that the findings of the trial judge make it impossible
to conclude that the Minister has discharged this burden in the instant case.  65                              
Indeed, in my view, the fact that in the instant case, Brulé J. found
that the TIPs were properly attributable to a number of different expenses
makes inevitable the conclusion that they constituted running expenses.  As I
have already noted, I do not see how, under these circumstances, it is possible
with any accuracy to amortize the payments over the term of the lease, in the
absence of an established formula acceptable for tax purposes, which was not
advanced by the Minister.  It follows, then, that the TIPs were not referable
to any particular items of income, i.e., they cannot be correlated directly, or
at least not principally, with the rents generated by the leases which they
induced.  They therefore qualify as running expenses to which the matching
principle does not apply: see Oxford Shopping Centres, supra. 
The findings of fact made by Brulé J. in this regard are entitled to
considerable deference.  There is no indication that these findings were unsupported
by the evidence, and I can see no reason to reject them.  66                              
In light of the foregoing, I am compelled to the view that the Federal
Court of Appeal erred in requiring that the TIPs be amortized over the terms of
the leases which they induced, rather than being deducted entirely in the year 
incurred.  As I have already made clear, there is no basis for treating the
matching principle as a “rule of law”, as the Federal Court of Appeal chose to
do, and for my part, I am unable to conclude that to apply this particular
principle of accounting to the present case would serve to achieve a more
accurate picture, for tax purposes, of the taxpayer’s financial position for
the year in question than the immediate deduction of the expenses favoured by Canderel. 
While the matching principle will certainly be useful in some cases, its
specific application in the present case is unnecessary, as the payments
related at least partially to benefits realized entirely in the year incurred, 
and the taxpayer therefore should not be constrained to amortize.  The method
employed by Canderel was consistent both with the law and with well-accepted
business principles, and gave at least as accurate a picture of the taxpayer’s
income as would the amortization method.  Therefore, it ought not to be
disturbed.  VI.  Disposition  67                              
For the foregoing reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal, and restore the judgment of the Tax
Court of Canada.  The appellant shall have its costs throughout.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Goodman, Phillips &
Vineberg, Montreal.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.    