Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd. v. British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R.
1133  Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd. and Pacific Western
Airlines Ltd.                                                                                    Appellants  v.  Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the province of
British Columbia                                                                                     Respondent  and  The Attorney General for Ontario, the Attorney General of Quebec, the Attorney General of Nova Scotia, the Attorney General for New
Brunswick, the Attorney General of Manitoba, the Attorney General for Saskatchewan, the Attorney General for Alberta, the Attorney General of Newfoundland
and the Canadian National
Railway Company                                                                      Interveners  and
between  Air
Canada                                 Appellant  v.  Her
Majesty The Queen in Right of the
province of British Columbia, the
Attorney General of the province of British
Columbia, the Minister of Finance for the
Province of British Columbia and E. J.
Turner, in his capacity as Commissioner, Social Service Tax Act Respondents  and  The
Attorney General for Ontario, the
Attorney General of Quebec, the
Attorney General of Nova Scotia, the
Attorney General for New Brunswick, the
Attorney General of Manitoba, the
Attorney General for Saskatchewan, the
Attorney General for Alberta, the Attorney
General of Newfoundland and the Canadian National Railway Company                                                                      Interveners  indexed as:  canadian pacific air lines ltd. v. british
columbia  File
Nos.:  17875, 17902, 17910, 19602.  1988: 
June 8, 9, 10; 1989:  May 4.   on
appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia       Courts
-- Judgments -- Judgment granted in one set of actions finding tax inapplicable
-- Second action seeking same finding -- Second action also raising additional
issues, including whether or not tax collected under inapplicable tax
refundable.      British
Columbia's Social Service Tax Act provided for a tax
on the purchase of tangible goods purchased in British Columbia.  It also
imposed the tax on goods purchased outside the province and brought into the
province by its residents or businesses carrying on business in the province. 
The tax was applied to aircraft and aircraft parts and was calculated, in
accordance with different formulae negotiated with each airline, on the
percentage of miles travelled by the aircraft in airspace over British Columbia
to the total miles travelled.  The formulae had no statutory base.  All
aircraft and parts were bought outside the province and were used to meet the
airlines' operational needs on flights forming part of a more comprehensive
international and interprovincial service.  The aircraft were in constant use. 
The airlines also collected this tax in respect of in-flight liquor sales made
to passengers in  airspace over British Columbia if the flight originated or
terminated in, or connected two points within, the province.  The
First Appeal   The
Second Appeal      Air
Canada had commenced its action by writ of summons issued before the
applications in the first appeal had been made but only proceeded to trial
after the judgment of the Court of Appeal had been rendered in those
applications.  In its action, Air Canada sought not only declarations as
to the applicability and constitutionality of the Act but also other relief
including recovery of the taxes paid in respect of aircraft and aircraft parts
and of the tax on in-flight liquor sales.  Air Canada also raised a number
of "new issues".  It queried whether the tax as it applied to its
operation was authorized by s. 92(2)  of the Constitution Act,
1867 , and whether it infringed on the federal powers over
aeronautics and over interprovincial trade and undertakings.  In this Court it
also relied on s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  The
action was dismissed at trial and on appeal on the ground that the issue
(including the new issues) had been decided in the first appeal and in any
event that the new issues were groundless.  Air Canada appealed to this Court. 
In this Court, the Crown argued that even if Air Canada succeeded on its
points, Air Canada could not recover because it had paid the taxes under a
mistake of law.       Per Lamer,
La Forest and L'Heureux-Dubé JJ.:  The predominant purpose of the Social
Service Tax Act was to impose a retail tax payable by the ultimate
consumer of the goods in the province.  The provision relating to tax on
goods brought into the province for consumption by the ultimate consumer was to
serve as a supplementary provision to guard against avoidance of the purchase
tax by a consumer's purchasing goods outside the province.  It was aimed at
goods brought into the province on a permanent basis.  It had no application to
aircraft regularly flying in and out of the province.  If it did so apply, it
would, if it were to be imposed by all provinces on interprovincial airlines,
place a much heavier burden on these entities than on local airlines and other
businesses.  An intention on the part of the Legislature to enact a measure
having such discriminatory potential should not be lightly assumed.  The
formulae which were used to alleviate any unfair tax burden on the airlines
were without statutory basis and so did not bind the taxing authorities. 
It was unnecessary to decide if such a formula, given properly framed
legislation, would impose an undue burden on interprovincial undertakings.      There
was not sufficient presence in the province to provide a basis for the
imposition of the tax on in-flight sales of alcohol, whether that sale occurred
in an overflight or in a flight originating or terminating in a province.      Held:  The
second appeal by Air Canada should be allowed as regards the amount claimed for
taxes unlawfully collected in respect of its aircraft and parts.      Per Lamer,
La Forest and L'Heureux-Dubé JJ.:  Since the issue regarding the applicability
of the Act had now been decided in Air Canada's favour in the first appeal
(i.e., the Act did not apply to it), there was no reason why it should be
refused recovery.  The fact that Air Canada paid the money on the basis of a
mistake of law does not preclude recovery as is explained in Air Canada
v. British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 000.  The new issues were also
rejected for the reasons given in that case.      Air
Canada cannot recover the money paid by its passengers for the tax on alcoholic
beverages.  It was simply acting as an agent to collect it under the Act.     Per Beetz
J.:  The reasons of La Forest J. were agreed with, subject to the qualifications
expressed in Air Canada v. British Columbia.      Per
McIntyre J.:  The reasons of La Forest J. were agreed with, subject to the
qualifications expressed by Beetz J.      Per Wilson
J.:  For the reasons given by La Forest J., the Social Service Tax
Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 388, as a matter of statutory interpretation,  does
not apply to the respondent airlines' aircraft and parts.  The payment made by
Air Canada on account of taxes under the Act was accordingly made under a
mistake of law.  Since monies paid under a mistake of law should, like monies
paid under a mistake of fact, be recoverable, the respondent airlines' mistake
afforded no defence to the province against a claim for recovery of the monies
paid.      The
imposition of the tax on the sale of alcoholic beverages to passengers while
airborne over British Columbia was unconstitutional since such sales did not
take place "within the province".  These moneys were not, however,
recoverable by the respondent airlines because, although they represented payments
made under unconstitutional legislation, the tax was imposed on and paid by the
passengers who purchased drinks.  The airlines were merely tax collectors, not
taxpayers, and could not claim recovery of the money for their own use and
benefit.  Cases
Cited  By La
Forest J.     Referred
to:  The Queen in Right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, [1980]
2 S.C.R. 303; Northern Telecom Ltd. v. Communications Workers of
Canada (No. 1), [1980] 1 S.C.R. 115; Atlantic Smoke Shops,
Ltd. v. Conlon, [1943] A.C. 550; Cairns Construction
Ltd. v. Government of Saskatchewan, [1960] S.C.R. 619; Murphy v.
Canadian Pacific Railway Co., [1958] S.C.R. 626;
Attorney-General for Alberta v. Attorney-General for Canada (Alberta Bank Case), [1939]
A.C. 117.  By
Wilson J.      Followed:  Air
Canada v. British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 000.  Statutes
and Regulations Cited  British Columbia Supreme Court Rules, ss.
10(1)(b), 18(1), (2), (3), (6).  Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, s. 7 .  Constitution Act, 1867, s. 92(2) .  Gasoline Tax Act, 1948,
R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 162.  Social
Service Tax Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 388, ss. 1, 2(1), (4), 5.  Authors
Cited  Scott,
F. R. Comment (1934), 12 Can. Bar Rev. 303.       APPEAL
from a judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal dismissing an appeal
from a judgment of Macdonald J.  The second appeal by Air Canada as regards the
amount claimed for taxes unlawfully collected in respect of its aircraft and
parts should be allowed.      Wendy
G. Baker and Peter G. Voith, for the
appellants Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd. and Pacific Western Airlines Ltd.      D. M.
M. Goldie, Q.C., W. S. Martin, C. F.
Willms and R. G. Berrow, for the appellant
Air Canada.      E.
Robert A. Edwards, Q.C., and Joseph J. Arvay, Q.C., for
the respondents the province of British Columbia, et al.      Elizabeth
Goldberg and Gerry Sholtack, for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario.      Michel
Jolin, for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.      Reinhold
M. Endres, for the intervener the Attorney General of Nova
Scotia.      Richard
P. Burns, for the intervener the Attorney General for New
Brunswick.      Dirk
Blevins and Stewart J. Pierce, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba.      Robert
G. Richards, for the intervener the Attorney General for
Saskatchewan.      Howard
Kushner, for the intervener the Attorney General for Alberta.      F.
Greig Crockett, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Newfoundland.      D'Arcy
McCaffrey, Q.C., and Joe E. Hershfield, for
the intervener the Canadian National Railway Company.  //Beetz J.//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      BEETZ J. --
Subject to what I have written in the appeals and cross-appeal relating to the Gasoline
Tax Act of British Columbia, I agree with the reasons of my
brother, La Forest J., as well as with his proposed disposition of these
appeals.  //McIntyre J.//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      MCINTYRE J. -- I
agree with the reasons for judgment of my brother, La Forest J.,
subject to the qualifications expressed by my brother, Beetz J., which I would
adopt.  //La Forest
J.//      The
judgment of Lamer, La Forest and L'Heureux-Dubé JJ. was delivered by      LA FOREST J. --
The cases considered in this judgment form part of a trilogy of appeals heard
at the same time in which the airlines, Canadian Pacific, Pacific Western and
Air Canada, raise numerous issues regarding the application and
constitutionality of two taxing statutes of British Columbia, the Social
Service Tax Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 388, and the Gasoline
Tax Act, 1948, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 162.  This judgment deals with the
appeals regarding the Social Service Tax Act.  A first set of
appeals involving all three airlines (which for convenience, I shall refer to
as the first appeal) raises the questions whether that Act, on its true
construction applies, or can constitutionally apply,      (a)to the respondent airlines' aircraft, engines,
components, parts, equipment and rotable spares (hereafter compendiously
referred to as "aircraft and parts") when used on flights that
originate from, terminate in or connect two points in the province, and      (b)to sales by the airlines of alcoholic beverages
which are served to passengers on such flights after the aircraft is airborne
and has achieved cruising speed.      The
second appeal is by Air Canada alone.  In addition to raising supplementary
arguments relating to the first of the above questions, Air Canada seeks to
recover the taxes paid.  This raises the further question whether, assuming the
taxes were wrongly collected, they can be recovered by Air Canada.  The latter
question raises two issues:  whether taxes paid under a mistake of law are
recoverable, and whether Air Canada may recover the taxes on the alcoholic
beverages on behalf of the passengers.  All of these additional questions
(except the issue concerning the recovery of the taxes on alcoholic beverages)
were also raised in the appeal concerning the Gasoline Tax Act (the
third appeal) where they were more directly addressed, and I shall, therefore,
deal with them in the judgment on that appeal, which is issued
contemporaneously with this judgment.  Background      In
general terms, the Social Service Tax Act (of which a
counterpart exists in most of the provinces) imposes a tax on a person who
purchases tangible personal property at a retail sale in the province for his
own consumption or use.  The tax is based on a percentage of the purchase
price.  A similar tax is imposed on a person who brings such property in the
province for his consumption or use.  In the case of the airlines' aircraft and
parts brought into the province, the tax, by virtue of administrative formulae
not provided by statute, is applied only in respect of flights originating
from, terminating in, or connecting two points in the province.  According to
the formulae, the tax is calculated on the percentage of miles travelled by the
aircraft in provincial airspace to the total miles travelled.      More
specifically, s. 2(1) imposes the tax in the usual case to which the Act
applies, a purchase in the province.  It reads:      2. (1) A
purchaser shall pay to Her Majesty in right of the Province at the time of
making the purchase a tax at the rate of 4% of the purchase price of the
property purchased.  Section
1 defines "purchaser" and "retail sale" in a manner that
makes it clear that the taxpayer is (minor additions apart) a purchaser who
purchases tangible personal property at a retail sale in the province for his
own use or consumption.  These provisions read:                              1. ...  "purchaser" means a person who acquires
tangible personal property at a sale in the Province for his own consumption or
use, or for the consumption or use by other persons at his expense, or on
behalf of, or as the agent for, a principal who desires to acquire such
property for consumption or use by that principal or other persons at his
expense, and includes a promotional distributor to the extent that the purchase
price of the tangible personal property provided by way of promotional
distribution exceeds the amount of the payment specifically made for it by the
person to whom the tangible personal property is so provided;  "retail
sale" means a sale to a purchaser for purposes of consumption or use and
not for resale;  Section
5 makes provision for collecting the tax through the seller, who is deemed to
be an agent of the Minister for the purpose.      Rounding
out the scheme is s. 2(4) which imposes a similar tax on persons who reside or
carry on business in the province who acquire tangible personal property
outside the province.  Section 2(4) imposes the tax on any such person who
brings into, or receives in the province, any such property acquired by him for
value for his own consumption or use.  It reads as follows:      2. ...      (4)
A person residing or ordinarily resident or carrying on business in the
Province who brings or sends into the Province or who receives delivery in the
Province of tangible personal property for his own consumption or use, or for
the consumption or use of other persons at his expense, or on behalf of, or as
the agent for, a principal who desires to acquire such property for the
consumption or use by that principal or other persons at his expense, shall
immediately report the matter in writing to the commissioner and supply to him
all pertinent information as required by him in respect of the consumption or
use of the property, and furthermore, at the same time, shall pay to Her
Majesty in right of the Province a tax at the rate of 4% of the purchase price
of the tangible personal property.      Each
airline, while disputing its liability, has paid the tax imposed under s. 2(4)
on the basis of a formula as above described.  Such formula is prepared
pursuant to the following administrative instruction which, as noted, has no
statutory base:  Aircraft
which, in the opinion of the Commissioner, normally enter into interprovincial
or foreign trade are subject to the tax under the Act on the basis of the
percentage of miles travelled in the Province to total miles travelled.  The
formulae, which were negotiated with the airlines, are not the same for each
airline.  That for Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd., according to its petition,
is as follows:  C   x  B  x 
R  =  T   M   That for
Air Canada and Pacific Western Airlines Ltd., on the other hand, reads:                             TAX 
=  Cost of aircraft parts, etc.  x  B.C. Miles  x  Rate of Tax                                                         5
years                  total miles      The
flights in respect of which the airlines' aircraft and parts were taxed, as the
airlines were careful to underline, form part of a more comprehensive
international and interprovincial service.  The three airlines provide
scheduled and chartered air transportation services within Canada and to points
outside Canada.  All aircraft used by them in their operation are purchased
outside British Columbia.  From time to time they also purchase outside British
Columbia engines, components, parts, equipment and other tangible property for
repairs and overhaul of the aircraft and for equipping the aircraft for their
use in the airline operation.      None
of the aircraft is used exclusively in airspace over British Columbia.  All are
used wherever required to meet the operational needs of the airlines.  They are
in constant use and remain on the ground only for maintenance and repairs, to
load and unload passengers and cargo, to refuel or restock, or to comply with
published schedules.      The
first major issue, we saw, relates to the application of s. 2(4) to the
aircraft and parts.  The second concerns the tax imposed under s. 2(1) on the
purchase of alcoholic beverages sold by the airlines to passengers for
consumption after the aircraft reaches a cruising altitude and before it lands.  Judicial
History      The
initial step in these proceedings was taken by Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd.
on April 28, 1981.  It issued a petition pursuant to Rule 10(1)(b) of the British
Columbia Supreme Court Rules which provides for the making of an
originating application to the court when the sole or principal issue is one of
construction of an enactment or other document.  On February 2, 1982, Pacific
Western Airlines Ltd. issued a similar petition.  Both sought the same relief,
i.e., a declaration that the Act on its proper construction did not apply (a)
to aircraft and parts purchased outside British Columbia and used in the
airlines' flight operation, or (b) to the sale by the airlines of alcoholic
beverages aboard aircraft while they are in the airspace over British Columbia.      The
two petitions were heard together by Proudfoot J. on February 15, 1982 ([1982]
B.C.W.L.D. 641).  Proudfoot J. granted the declarations sought by the
petitioners.  In her view, the cases were governed by The Queen
in Right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 303.  That case was
similar to the present except that it was concerned with through-flights over
Manitoba and stopovers during flights through Manitoba.  In one respect,
Proudfoot J. observed, the province's case was stronger than those before her
in that there the formula for the tax on airlines was spelled out in the Act. 
At all events, she saw no reason why the rationale of that case would not
extend to flights that originate or terminate in the province or connect two
points in the province.  As in that case, the aircraft was in the airspace and
not in the province, and consequently neither the aircraft and parts nor the
liquor attracted the tax.      Some
time before these petitions were heard, Air Canada, on May 1, 1981, had
commenced an action by writ of summons.  It claimed that the Act did not apply
to Air Canada and was ultra vires the province.  In
its statement of claim, Air Canada did not restrict its claim for relief to a
declaration regarding the applicability and constitutional validity of the tax
in relation to its operation, but also sought, among other relief, repayment of
the tax collected since 1974.      On
July 14, 1982, after Proudfoot J. had declared that Canadian Pacific Air Lines
Ltd. and Pacific Western Airlines Ltd. were not subject to tax under the Act,
Air Canada made an application pursuant to Rule 18(1) of the British
Columbia Supreme Court Rules for declarations that on its true
construction the Act did not apply to Air Canada's aircraft and parts purchased
outside British Columbia and used in the flight operation of its airline
business or to the sale of alcoholic beverages aboard its aircraft while in the
airspace over British Columbia.  In short, it applied for precisely the same
relief as that granted to Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd. and Pacific Western
Airlines Ltd. alleging that there was no fact which would constitute a defence
to the claim of Air Canada in that respect.  It did not at that time seek the
additional relief set forth in its statement of claim, wishing no doubt to
tailor that part of its demand for summary judgment to take advantage of the
decision of Proudfoot J.  Rule 18 reads as follows:  Summary Judgment in an action      (1)  In an action in which an appearance has been
entered, the plaintiff, on the ground that there is no defence to the whole or
part of a claim, or no defence except as to amount, may apply to the Court for
judgment on an affidavit setting out the facts verifying the claim or part of
the claim and stating that the deponent knows of no fact which would constitute
a defence to the claim or part of the claim except as to amount.      (2)  On the hearing of an application under subrule
(1) the Court may exercise any of its powers under Rule 52(8) and may      (a)grant judgment for the plaintiff on the whole or
part of the claim and may impose terms on the plaintiff, including a stay of
execution of any judgment, until the determination of the defendant's
counterclaim or third party proceeding,      (b)allow the defendant to defend the whole or part
of the claim either unconditionally or on terms relating to the giving of
security, time, the mode of trial or otherwise, and may give directions
pursuant to Rules 40(41) and (42) for the hearing of evidence at trial                                                                            .
. .      (e)  grant any other order it thinks just.      (3)  Where a plaintiff obtains judgment under
subrule (2), he may continue the action in respect of any remaining part of the
claim, any other claim or against any other defendant.                                                                            .
. .      (6) 
In an action in which an appearance has been entered, the defendant, on the
ground there is no merit in the whole or part of the claim, may apply to the
Court for judgment on an affidavit setting out the facts verifying the
defendant's contention that there is no merit in the whole or part of the claim
and stating that the deponent knows of no facts which would substantiate the
whole or part of the claim.      On
August 11, 1982, Callaghan J. granted the declarations sought by Air Canada. 
According to the information before us, he simply applied to Air Canada the
decision of Proudfoot J. in the Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd. and Pacific
Western Airlines Ltd. cases.      The
province then appealed to the British Columbia Court of Appeal from the
decisions of Proudfoot J. on the Canadian Pacific Air Lines Ltd. and Pacific
Western Airlines Ltd. petitions, and of Callaghan J. on the Air Canada summary
judgment application.  The appeals were heard together and were allowed in
part.  The declaration relating to the tax on the aircraft and parts was set
aside, thus making the airlines liable for the tax on these items.  The
declaration relating to the liquor, however, was upheld.      In
holding that the tax applied to the aircraft and parts, Macfarlane J.A., Seaton
and Anderson JJ.A. concurring (1983), 46 B.C.L.R. 213, made a distinction
between overflights and momentary stopovers, which were in issue in The Queen
in Right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, supra, and
flights originating or terminating in the province or beginning and ending
there.  In the latter case, there was in his view a sufficiently substantial
connection to satisfy the constitutional requirement in s. 92(2) ,
Constitution Act, 1867 , that the taxed subject must be "within the
province" before it can be taxed.  Once it was decided that there was a
sufficient connection to attract the tax, there was no objection to the
province measuring the amount of the tax on the basis of miles travelled in the
airspace over the province as compared to total miles travelled by the
aircraft.  The Act, he noted, did not specify the extent of the use, so it need
not be any particular degree or type of use.  In strict terms, he stated, if an
aircraft lands, proceeds to the terminal, loads and unloads, and performs
maintenance, the airline is using the aircraft in the province.  Macfarlane
J.A. also briefly rejected the argument that the tax was legislation in
relation to a federal undertaking on the ground that the tax did not represent
a colourable attempt to regulate aeronautics.  The sole issue, he thought, was
simply one of situs.  Similarly, he found it irrelevant
that the amount of the tax was measured in terms of airspace.  The issue was
whether the aircraft had sufficient presence in the province to attract the
tax.  On the other hand, the presence of an aircraft in the airspace over
British Columbia did not create a sufficiently substantial presence in the
province to make liquor sales in the airspace subject to the tax.  There was no
real distinction between such sales on overflights and on those that originate
or terminate in British Columbia.      The
three airlines then applied for and were granted leave to appeal to this
Court.  The province cross-appealed in respect of the Court of Appeal's
decision regarding the tax on alcoholic beverages.  This is the first appeal.      Air
Canada then proceeded to trial in its action, (which ultimately culminated in
the second appeal) in which, as noted earlier, it sought not only declarations
as to the applicability and constitutionality of the Act but other relief
including recovery of the amounts it had paid in taxes between July 14, 1976
and February 1, 1978, namely $903,424.57 in respect of the tax on aircraft and
parts, and $90,279.52 in respect of the tax on liquor.  As to this additional
relief, I should note that the province in this Court argued that taxes
voluntarily paid to the Crown are irrecoverable by the taxpayer as having been
paid under a mistake of law.      At
the start of the trial, the province brought a motion under Rule 18(6) of the
rules of court, set out above, for a summary dismissal of the action.  Rule
18(6), it will be recalled, provides for dismissal, on application, of an
action where there is no merit in the whole or part of the claim.  The province
argued that it was entitled to summary judgment on the basis that the issues
raised by Air Canada were res judicata.      Macdonald
J. dismissed the province's motion.  He, however, rejected Air Canada's
argument that because the original application was an application for summary
judgment, the effect of the dismissal of that application was to leave the
parties in the same position as before the motion was brought so the trial
should proceed as though no motion was ever brought.  He also rejected the
argument that this Court had, by granting a postponement of the time for filing
the notice of appeal, said that Air Canada was entitled to a trial.  He
nonetheless dismissed the motion.  In his view, he should hear the evidence. 
He observed that in Northern Telecom Ltd. v. Communications Workers of Canada
(No. 1), [1980] 1 S.C.R. 115, this Court had declined to answer
a constitutional issue because it lacked the necessary facts.  Such a result
was to be avoided.  Otherwise, the appeal to this Court could be inconclusive
or lead to further litigation.  The facts the airlines could establish, he
asserted, might convince him that he was not bound by the decision of Macfarlane
J.A.  The decision of this Court should be based on the facts established at
trial and not be open to the potential argument that the Court of Appeal
proceeded on a mere supposition or facts that were not on the record.      At
trial, Air Canada, in addition to adducing new evidence, sought to raise three
alleged new issues.  The first of these was that provincial legislation that
affects or interferes with rights outside the province or has a substantial
extra-provincial effect is ultra vires.  The position is
not wholly easy to follow, but as I understand it the point is that Air
Canada's operations were largely outside British Columbia.  Because, owing to
economic forces, the tax may be recovered from passengers throughout Canada and
beyond, it was indirect and therefore ultra vires.  A
second argument was that the tax was not imposed "in order to the raising
of a Revenue for Provincial Purposes" within the meaning of s. 92(2)  of
the Constitution Act, 1867 .  There was no provincial purpose
here.  The province had no role in aeronautics in so far as interprovincial
carriers were concerned, and it thus conferred no benefit to the airline from
the tax.  In this Court, this argument was buttressed by the further contention
that the levying of a tax from which the taxpayer derived no benefit violated
s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
Finally, Air Canada claimed to be entitled to recover the money it had
collected from its passengers for the tax on liquor.      Macdonald
J. dismissed the action.  He reiterated that the reason he had allowed the
trial to proceed was to ensure that this Court would be in a position to give a
definitive answer to the constitutional issues raised.  If he was incorrect in
this, he stated, the courts above could simply refuse to consider that
evidence.  At all events, the additional evidence would not, in his view, have
changed the Court of Appeal's conclusion.  He also dealt with and rejected the
new issues.      An
appeal to the British Columbia Court of Appeal (per Taggart
J.A., Carrothers and Lambert JJ.A. concurring) was dismissed through the
application of the principle of res judicata.  More
specifically, it held, the circumstances required the application of issue
estoppel.  Here, in fact, there was but one action with Air Canada seeking to
try the same issue twice.  It had originally been successful on its first
attempt when Callaghan J. granted its motion.  It was partially unsuccessful on
appeal, and it now sought a full trial on the issue on which it failed.  While,
ordinarily, a plaintiff who is unsuccessful under Rule 18 is entitled to a full
trial, here Air Canada had carefully singled out an issue for resolution, and
that issue had been decided, initially in its favour, but adversely to it on
appeal.  At all events, it had been decided.  As a consequence, in the court's
view, issue estoppel applied.  The additional evidence should, therefore, not
have been permitted.  If it was required, it should have been before Callaghan
J. and the Court of Appeal on the summary judgment application.  Taggart J.A.
also noted that one might well say that Air Canada, having under Rule 18
elected a remedy and having fully argued the issues, should not now be
permitted to seek additional remedies at a full trial, but added that he need
not decide this point.      On
the assumption that he was wrong on the question of res judicata,
Taggart J.A. agreed with Macdonald J. that the additional facts would not have
altered the finding of the Court of Appeal.  So far as the new issues were
concerned, they should, he thought, have been raised before Callaghan J., and
Macdonald J. should have applied issue estoppel to them.  On the assumption
that he was wrong, however, he dealt with and rejected all the new arguments.      Air
Canada then sought and was granted leave to appeal to this Court on February
28, 1986.  This is the second appeal.      The
Attorneys General of the following provinces intervened:  Ontario, Quebec, Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and Newfoundland.  The
Canadian National Railway Company also intervened.  The
Issues      The
parties and the interveners raised a wide variety of issues, but as I view the
matter, only a few need be discussed in the resolution of these appeals.  I
shall, in dealing with the first appeal, discuss the tax on aircraft and parts,
and then the tax on alcoholic beverages.  I shall then deal with the remaining
issues in the second appeal.  The Tax
on Aircraft and Parts      The
first issue to be determined is whether on its true construction the Act
applies to the aircraft and parts.  The province claims it does by virtue of s.
2(4) of the Act, which I have already cited in full.  That provision applies to
residents, and more pertinently, to any person "carrying on business in
the Province who brings or sends into the Province or who receives
delivery in the Province of tangible personal property for his own
consumption or use ...."  Section 2(4), like other provisions in a
statute, must be read both in its specific context and in its context as a
whole.  That consideration must be firmly kept in mind in considering whether
the entry into the province of the aircraft and parts in the course of the
operations of the airlines previously described constitutes
"bringing" or "sending" them into province or
"receiving delivery" of them there.      While
I would not, in the absence of a detailed examination, wish to categorize the
Act as being solely intended to impose a retail tax payable by the ultimate
consumer of the goods, there can be no doubt, as I mentioned before, that this
is its predominant purpose.  The Act, in its general structure and intent,
closely resembles the type of enactment originally approved by the courts in Atlantic
Smoke Shops, Ltd. v. Conlon, [1943] A.C. 550, and later generalized to include all
tangible personal property; see Cairns Construction Ltd. v. Government
of Saskatchewan, [1960] S.C.R. 619.  This predominant purpose, in my
view, is of considerable assistance in understanding the import of s. 2(4). 
Indeed, Viscount Simon L.C. in the Conlon case (p. 568)
observed of a similar provision that it was manifest that it was enacted merely
as a supplementary provision.  The nature of this particular provision also
argues for its interpretation in the light of the overall scheme.  It is a
provision which, if it stood alone, might well be construed as infringing upon
s. 121  of the Constitution Act, 1867  which provides
that "All articles of the growth, Produce, or Manufacture of any one of
the Provinces shall ... be admitted free into each of the other
Provinces."  Viscount Simon in Conlon, it is true,
rather underplayed that possibility, but subsequent cases have indicated that
the courts would closely scrutinize a tax that in Rand J.'s words "in its
essence and purpose is related to a provincial boundary"; see Murphy v.
Canadian Pacific Railway Co., [1958] S.C.R. 626, per Rand
and Cartwright JJ.; see also a Comment by F. R. Scott (1934), 12 Can. Bar
Rev. 303, at p. 308.      This
context, it seems to me, strongly supports the view that the general purpose of
s. 2(4) is to serve as a supplementary provision "to guard against the
methods of avoidance of" the purchase tax; see Viscount Simon in Conlon, at p.
568.  If that view is correct, what the provision was intended to do was to
prevent the evasion of the tax and consequent loss of revenue by the simple
expedient of a consumer's purchasing goods outside the province.  The provision
equalizes the burden by taxing out-of-province purchases by provincial
residents at the same rates as if the purchases had taken place in the
province.  The out-of-province purchaser pays the tax when he "brings or
sends the goods" into the province or "receives delivery" for
his use or consumption.  This is confirmed, I think by the words used in the
provision, and especially if one considers them in connection with the
purported application of the provision to the facts of this case.  What I think
is contemplated is the bringing of a purchased item into the province on a
permanent basis, at which time it is taxable once and for all at a stated
percentage of the purchase price as the provision clearly provides.  If such a
tax was imposed on interprovincial airlines by every province, it would place a
much heavier burden on these entities than on local airlines and other
businesses.  Whether the imposition of such a tax would be sufficiently
discriminatory as to make it invalid within the principle in
Attorney-General for Alberta v. Attorney-General for Canada  (the Alberta
Bank case), [1939] A.C. 117, I need not consider.  It is
sufficient to say that I do not think one should lightly assume an intention on
the part of the Legislature to enact a measure having the discriminatory
potential of the statute here if given a broader interpretation than the general
scheme of the Act would suggest.      I am
aware that the taxing authorities sought to alleviate any unfair burden the tax
might impose on the airlines by calculating it on a basis proportional to the
use of their aircraft in the province.  But there is no statutory basis for
this practice and, as the Court of Appeal noted, they did not have to do this. 
It may well be that the Legislature could, by properly framed legislation,
impose a proportional tax of the kind the taxing authorities sought to levy here
if it did not impose an undue burden on interprovincial undertakings.  But I do
not think I should speculate further about the matter.  As Laskin C.J. noted in The Queen
in Right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, supra, at p.
320, it is "preferable to avoid dealing with it, in conformity with the
general rule in constitutional cases not to engage issues which do not squarely
arise for decision".  This approach seems to me to be particularly apt in
an area as intricate and so fraught with consequences as the constitutional
power of taxation.      I,
therefore, conclude that on a proper construction of the Act, the tax provided
by s. 2(4) does not apply to the airlines' aircraft and parts.  Consequently,
leaving aside the issues relating to the recovery of the taxes from the
province, the constitutional questions raised by the airlines relating to these
items need not be addressed.  The Tax
on Alcoholic Beverages      Both
Proudfoot J. and the Court of Appeal declared that the sales by the airlines of
alcoholic beverages to passengers aboard the aircraft while they were in the
airspace over British Columbia were not covered by the Act.  I agree.  In The Queen
in Right of Manitoba v. Air Canada, supra, Laskin
C.J. stated, at p. 316:      I am prepared, on this view, to assume that the
Province has some legislative jurisdiction in the air space above it so that
the pivotal question is whether Air Canada aircraft, engaged in overflights are
"within the Province", as this quoted phrase is used in s. 92(2)  which
empowers a Province to impose "direct taxation within the Province in
order to the raising of a revenue for provincial purposes".      Merely
going through the air space over Manitoba does not give the aircraft a situs there
to support a tax which constitutionally must be "within the
Province".  In the case of aircraft operations, there must be a
substantial, at least more than a nominal, presence in the Province to provide
a basis for imposing a tax in respect of the entry of aircraft into the
Province.  He was
there speaking of overflights, but like the Court of Appeal, I can see no real
distinction between a sale of liquor in airspace on an overflight, and one that
originates or terminates in British Columbia.  In either case, both the person
taxed and the transaction in respect of which he is taxed take place on the
aircraft when it is in the airspace.  Under these circumstances, there is no
presence in the province sufficient to provide a basis for the imposition of
the tax.  The
Second Appeal      The
Court of Appeal, it will be remembered, dismissed this appeal.  They quite
properly held that the issues that had been raised before Callaghan J. could
not be relitigated before Macdonald J.  And I am inclined to agree with that
court that the additional evidence was of no serious consequence.  I need not
consider whether issue estoppel also applied to the additional issues raised
before Macdonald J. because I agree with the conclusions of the Court of Appeal
on the merits of these issues.  My reasons will be apparent from a perusal of
my reasons in the third appeal between the same parties relating to the Gasoline
Tax Act of British Columbia delivered contemporaneously with
this judgment.  For reasons there stated, I would also reject the contention
that the relevant legislation in the present case violates s. 7  of the Charter .      These
matters are, however, no longer relevant except as regards costs.  Essentially
the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal because of determination in earlier
proceedings in the same action which had decided against Air Canada the major
issues on which recovery depended.  They have now been decided in its favour. 
The decision of the Court of Appeal has been reversed in so far as the tax on
the aircraft and parts is concerned.  The Court in the first appeal has held
that the Act does not apply to these items.  Absent other considerations, there
seems no reason to refuse Air Canada the recovery it seeks.  There is nothing
to indicate it ever abandoned this claim.  In seeking summary judgment, it merely
tried to obtain a ruling on issues to which it thought, in light of Proudfoot
J.'s judgment, there was no defence as Rule 18 clearly contemplates.  It could
then continue its action in respect of any remaining issues.  It would have
been better to await the ultimate disposition of the first appeal before
raising additional issues, but this seems to me to be relevant only as to
costs.      The
province, however, argued that it can resist recovery on the basis that the
payment by Air Canada was made on the basis of a mistake of law.  As mentioned
earlier, I have dealt with this issue in the third appeal.  For reasons there
given, I do not think this defence is available to the province.      One
further issue requires examination.  Air Canada seeks to recover the money paid
by its passengers for the tax on alcoholic beverages.  It argued that the
province had unjustly enriched itself by collecting the tax and that it alone
was in a position to rectify the wrong by returning the money to the passengers
by way of reduced fares.  Like Macdonald J. and Taggart J.A., I can see no
basis on which Air Canada is entitled to receive this money.  The tax was
imposed on the passengers, not Air Canada.  Air Canada was simply an agent to
collect it under the Act and, in fact, obtained a fee for doing so.  I am
unable to see how it could identify the passengers who consumed the liquor, so
its repayment to Air Canada would simply amount to a windfall to the airline.  Disposition      For
these reasons, I would allow the airlines' first appeal relating to the taxes
on the aircraft and parts, and dismiss the province's cross-appeal relating to
the taxes on alcoholic beverages sold in aircraft while they are in the
airspace.  I would restore the orders of Proudfoot J. and Callaghan J.  The
airlines are entitled to their costs throughout.      I
would allow the second appeal by Air Canada as regards the amount claimed for
taxes unlawfully collected in respect of its aircraft and parts, and award the
sum claimed, namely, $903,424.57.  I would dismiss the appeal as regards the
amount claimed for taxes unlawfully collected in respect of alcoholic
beverages.  In the particular circumstances of this case, the province should
recover its costs at trial and before the Court of Appeal.  There should be no
costs on the appeal to this Court.  //Wilson J.//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      WILSON J. -- I
agree with my colleague La Forest J. for the reasons given by him that as a
matter of statutory interpretation the Social Service Tax
Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 388, does not apply to the respondent airlines'
aircraft and parts.  This being so the payment made by Air Canada on account of
taxes under the Act was made under a mistake of law.  Having concurred with my
colleague by way of obiter dicta in Air Canada
v. British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 000, that monies paid under a mistake
of law should, like monies paid under a mistake of fact, be recoverable, I
agree with my colleague that the respondent airlines' mistake in this case
affords no defence to the province against a claim for recovery of the monies
paid.      I
agree also with my colleague La Forest J. that the imposition of the tax on the
sale of alcoholic beverages to passengers while airborne over British Columbia
was unconstitutional since such sales did not take place "within the
province".  I also agree with my colleague that these monies are not
recoverable by the respondent airlines even although they were paid under
unconstitutional legislation.  I distinguish this case from the case dealing
with the Gasoline Tax Act in that the tax in
this case was not a tax on the respondent airlines but on the passengers who
purchased drinks.  The monies paid did not come out of the airlines' pockets
but out of the pockets of their passengers who would be entitled, were it
practical to do so, to make the claim for their return.  The airlines in this
case were merely tax collectors and not taxpayers.  There is therefore no
foundation for their claim that the monies should be returned to them for their
own use and benefit.      In
the result I agree with the disposition of these appeals proposed by my
colleague.       The
second appeal by Air Canada as regards the amount claimed for taxes unlawfully
collected in respect of its aircraft and parts should be allowed.      Solicitors
for the appellants Pacific Western Airlines Ltd. and Canadian Pacific Air Lines
Ltd.:  Davis & Company, Vancouver.      Solicitors
for the appellant Air Canada:  Russell & DuMoulin, Vancouver.      Solicitor
for the respondents the province of British Columbia et al.:  The Attorney
General of British Columbia, Victoria.      Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General for Ontario:  The Attorney General for
Ontario, Toronto.       Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Nova Scotia:  The Attorney General
of Nova Scotia, Halifax.      Solicitor
for intervener the Attorney General for New Brunswick:  The Attorney General
for New Brunswick, Fredericton.      Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba:  The Attorney General of
Manitoba, Winnipeg.       Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General for Alberta:  The Attorney General for
Alberta, Edmonton.      Solicitors
for the intervener Canadian National Railway Company:  Taylor McCaffrey
Chapman, Winnipeg.  * Le Dain
J. took no part in the judgment.  