Supreme Court of Canada R. v. Melford Developments Inc., [1982] 2 S.C.R. 504 Date: 1982-09-28 Her Majesty The
Queen Appellant; and Melford
Developments Inc. Respondent. File No.: 16482. 1982: June 1; 1982: September 28. Present: Ritchie, Estey, McIntyre, Lamer and
Wilson JJ. ON APPEAL FROM THE FEDERAL COURT OF APPEAL Taxation—Income tax—Guarantee
fees—Non-resident—Withholding tax—International Tax Convention—Domestic Tax
Law—Conflict—Whether guarantee fees paid to non-resident bank subject to
taxation—Whether the Income Tax can override the provisions of the tax
treaty—Income Tax Act, 1970-71-72 (Can.), c. 63 as amended, ss. 212(1)(b),
214(15)(a)—Canada-Germany Income Tax Agreement Act, 1956 (Can.), c. 33,
s. 3—Canada-Germany Tax Convention, Articles II(2), III(1), (5). Held: The
appeal should be dismissed. The guarantee fees were not “interest”,
within the terms of the Canada-Germany Tax Convention. The Canada-Germany
Income Tax Agreement Act, 1956, being the legislative adoption of the
international tax Agreement, had not been amended by the income tax amendment
of 1974. There is no doubt that the effect of s. 3 of the 1956 Act was to
make the operation of any other law of Parliament, including the Income Tax
Act, subject to the terms of the 1956 Act and the incorporation Agreement.
The guarantee fees were consequently not taxable as Article III(1) of the
Agreement did not [Page 505] authorize the taxation of commercial profits
of a nonresident where those profits were not earned through a permanent
establishment in Canada. Re: Farm Security Act, [1947] S.C.R. 394; Bennett and White Construction Co. v. Minister
of National Revenue, [1949] S.C.R. 287; Associates Corporation of North
America v. The Queen, [1980] 2 F.C. 377 affirmed [1980] 2 F.C. 382; Inland
Revenue Commissioners v. Collco Dealings Ltd., [1962] A.C. 1; Woodend
(K.V. Ceylon) Rubber and Tea Co. v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue, [1971]
A.C. 321, referred to. APPEAL for a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (1981),
36 N.R. 9, [1981] 2 F.C. 627, [1981] C.T.C. 30, affirming a judgment of the
Trial Division, [1980] 2 F.C. 713, [1980] C.T.C. 141. Appeal dismissed. John R. Power, Q.C., and Jane Meagher,
for the appellant. John R. Dingle, for the respondent. The judgment of the Court was delivered by ESTEY J.—This appeal raises for settlement the
principles applicable to the interpretation of domestic tax law and
international tax conventions where their provisions are said to be competing.
The appellant seeks to recover under the Income Tax Act, 1970-71-72
(Can.), c. 63, s. 1, as amended, withholding tax on a payment made by the
respondent to a resident in Germany. The parties agree that the recipient of
the payment does not carry on business in Canada and that the susceptibility to
taxation of the payments in question depends entirely upon the application of
Part XIII of the Income Tax Act, supra, relating to the taxation of
non-residents and the Canada-Germany Tax Convention brought into the laws of
this country by statute: The Canada-Germany Income Tax Agreement Act, 1956, 1956
(Can.), c. 33. The payment in question was made by the
respondent as a fee payable for the delivery by the [Page 506] PART XIII 212. (1)
Every non-resident person shall pay an income tax of 25% on every amount that a
person resident in Canada pays or credits, or is deemed by Part I to pay or
credit, to him as, on account or in lieu of payment of, or in satisfaction of, … (b) interest except… Section 214(15) (15) For the purposes of this Part, (a) where a non-resident person has
entered into an agreement under the terms of which he agrees to guarantee the
repayment, in whole or in part, of the principal amount of a bond, debenture,
bill, note, mortgage, hypothec or similar obligation of a person resident in
Canada, any amount paid or credited as consideration for the guarantee shall be
deemed to be a payment of interest on that obligation; (Added by 1974-75-76 (Can.), c. 26,
s. 119(2)). The respondent takes the view that whatever the Income
Tax Act may provide, it cannot override the provisions of the tax treaty
and, more particularly, the provisions of the Canadian statute introducing the
tax treaty to the domestic law of Canada. Section 3 of that Act (which section alone in that statute
relates to the issues arising on this appeal) provides as follows: 3. In the
event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Act, or the
Agreement, and the operation of any other law, the provisions of this Act and
the Agreement prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. [Page 507] By Article III(1) the contracting
countries, Germany and Canada, agreed that industrial or commercial profits of
an enterprise in Germany would not be subject to tax in Canada unless it
carried on business in Canada through a permanent establishment here.
Subsection (5) of Article III on the other hand excludes from such
immunity income derived from within Canada by a German resident where the income arises, for example, from
“dividends[,] interest, rents or royalties”. Article II(2) of the
Convention provides that undefined terms in the Convention shall take the
meaning which they have in the laws in force in the contracting countries.
These provisions in the treaty it is convenient to set out in full, and they
are as follows: Article III (1) The industrial or commercial profits of
an enterprise of one of the territories shall not be subject to tax in the
other territory unless the enterprise carries on a trade or business in the
other territory through a permanent establishment situated therein. If it
carries on a trade or business in that other territory through a permanent
establishment situated therein, tax may be imposed on those profits in the
other territory but only on so much of them as is attributable to that
permanent establishment. … Article II (2) In the application of the provisions of
this Convention by one of the contracting States any term not otherwise defined
in this Convention shall, unless the context otherwise requires, have the
meaning which it has under the laws in force in the territory of that State
relating to the taxes which are the subject of this Convention. It will be seen from the combined effect of
these provisions that Parliament in 1974, when s. 214(15) was introduced
into the Income Tax Act, sought to extend withholding tax, theretofore [Page 508] referable to interest, to payments by way of
guaranty fees or standby charges. The simple issue here arising is whether or
not the 1974 legislation amends the Treaty so as to expose the respondent to
the burden of withholding tax at the prescribed rate when making payment of the
guaranty fees to the non-resident guarantor. Urie J., writing on behalf of the Federal Court
of Appeal, found that the above-mentioned sections of the Income Tax
Act did not, when applied to the guaranty fee here in question, have the
effect of converting that fee into “interest” for the purpose of s. 212
thereby necessitating the withholding of tax by the respondent pursuant to
s. 215. His Lordship stated: I am unable to agree with this contention.
Whatever is the meaning of the phrase concluding the subsection, namely, “shall
be deemed to be a payment of interest on that obligation” (presumably
that obligation referring to the repayment of the mortgage) it is clear that it
does not deem that the guarantee fee is “interest” but only that the payment
of it shall be deemed to be “a payment of interest”. Clearly the deeming of
the payment to be what it is not does not change the character or nature of the
thing that was paid. It could never in fact be a payment of interest because it
was always a payment of a fee as consideration for the provision of the
guarantee. (Emphasis that of Urie J.) With the greatest respect, I reach the opposite
conclusion and for the purposes of this appeal would construe these
sections of the Income Tax Act so as to obligate the respondent to
effect the withholding but at the rate prescribed in the Act, namely 25 per
cent rather than 15 per cent as claimed by the appellant. However, this does
not by any means dispose of the appeal. The critical issue on this appeal is whether or
not Article III(5) of the Canada-Germany Agreement and s. 3 of the
enacting statute interrupt the application of the Income Tax Act to this
transaction. As regards the definition of interest, counsel
for the respondent placed reliance upon the comments of Rand J. in Re: Farm
Security Act, [1947] S.C.R. 394 at p. 411 where His Lordship stated: [Page 509] Interest is, in general terms, the return
or consideration or compensation for the use or retention by one person of a
sum of money, belonging to, in a colloquial sense, or owed to, another. Read literally, this statement would not require
the payment of interest to be made to the owner of the capital advanced to the
borrower. Indeed, it may be broad enough to embrace the very transaction now
before the Court, namely a guaranty fee for the procurement of the money of
another. If this indeed was the meaning in 1956 in the law of Canada of the
term “interest”, then it can be argued that the 1974 Tax Act amendments
are not in conflict with the 1956 statute. However, when the observation of
Rand J., supra, is read in the context of the issue then before the
Court it becomes apparent that no attempt was there being made to determine the
extent of the definition of the term “interest” and I do not believe the
comment should be taken as meaning that interest relates to anything other than
the payment for the use of the principal advanced to the payor by the payee.
Some light is shed on the above quoted passage from Rand J. when reference is
made to the decision of this Court in Bennett and White Construction Co. v.
Minister of National Revenue, [1949] S.C.R. 287 in which the taxpayer
argued that guaranty fees, like interest, were current expenses. The Court
unanimously rejected the argument and Rand J., in his reasons, made the
following observation at p. 293: Now the Crown has allowed the deduction of
interest paid to the bank, and it must have been either on the footing that the
day-to-day use of the funds was embraced within the business that produced the
profit, or that the interest was within section 5, paragraph (b). But
setting up that credit right or providing the banking facilities is quite
another thing from paying interest; it is preparatory to earning the income and
is no more part of the business carried on than would be the work involved in a
bond issue. See also the judgment of Locke J. (Rinfret C.J.
and Kellock J. concurring) at pp. 289-90: While the amounts paid to the guarantors
were described as interest in the various resolutions which [Page 510] authorized their payment, this was clearly
inaccurate. Interest is paid by a borrower to a lender: a sum paid to a third
person as the consideration for guaranteeing a loan cannot be so described. Admittedly the issue in that case was different
from that here raised, and the provisions of the Income Tax Act then
before the Court were quite different. The principal question there was whether
the payments in question were laid out by the taxpayer to “earn income”, but
none of the members of the Court suggested the payment of the guaranty fees was
deductible as “interest” under the specific provision of the Income Tax Act relating
to the payment of interest by the taxpayer. Turning to the interpretation of “income” in
Article III(5) of the Agreement, subsection (1) of Article III
exempts “industrial or commercial profits” of a German enterprise wherever
those profits are earned unless that German enterprise “carries on a trade or
business” in Canada through a “permanent establishment” situated in Canada.
This exemption of industrial and commercial profits is reduced by subs. (5) of
the same Article which enables Canada (to transpose the terms of the
subsection to the realities of this transaction), to tax the income of the
German enterprise when it is “derived from sources within” Canada if such
income (a) “is not attributable to a permanent establishment in” Canada, and
(b) is “e.g. dividends[,] interest, rents or royalties”. The first question
arising from this analysis of the wording of the subsection is whether or
not the parenthetical expression after “income” creates a genus so as to
limit the word “income” to like quantities or elements of income. The second
question is whether or not the presence of the letters “e.g.” is limitative or
expansive with reference to the preceding word “income”. Turning back to the
first question, each of the four words describes a payment made in respect of
an underlying or related property interest. Each is associated with the concept
of income in the sense of receipts from or by reason of the ownership of shares
in the case of dividends, principal in the case of interest, property in the
case of rents, and rights or proper- [Page 511] ties in the case of royalties. To that extent at
least there is a class created which might lead to the attribution by analogy
to the word “income” of a meaning which would include guaranty fees. The
guaranty payment received by the German bank from the respondent was made by
the respondent in order to place the credit of the German bank within reach of
the Canadian lending bank, the Bank of Nova Scotia, so as to obtain the loan in
question. The asset of the German bank might by analogy be considered to be its
credit worthiness and the “income” earned by that asset might be said to be the
guaranty fee. In this sense Parliament, by revising the Income Tax Act so
as to extend income to include guaranty fees received by a non-resident
enterprise, would not contravene the provisions of subs. (5). This would be so
not because the word “interest” has been expanded to include something else but
because the word “income” has been expanded to include elements of income
falling generically within the class of four but not being identical with any
one and which included element is not to be excluded by the letters “e.g.”. However, the presence of the letters “e.g.” may
interrupt the application of this method of interpreting and discerning the
sense of subs. (5). In my view the proper interpretation to be placed upon the
parenthetical expression in subs. (5) is that it catalogues by way of
illustration those items which ordinarily would be included in the exceptional
term “income”, it being that type of revenue excised from industrial and
commercial profits otherwise exempted by subs. (1). That being so, the
illustrations must be taken in the context of the ordinary usage of the
language at the time of the Agreement, in which case one can find no
justification in any of the four words for excluding a fee in the nature of a
guaranty fee from the previously exempted industrial and commercial profits.
Further support for the view that “income” has no independent force apart from
the four parenthetical illustrations can be drawn from an examination of the
succeeding articles in which [Page 512] specific regimes are set up for the taxation of
dividends (Article VI), certain interest (Article VII), royalties
(Article VIII) and rents (Article XIII). These articles provide
maximum rates of taxation which may be imposed by the state in which they
arise. On this question I am in respectful agreement with the conclusions of
Urie J.: It will immediately be seen that
Article VI deals with dividends, Article VII with “interest on bonds,
securities, notes, debentures or any other form of indebtedness (exclusive of
…)”, Article VIII with copyright and industrial property and
Article XIII with income from immovable property. All of the types of
income referred to in those Articles are referred to parenthetically in
paragraph 5 of Article III and as such they exemplify the kinds of income
which Canada could tax notwithstanding that each might also be considered
“industrial or commercial profits”. The paragraph does not enable Canada to
declare that a kind of income that was accorded exemption in the Convention as
such profits and is not specifically provided for in the Articles that follow
shall be taxable. The next question is, with reference to
Article II(2) of the Agreement, whether the term “laws in force” in Canada
“relating to the taxes which are the subject of this Convention” means the laws
as they existed in 1956 or the laws of Canada from time to time in force.
Specifically the question is whether or not that expression includes the 1974
amendments to the Income Tax Act. This takes us first of all to an
interpretation of the expression “relating to the taxes which are the subject
of this Convention” as found at the end of subs. (2). The Convention makes
industrial and commercial profits earned by a permanent establishment taxable
in the country where the permanent establishment exists and where those
earnings arose, and it also authorizes the taxation of “income” including
dividends, interest etc. However, the Treaty does not authorize the taxation of
industrial and commercial profits of a non-resident where those profits were
not earned through a permanent establishment in Canada. The guaranty fee falls
into the latter category. The revenue received by the non-resident bank by
reason of its guaranty of a Canadian lender represents industrial and
commercial profits received from within Canada but [Page 513] not earned in an entreprise carried on through a
Canadian permanent establishment. Laws enacted by Canada to redefine taxation
procedures and mechanisms with reference to income not subjected to taxation by
the Agreement are not, in my view, incorporated in the expression “laws in
force” in Canada as employed by the Agreement. To read this section otherwise
would be to feed the argument of the appellant, which in my view is without
foundation in law, that subs. (2) authorizes Canada or Germany to unilaterally
amend the tax Treaty from time to time as their domestic needs may dictate. It is well to remind ourselves in analysing
these statutes and the subtended tax Agreement that the international Agreement
does not itself levy taxes but simply authorizes the contracting parties,
within the terms of the Agreement, to do so. As I have already mentioned, s. 3 of the
ratifying statute of 1956 anticipates at least in part the problem with which
the Court is today faced. There is, of course, no room for debate on the
proposition that Parliament is supreme and can neither bind itself nor any
successor of Parliament when acting within its constitutionally-assigned
sovereign jurisdiction. Obviously it follows that s. 3 or any other part
of the 1956 statute can be repealed or amended. The question is not that, but
whether the collateral legislative action in connection with the Income Tax
Act has the effect of amending the 1956 statute. The suggestion that it
does have such an effect is startling. There are 26 concluded and 10 proposed
tax conventions, treaties or agreements between Canada and other nations of the
world. If the submission of the appellant is correct, these agreements are all
put in peril by any legislative action taken by Parliament with reference to
the revision of the Income Tax Act. For this practical reason one finds
it difficult to conclude that Parliament has left its own handiwork of 1956 in
such inadvertent jeopardy. That is not to say that before the 1956 Act can be
amended in substance it must be done by Parliament in an Act entitled “An Act
to Amend the [Page 514] Act of 1956”. But neither is the converse true,
that is that every tax enactment, adopted for whatever purpose, might have the
effect of amending one or more bilateral or multilateral tax conventions
without any avowed purpose or intention so to do. There is no doubt, in my view, that the effect
of s. 3 is to make the operation of any other law of Parliament, including
the Income Tax Act, subject to the terms of the 1956 Act and the
incorporated Agreement. The only exception to this result would be where
Parliament has expressly set out to amend the 1956 statute. Then, of course,
there is no conflict between the 1956 Act and “any other law”. This
interpretation has the necessary result of embodying in the Agreement, by
reason of Article II(2), as definitions of the words not therein defined,
the meaning of those words at the time the Agreement was adopted. Thus any
legislative action taken for whatever reason which results in a change or
expansion of a definition of a term such as “interest” does not prevail over
the terms of the 1956 statute because of the necessary meaning of s. 3
thereof. [Page 515] What the position of the appellant amounts to is
an assertion that Canada can simply amend the Agreement by the device of
redefining the term interest. As has already been noted, interest in the
ordinary commercial usage of that term simply means the payment of rent by a
borrower for the use of the principal of the lender to whom the rent is paid.
It may be that the money flow will be different than this simple definition
would indicate by reason of directions or special circumstances, but
essentially the payment is made by the payor for the use of the payee’s
principal. Here the respondent was not a borrower from the guarantor and it has
made no payment to the guarantor for the use of the guarantor’s principal. The
consequence of the 1974 tax amendment therefore, as urged by the appellant, is
simply a purported exercise of a unilateral right to effectively amend the
Agreement deliberately entered into and implemented by legislation by Canada in
1956. The Agreement provides, as for example in Article XXIII(2), for
alterations to it by unilateral action but these are exceptional and explicit.
That same Article establishes a procedure for termination by notice
terminating the Agreement effective the 1st day of January next following the
giving of notice. Subsection (2) provides a method for termination of
rates established in Article VII, supra, and other Articles. This
requires the giving of notice by one country to the other on or before the 30th
day of June in any year so as to revise the rate effective the 1st of January
following. No notice of termination appears in the record here. It is in lieu
of all these procedures enacted by Parliament that the appellant directs our
attention to the above sections of the 1974 Income Tax Act as
producing the same result. On this leg of the argument, therefore, I
conclude that the 1956 statute has introduced into our domestic law the terms
of the international Agreement and that properly construed that Agreement does
not authorize the taxation by domestic law of the guaranty fee by Canada. I
also reach the conclusion that the introduction of provisions relating to
interest by the amendments of 1974 to the Income Tax Act of Canada
evidences no intention by Parliament to amend the 1956 statute. I [Page 516] note also that this conclusion is in accord with
that reached by Mahoney J. when considering the Canada-U.S. Convention in Associates
Corporation of North America v. The Queen, [1980] 2 F.C. 377 aff’d [1980] 2
F.C. 382. In his reasons for judgment Mr. Justice Mahoney concluded [at
p. 381]: The Court was directed to a number of cases from
the United Kingdom dealing with the relationship said to exist between
legislatively-adopted treaties and domestic statutes generally. Only a few of
these authorities can be said to have any bearing on the issue raised in this
appeal. I refer firstly to Inland Revenue Commissioners v. Collco Dealings
Ltd., [1962] A.C. 1 in which the House of Lords considered an amendment to
United Kingdom income tax legislation which was intended to put an end to the
practice of “dividend stripping”, the paying of dividends out of profits
accumulated before the date on which the shares were acquired. The precise
issue before their Lordships was whether the opening words of the provision, “…
a person entitled under any enactment to an exemption from income tax which
extends to dividends … ”, should be read to include a resident of Ireland whose
dividends would otherwise be exempted by a U.K.-Irish Agreement. Their
Lordships concluded, affirming the Court of Appeal and Vaisey J., that the
plain words of the enactment extended to the exemption for Irish residents.
Viscount Simonds, at p. 19, declared: [Page 517] It would not, I think, be possible to state
in clearer language and with less ambiguity the determination of the
legislature to put an end in all and every case to a practice which was a gross
misuse of a concession. Similarly in Woodend (K.V. Ceylon) Rubber and
Tea Co. v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue, [1971] A.C. 321, the Privy
Council concluded that the Legislature of Ceylon had intended the expression
“non-resident company” to apply so as to override any inconsistencies with a
1950 U.K. Agreement, holding that “the general words must receive their full
meaning” (per Lord Donovan at p. 335). These cases add little to
the analysis of the present appeal as the terms of the 1974 amendments to the
Canadian Income Tax Act evidence no comparable intention by the Canadian
Parliament to override the 1956 Agreement. In the final analysis the appellant must fail
because the 1956 statute, being the legislative adoption of the international
tax Agreement, has not been amended by the income tax amendments of 1974 and
accordingly Article III(1) of the Agreement prevents the application of
the Income Tax Act to the guaranty fees paid by the respondent to the
non-resident bank. Accordingly the appeal should be dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed with costs. Solicitor for the appellant: R. Tassé,
Ottawa. Solicitors for the respondent: Blaney,
Pasternak, Smela and Watson, Toronto.   