                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation: Redeemer
  Foundation v. Canada (National Revenue), [2008] 2 S.C.R. 643, 2008 SCC
  46  Date:  20080731 Docket:  31753  Between: Redeemer
Foundation Appellant and Minister of
National Revenue Respondent  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Charron and Rothstein JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 29)  Reasons
  Dissenting in Part: (paras. 30 to 58)   McLachlin C.J. and LeBel J. (Fish and Charron JJ.
  concurring)  Rothstein J. (Binnie and
  Deschamps JJ. concurring)  ______________________________ Redeemer Foundation v. Canada (National Revenue), [2008] 2
S.C.R. 643, 2008 SCC 46  Redeemer Foundation                                                                                                        Appellant  v.  Minister of National Revenue                                                                                        Respondent  Indexed as:  Redeemer Foundation v. Canada
(National Revenue)  Neutral citation:  2008 SCC 46.  File No.:  31753.  2008:  February 28; 2008:  July 31.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel,
Deschamps, Fish, Charron and Rothstein JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Taxation — Income tax — Administration and
enforcement — Minister of National Revenue’s power to inspect, audit and
examine taxpayers’ records — Whether Minister must obtain judicial
authorization during course of legitimate audit of registered charity before
asking charity to provide information that identifies its donors — Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .), ss. 230(2) (a), 231.1(1) .   The appellant Foundation, a registered charity, operates
a forgivable loan program that finances the education of students at an
affiliated college.  The Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”) was concerned that some
donations to the program were not valid charitable donations because the
donors’ contributions were made solely to finance the education of their own
children.  CRA served the Foundation with a requirement to record the identity
of each donor and the name of the student who received credit for each
donation.  In a subsequent audit, CRA requested the donor information, which
the Foundation provided.  CRA advised the Foundation that there might be
grounds to revoke its charitable status and to reassess its donors.  Notices of
reassessment were sent to some donors.  The Foundation applied for judicial
review of the CRA’s request for donor information.  The reviewing judge
declared that the request was improper without prior judicial authorization,
the donor information should be returned, and the Minister of National Revenue
should be prevented from acting upon the information to reassess donors.  The
Federal Court of Appeal set aside the reviewing judge’s order and dismissed the
application for judicial review.  Held (Binnie, Deschamps
and Rothstein JJ. dissenting in part):  The appeal should be
dismissed.  Per McLachlin C.J.
and LeBel, Fish and Charron JJ.:  The Minister was entitled to the donor
information through the combined effect of ss. 230(2) (a) and 231.1 
of the Income Tax Act , and the Minister was not required to obtain
judicial authorization before requesting the information.  The Minister has a
broad power under s. 231.1  to inspect, audit and examine taxpayers’ records
and any information that is or should be in the taxpayer’s books.  The
Foundation was required to collect the donor information pursuant to its record
keeping obligations under s. 230(2) (a) because the information was
necessary for determining whether to revoke its registration as a charity. 
Section 231.2  still serves a useful purpose if s. 231.1  is read as
authorizing the Minister to obtain information on unnamed third parties during
the audit of a taxpayer without judicial authorization, since s. 231.2 
addresses circumstances where the Minister needs information about one or more
taxpayers outside the context of a formal audit.  [1] [12-13] [15]   The Federal Court does not have the jurisdiction to
order the Minister to vacate tax assessments.  Taxpayers should challenge
evidence used for a reassessment before the Tax Court of Canada.  [28]    The Federal Court did not have
jurisdiction to vacate the donors’ tax assessments.  Any issues as to the
admissibility of evidence in respect of assessments should be made at the Tax
Court of Canada.  [58]  Cases Cited  By McLachlin C.J. and
LeBel J.  Referred
to:  R. v. McKinlay
Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627.  By Rothstein J. (dissenting in
part)  Canada Trustco Mortgage Co. v.
Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601,
2005 SCC 54; Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27.  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .), ss. 152(8) , 169(1) , 230 , 231.1 , 231.2 , 248(1) .  Authors Cited  Canada. 
Ministry of National Revenue.  Audit Directorate.  Requirement Guidelines. 
Ottawa:  Ministry of National Revenue, July 20, 1995.  APPEAL from a judgment of the
Federal Court of Appeal (Richard C.J. and Sharlow and
Pelletier JJ.A.), [2007] 3 F.C.R. 40, 354 N.R. 147, [2007] 1 C.T.C. 280,
2006 D.T.C. 6712, [2006] F.C.J. No. 1492 (QL), 2006 CarswellNat 4821, 2006
FCA 325, reversing a decision of Hughes J., [2006] 1 F.C.R. 416, 281 F.T.R.
143, [2006] 1 C.T.C. 7, 2005 D.T.C. 5617, [2005] F.C.J. No. 1678 (QL),
2005 CarswellNat 3280, 2005 FC 1361, granting an application for judicial
review of a decision of the Canada Revenue Agency to request third party donor
information and documentation from the appellant.  Appeal dismissed, Binnie,
Deschamps and Rothstein JJ. dissenting in part.  Jacqueline L. King, Robert B. Hayhoe and
Gerald Chipeur, for the appellant.  Gordon Bourgard and Christine Mohr, for
the respondent.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and
LeBel, Fish and Charron JJ. was delivered by  [1]    
The Chief Justice and LeBel J. —
The issue in this appeal is whether the Minister was required under
s. 231.2(2)  of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .),
to obtain judicial authorization before asking the Redeemer Foundation
(“Foundation”), a registered charity, for information about the identity of its
donors in the course of a legitimate audit of the Foundation.  In our view, he
was not required to do so.  The Minister was entitled to information about the
identity of the donors through the combined effect of s. 230(2) (a)
and s. 231.1 .  (The relevant provisions are reproduced in the Appendix.) 
Moreover, the Minister requested that information for a legitimate purpose — to
investigate the validity of the Forgivable Loan Program (“FLP”) operated by the
Foundation.  For these reasons, we would dismiss the appeal and affirm the
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal.  I.      Facts  [2]    
The Foundation is affiliated with Redeemer University College. The
Foundation operates the FLP as a means of financing the education of students
at the College. In October 1998, the Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”) audited both
the Foundation and the College in respect of the 1997 taxation year. The audit
raised concerns regarding the Foundation’s compliance with the Income Tax
Act . A central concern of the CRA was that many of the contributions to the
FLP might not have been valid charitable donations because they were made by
parents of students attending the College with the expectation that the money
would be used to finance their child’s education. The CRA cautioned that it
would consider disallowing deductions to parents on their individual income tax
returns. Ultimately, however, the CRA determined that it required additional
information to fully understand the transactions under investigation.  [3]    
In particular, the CRA expressed its concern that the Foundation had
been unable to provide completed transmittal forms which recorded the identity
of each donor and the name of the student who was to receive credit for the
donation. It resumed its audit of the Foundation in 2001 for the 1998, 1999 and
2000 taxation years. Again, the Foundation could not produce completed
transmittal forms and advised the CRA that the forms had not been preserved for
those years. In response, the CRA served the Foundation with a requirement
under s. 230(3)  of the Income Tax Act  asking it to maintain proper
records, including the transmittal forms. The CRA decided to wait until the
transmittal forms were available before pursuing its investigation into the
links between donors and students.  [4]    
The CRA began a further audit in 2003 in regard to the 2001 and 2002
taxation years. In the course of that audit, the CRA’s representative made an
oral request of the Foundation’s Executive Director for certain information,
including a list of donors. The Foundation complied with this request. Upon its
review of all of the information, the CRA advised the Foundation of its view
that a valid charitable donation arrangement did not exist and that there might
be grounds for revoking the Foundation’s charitable status as a result. Several
meetings subsequently took place between the CRA and representatives for both
the Foundation and the donors to discuss the implications of the CRA’s position
on the charitable status of the Foundation and reassessment implications for
the donors. In addition, the CRA contacted certain donors to advise them of its
intention to disallow deductions for their donations to the Foundation and to
request additional information. Notices of reassessment were eventually sent to
some of these donors.  [5]    
During a follow-up meeting with the Foundation in June 2004, the CRA
requested the donor lists for the 2002 and 2003 taxation years. The Foundation
refused to provide the information, upon the advice that it would be improper to
do so without the CRA having first obtained an order from the Federal Court
pursuant to ss. 231.2(2)  and 231.2(3)  of the Income Tax Act .  Section
231.2(2) of the Act states:  The Minister shall not impose on any person (in this section referred
to as a “third party”) a requirement under subsection (1) to provide
information or any document relating to one or more unnamed persons unless the
Minister first obtains the authorization of a judge under subsection (3).   [6]    
In September 2005, the Foundation brought an application for judicial
review of the CRA’s 2003 request, with which the Foundation had complied by
providing the CRA with the 2001 and 2002 donor lists and related information.
The Foundation sought a declaration that the 2003 request was improper, that
the information be returned and that the CRA be prevented from acting upon the
information, such as by reassessing the donors identified by the information.  II.     Judgments Below  A.     Federal Court, [2006] 1 F.C.R. 416,
2005 FC 1361  [7]    
Hughes J. allowed the Foundation’s application for judicial review and
ordered that any reassessments based on the information obtained as a result of
the 2003 request be set aside. Hughes J. held that ss. 231.2(2)  and 231.2(3) 
were “intended to protect third parties from having information relating to
their activities obtained from other persons audited by the Minister, who then
will use it for taxation purposes” (para. 14).  [8]    
Given that there was evidence that the CRA had used the information
obtained from the Foundation to contact donors in respect of reassessment, in
his view, the 2003 request fell within the scope of conduct covered by ss.
231.2(2)  and 231.2(3) . He therefore held that the CRA’s request for and use of
the information without prior judicial authorization was wrong.  [9]    
Hughes J. held that the Federal Court had the power to restrain the
Minister from acting upon improperly obtained information by virtue of s.
18.1(3) (b) of the Federal Courts Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 , which
includes the power to “set aside . . ., prohibit or restrain, a decision, order
[or] act”. In his view, the word “decision” was “broad enough to include acts
consequent upon the initial illegal act” (para. 22). It was on this basis that
he set aside the reassessments.  B.     Federal
Court of Appeal, [2007] 3 F.C.R. 40, 2006 FCA 325  [10] Pelletier
J.A., writing for a unanimous court, allowed the Minister’s appeal, set aside
the order of the Federal Court and dismissed the application for judicial
review. Pelletier J.A. looked to other provisions of the Income Tax Act  to
inform his interpretation of s. 231.2(2) . In particular, he relied on s.
230(1) , which requires taxpayers to keep records that will enable the Minister
to determine taxes payable under the Act. In addition, he considered s. 230(2) ,
which identifies information that is specifically required to be kept by
charities, and held that the information at issue was covered by this
provision. When combined with the Minister’s general audit powers under s.
231.1(1) , Pelletier J.A. surmised that these provisions provided sufficient
authority for the CRA’s 2003 request. As he explained:  If the auditor is entitled to obtain information by means of his own
examination of the Foundation’s books and records, I can think of no principle
which would require him to obtain a court order before asking for the
Foundation’s assistance in obtaining the very same information. [para. 37]  [11] Pelletier
J.A. rejected the CRA’s use of the information to reassess the Foundation’s
donors as a valid concern. In his view, given the reciprocity of tax treatment
between a charity and its donors, the CRA had a valid interest in reviewing the
tax returns of the Foundation’s donors based on its audit of the Foundation and
its conclusion that many donations were not eligible for deduction.  III.     Statutory Interpretation  [12] The
case before us, first and foremost, is one of statutory construction.  The main
section at issue is s. 231.1(1) which gives the Minister a broad power to
inspect, audit and examine taxpayers’ records.  This is the section that the
Minister and the Federal Court of Appeal relied on as authorizing the Minister
to obtain without judicial authorization the names of donors to the Foundation:  231.1 (1) An authorized person may, at all reasonable times,
for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement of this Act,  (a)    inspect, audit or examine the books and records of a
taxpayer and any document of the taxpayer or of any other person that relates
or may relate to the information that is or should be in the books or records
of the taxpayer or to any amount payable by the taxpayer under this
Act, . . .  [13] On its
face, this section covers the situation at bar.  It authorizes the Minister to
examine “information that is or should be” in the Foundation’s books.  The
information at issue regarding third party taxpayers who had contributed to the
Foundation was either in the Foundation’s books, or “should” have been in its
books pursuant to the broad record-keeping requirements created by s. 230(2) :  230. . . .  (2)   Every registered charity and registered Canadian amateur
athletic association shall keep records and books of account at an address in
Canada recorded with the Minister or designated by the Minister containing  (a)   information
in such form as will enable the Minister to determine whether there are any
grounds for the revocation of its registration under this Act;  (b)   a
duplicate of each receipt containing prescribed information for a donation
received by it; and  (c)   other information in such form as will enable the Minister
to verify the donations to it for which a deduction or tax credit is available
under this Act.  The Minister led
unchallenged evidence to the effect that the information it sought identifying
the donors was necessary for determining whether the Foundation was issuing
receipts not in accordance with the Act and, therefore, whether there were
grounds to revoke its registration.  It would seem to follow that by the
combined effect of ss. 230(2)(a) and 231.1 of the Act, the Minister
was entitled to information on those donors within the hands or power of the
Foundation.  [14] The
first argument of the appellant is that the principles of statutory
construction require the Court to read s. 231.1(1) as not permitting access to
any third party records without judicial authorization.  It was raised that s.
231.2 would serve no purpose if s. 231.1 were read as authorizing the Minister
to obtain information on unnamed persons (i.e. the contributors or “third
parties” in this case).  Therefore, s. 231.1(1) cannot be read as applying
to information about unnamed persons, and a warrant is required before
examining information about donors to the Foundation.  [15] Statutory
provisions must be interpreted in a textual, contextual and purposive way, and
all sections of a related group of provisions should be given coherent meaning
if possible.  But, we do not accept the argument that s. 231.2 serves no
purpose if s. 231.1 is read as authorizing the Minister to obtain information
on unnamed third parties during the audit of a taxpayer. The Minister may well
need to obtain information about one or more taxpayers outside the context of a
formal audit. Section 231.2 responds to this need, subject to a requirement for
judicial authorization if the Minister is seeking information relating to
unnamed persons from a third party record holder.  It follows that the argument
that s. 231.1(1) should be read down to avoid redundancy fails.  IV.     The Purpose of Requesting the Donor List  [16] Another
argument raised in support of the appeal is that judicial authorization was
required because one of the purposes the CRA was pursuing in obtaining the
donor list was to reassess the Foundation’s donors.  In our opinion, however,
the facts of this case confirm that the CRA needed the list to investigate its
suspicions regarding the legitimacy of the FLP. The reassessment of the
Foundation’s donors is just a logical consequence of the CRA’s suspicion that
the FLP was not a valid charitable program.  [17] Upon
concluding its audit in 2003 regarding the 2001 and 2002 taxation years, the
CRA informed the Foundation of its findings as follows:  In our review
of the Transmittal Forms, a list of donors and the list of                             students
receiving the forgivable loans, we found that in the majority of cases the
students solicited funds for the FLP from their own parents. The students then
received 90% of the parents’ gifts under the FLP to pay for their tuition and
related costs. The parents receive a charitable donation receipt for income tax
purposes for 100% of the gift amount and their child-student receives a tuition
receipt for the applicable portion of their loan . . . .  For the reasons listed above, there may be grounds to revoke the
organization’s status as a registered charity. [Emphasis added; C.A. reasons,
at para. 9.]  The above
quotation confirms that the CRA reviewed the donor list, along with the
transmittal forms and a list of students benefiting from the FLP, in order to
assess the validity of the Foundation’s status as a registered charity. The CRA
used the donor list to shed light on the links between donors and students,
which were the very subject of its investigation of the Foundation and of the
validity of the Foundation’s charitable status. Regardless of whether the donor
list was used by the CRA in pursuing its audits of the donors themselves, the
CRA clearly had a valid purpose in requesting and using the information to
complete its audit of the Foundation.  [18] The
position of the appellant would require the CRA to obtain judicial
authorization whenever it has as even one of its purposes the reassessment of
unnamed persons.  This approach would compel the CRA to obtain judicial
authorization to access the records of practically any charity it chooses to
audit. When a charity is audited, we presume that it will generally be to
review the validity of the organization’s charitable status and/or the
legitimacy of the donations it receives. Such a review will always entail a
possibility, depending on the outcome of the initial investigation, that the donors
will be investigated and, ultimately, reassessed.  It is therefore unclear
under what circumstances the CRA would be able to audit a charity without
having to obtain judicial authorization to review information pertaining to the
charity’s donors. We find it hard to imagine how this test would be workable in
practice other than by requiring the CRA to obtain judicial authorization every
time it audits a charity.  [19] In
addition to audits of charities, this approach would potentially require
judicial authorization in a variety of other circumstances. Given the
reciprocal nature of many tax arrangements, where a suspicion arises that one
taxpayer is not complying with the Act, there may often be a corresponding
suspicion that there are others who are not complying in regard to the same
transactions. Presumably, the CRA may, in auditing the first taxpayer, obtain
information pertaining to other taxpayers, and it may reassess those other
taxpayers as a result. Judicial authorization would therefore be required.  [20] Returning
to the issue of charities, we share the concerns of the Federal Court of Appeal
regarding the ability of the CRA to review the records that charities are
legally required to maintain. Section 230(2) , as mentioned, requires registered
charities to keep certain records. Section 230(2) (c) specifically
requires a registered charity to keep records containing  other
information in such form as will enable the Minister to verify the donations
to it for which a deduction or tax credit is available under this Act.  Under s. 230(3),
where adequate records have not been kept, the Minister may require a charity
to keep such records, as was done in this case. The donor list was used, in
conjunction with the records the Foundation was specifically ordered to keep by
the CRA, to assess the validity of the FLP.  In our opinion, the donor list was
clearly the type of record the Foundation was required to keep pursuant to s.
230(2) . In the words of Pelletier J.A.: “The maintenance of books and records
would not assist in monitoring compliance with the Act if the Minister was not
able to consult those books and records” (para. 31).  It would be illogical to
require a charity to keep records to enable the CRA to verify the legitimacy of
its donations, but then require the CRA to obtain judicial authorization in
order to review those records. Judicial authorization would not serve any
useful purpose in such circumstances.  [21] In the
instant case, another difficulty resulted from the fact that it was apparently
necessary to identify the donors in order to assess the validity of the charity
itself.  The CRA suspected that the FLP was not a valid charitable program
because of the relationship between the donors and the beneficiaries (the
students).  This suspicion could not be confirmed without obtaining records
indicating the identities both of the donors and of those benefiting from their
donations.  [22] The s.
231.2(2)  requirement should not apply to situations in which the requested
information is required in order to verify the compliance of the taxpayer being
audited. Regardless of whether or not there is a possibility or a probability
that the audit will lead to the investigation of other unnamed taxpayers, the
CRA should be able to obtain information it would otherwise have the ability to
see in the course of an audit. The argument was made that if, during an audit,
the records of the taxpayer record the identity of the other party to a
transaction and the CRA requires nothing further, there is no need to resort to
s. 231.2(2) . However, it must be kept in mind that, in the instant case, the
Foundation had not been keeping proper records. The illogical implication is
that merely because the charity was not keeping proper records, the CRA is
required to obtain judicial authorization even though those records, which
would have included the very information the CRA is seeking, are ones that the
CRA would ordinarily be able to review during an audit.  V.     The Appellant’s Policy Argument  [23] Another
argument relied on by the appellant and accepted by Justice Rothstein is that
reading s. 231.1(1) as conferring the right to obtain information about third
parties in the course of an audit may lead to misuse of the audit power. 
Instead of seeking judicial authorization to obtain information about unnamed
persons from a third party record holder, the Minister would simply audit the
record holder.  [24] As mentioned
above, s. 231.1(1) is broadly worded.  It allows access to “information that is
or should be in the books or records of the taxpayer”.  It thus gives
access to information about third parties that is required to be kept by the
taxpayer, as well as information that may not be required to be kept but
happens to be in the taxpayer’s records.  [25] It is
true that the broad wording of s. 231.1(1) provides a powerful tool that may
reveal a great deal of information about transactions between the taxpayer
under audit and third parties.  However, this is business information. 
Taxpayers have a very low expectation of privacy in their business records
relevant to the determination of their tax liability: R. v. McKinlay
Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627.  [26] The
third party information at issue is directly tied to the operation of the
Foundation and its status as a charity, receiving donations from third parties
for which tax benefits are sought. The information was obtained by the Minister
as part of a bona fide audit of the Foundation.  A person who
contributes to a charity can reasonably expect that if the charity is audited,
the donor’s contribution may be examined.  Such a review will always raise the
possibility that the donors will be investigated and ultimately reassessed.  [27] There
remains a concern that the CRA may attempt to investigate unnamed taxpayers
under the “guise” of an audit.  Use of the word “guise” implies that the
taxpayer being audited is not really suspected of non-compliance and that the
unnamed persons are the real targets. However, if an organization’s charitable
program is not valid, then both the charity and any of its donors who
claim tax credits are non-compliant. The CRA has a valid interest in
investigating both.  The same would be true of any other relationship involving
reciprocal tax treatment.  In our view, the risk seems minimal that the CRA
would use its authority to audit a taxpayer who is not personally suspected of
non-compliance merely to investigate other unnamed taxpayers for
non-compliance.  VI.  Remedy  [28] Given
our conclusion that the CRA was not required to obtain judicial authorization
in requesting and obtaining the donor list and related information, it is,
strictly speaking, unnecessary to consider the issue of remedy for the purpose
of disposing of this appeal. However, we feel that some comment is warranted on
the Federal Court order granted by the applications judge, which vacated the
reassessments of any donor who was identified to the CRA only by means of the
information obtained as a result of the 2003 request.  We agree with Rothstein
J. that the Federal Court does not have the jurisdiction to order the Minister
of National Revenue to vacate tax assessments. Where a taxpayer has concerns
regarding certain evidence being used against him for the purposes of
reassessment, the proper venue to challenge its admissibility is the Tax Court
of Canada.  [29] For
these reasons, we would dismiss the appeal with costs.  The reasons of Binnie, Deschamps and Rothstein JJ. were delivered by [30] Rothstein J. (dissenting in part) — I
have read the reasons of the Chief Justice and LeBel J. but I am unable to
concur.  In my respectful view, s. 231.2(2)  of the Income Tax Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c.  1 (5th Supp .), was intended to provide some restraint on the
broad unilateral authority of the Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”).  The relevant
provisions of the Act should be read in a manner that gives meaning to that
section.  I would allow the appeal.  The relevant provisions of the Act have
been reproduced in the reasons of the majority.  [31] There
is no doubt that broad power has been conferred on the CRA in respect of its
audit of taxpayers.  (Under s. 248(1) of the Income Tax Act , the
definition of  “taxpayer” includes “any person whether or not liable to pay
tax” and this includes charitable organizations such as the Redeemer Foundation
(“Foundation”).)  Under s. 231.1(1), an authorized person may, for any
purpose related to the administration and enforcement of the Income Tax Act ,
inspect, audit or examine books and records of a taxpayer.  The CRA may require
any documents of the taxpayer and any other person that may relate to
information that is or should be in the books and records of the taxpayer.  [32] Under
s. 230(1), every person carrying on business and every person required to pay
tax shall keep records and books of account in such form and containing such
information as will enable the taxes payable to be determined.  [33] The
requirement on charities to keep records and books is specifically dealt with
under s. 230(2) .  Every registered charity is required to keep records and
books containing information that will enable the CRA to determine if there are
any grounds for revocation of the charity’s registration, a duplicate of each
receipt for a donation containing prescribed information and other information
as will enable the CRA to verify the donation for which deductions or tax
credits are available.  [34] Under
s. 230(3), where adequate records and books have not been kept, the CRA may
require that the books and records shall be kept as specified by it.  [35] Read
in isolation, these provisions might be interpreted as empowering the CRA, in
addition to conducting an audit of a taxpayer at any reasonable time, to
require such information to be kept as would enable the CRA to obtain the names
of unnamed  persons.  However, these provisions must be interpreted having
regard to other relevant provisions of the Act.  In Canada Trustco Mortgage
Co. v. Canada, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 601, 2005 SCC 54, at para. 10, the Chief
Justice and Major J. stated:  The interpretation of a statutory provision must be made according to a
textual, contextual and purposive analysis to find a meaning that is
harmonious with the Act as a whole. [Emphasis added.]  [36] Here
the other relevant provision is s. 231.2.  Under s. 231.2(1),  the Minister
may . . . for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement of this
Act, . . . require that any person provide . . .  (a)
any information or additional information . . . or  (b) any document.  Section 231.2(1)
must be interpreted as providing the CRA with additional power to what it is
given under ss. 230 and 231.1.  If it did not provide additional power, it
would be unnecessary.  Parliament does not intend to enact pointless
legislation.  As stated in Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1
S.C.R. 27, at para. 27,  a label of absurdity can be attached to interpretations which defeat the
purpose of a statute or render some aspect of it pointless or
futile . . . .  [37] The
CRA’s audit and inspection powers under ss. 230 and 231.1 cannot be as wide as
the majority asserts because such interpretation would ignore and give no
meaning to s. 231.2.  However, the additional power given to the CRA under s.
231.2(1), although very broad, is not itself unlimited.  It is made subject to
s. 231.2(2)  which provides that the CRA shall not under s. 231.2(1) impose a
requirement for information or documents relating to unnamed persons unless it
first obtains judicial authorization.  [38] Under
the majority’s interpretation and that of the Court of Appeal, the CRA could
always avoid s. 231.2(2)  by requesting information pertaining to unnamed
persons in the exercise of its audit power of the taxpayer it was asking to
provide that information.  That would leave to the discretion of the CRA
whether it wished to proceed by way of audit or judicial authorization to
obtain information or documents relating to unnamed persons.  That would render
s. 231.2(2) , a taxpayer protection provision, at best, a feeble requirement
and, at worst, totally ineffective.  [39] At
para.  15, the majority states that the argument that s. 231.1(1) should be
read down to avoid redundancy fails.  With respect, the notion of reading down
is misplaced.  What is required is to interpret provisions of the Act that bear
upon each other to be coherent when read together.  The question here is
whether, in the exercise of its authority to audit, the CRA may avoid s.
231.2(2) .  The majority’s approach would eliminate the need for s. 231.2(2) 
entirely whenever the CRA is auditing a taxpayer.  Nothing in the Act suggests
such a restricted application of s. 231.2(2) .  [40] I
think the difference between ss. 230 and 231.1 on the one hand and s. 231.2 on
the other is that under ss. 230 and 231.1, the focus is on the taxpayer’s
compliance with the Act and the ability of the CRA to ensure that under a
self-reporting system, it may seek and obtain information that will enable it
to ensure such compliance or determine non-compliance by the taxpayer.  Under
s. 231.2, the information and documents sought by the CRA, with a judge’s
authorization when necessary and otherwise without it, may be seen as enhancing
the CRA’s audit power of the  taxpayer, but  may also be for other purposes
such as dealing with non-payment and obtaining information about unnamed
persons.  [41] Where
the CRA seeks information or documents for a purpose other than compliance by
the taxpayer with the Act that may be determined through audit, it is acting
outside ss. 230 and 231.1.  If what the CRA seeks pertains to unnamed persons,
judicial authorization is required.  [42] As a
result of the audit of the Foundation and Redeemer University College for the
1997 fiscal year, which apparently raised concerns for the CRA, letters were
written on July 10, 2000 to donors to the Foundation proposing to reassess and
disallow credits for donations associated with the Forgivable Loan Program
(“FLP”) for students of the College.  It would thus appear that as early as
July 2000, if not before, it was the CRA’s intent to reassess donors associated
with the FLP.  During subsequent audits, books and records were required under
s. 230(3), and information and documents were requested to enable the CRA to
reassess donors for subsequent years.  [43] In my
opinion, once the CRA wished to obtain the names of and information about
unnamed persons, it was required to first obtain judicial authorization under
s. 231.2(2) .  It could not avoid the necessity of obtaining that
authorization by issuing a requirement under s. 230(3).  Further, I agree with
Hughes J., the applications judge, that the necessity of judicial authorization
could not be avoided by making a verbal or informal request for the information
([2006] 1 F.C.R. 416, 2005 FC 1361).  [44]  Whether
information and documents were required for the sole purpose of  obtaining
information about unnamed persons, or the dual purpose of auditing the
Foundation and obtaining information about the unnamed persons, the CRA was
obligated to comply with s. 231.2(2) .  [45] The
CRA argues that the Foundation was required to maintain the information it
sought for purposes of its audit.  It says it would be unreasonable and
impractical to require the CRA to have to obtain judicial authorization just
because there may be a chance that unnamed persons may be disclosed in the
information of the taxpayer it is auditing.  It says it audits or examines
close to 400,000 returns in a year.  Since it is entitled to the information
for purposes of the audit, no useful purpose would be served by requiring it to
obtain judicial authorization for information pertaining to unnamed persons.  [46] I
agree that it would be unreasonable and impractical to require the CRA to
obtain judicial authorization just because there may be a  possibility that 
the names of persons other than the taxpayer may be disclosed in the
information of the taxpayer it is auditing. But that is not this case.  In this
case, the CRA had decided in July 2000 or earlier that it intended to reassess 
donors, but needed more information before it could do so.  This is not a case
where the information needed to reassess donors was entirely within the records
when the CRA’s purpose was solely the audit of the Foundation.  When the CRA
forms the intention to ask for information pertaining to or identifying unnamed
persons to verify their compliance with the Act, judicial authorization must be
obtained.  [47] I
accept that the CRA audits and inspects almost 400,000 returns each year, but
its own practices indicate that obtaining judicial authorization should not be
unduly burdensome.  The CRA has issued “Requirement Guidelines” which outline
steps to be taken to obtain information during an audit when information
considered necessary by the CRA is not voluntarily forthcoming.  The Guidelines
segment when a requirement under s. 231.2(1) may be issued and when a
requirement under s. 231.2(2) , judicial authorization, is necessary.  [48] At
para. 20, the Chief Justice and LeBel J. state that “[i]t would be illogical to
require a charity to keep records to enable the CRA to verify the legitimacy of
its donations, but then require the CRA to obtain judicial authorization in
order to review those records.”  I do not say that if a taxpayer is required to
maintain records, that the CRA cannot see those records without judicial
authorization.  The distinction I do make is in circumstances in which the CRA
has formed the intent to obtain information pertaining to compliance of specific
but unnamed persons and requires the charity to maintain books and records or
requests the charity to provide information so that the CRA can obtain the
information and names of the unnamed persons.  In such cases, it must obtain
judicial authorization.  [49] The
majority also says that s. 231.2(2)  should not apply in situations where the
information requested is required to verify compliance by the audited taxpayer
when that taxpayer has not been keeping “proper records”.  They say that the
illogical implication is that the CRA must obtain judicial authorization merely
because the taxpayer did not maintain proper records.  Here the Foundation had
not been asked to keep transmittal records until November 1999.  At the same
time, the CRA stated that it would “disallo[w] the deductions to parents on
their individual income tax returns if the Charity fails to cease this
practice” (participation in the FLP).  There is no indication, other than the
CRA’s specific request that the Foundation maintain transmittal forms in 1999,
that transmittal forms were “proper records” that the Foundation or any other
charity was required to keep under s. 230(2) .  Once the CRA decided that it
would reassess donors participating in the FLP, the request for transmittal
forms was a request for information about unnamed persons pertaining to their
compliance with the Act.  The letter request for transmittal forms in 1999
could not be used to bypass s. 231.2(2) .  [50] The
Guidelines state:  When the
Minister is seeking to require information from any person relating to one or
more unknown parties, the Minister must obtain prior judicial authorization
under subsection 231.2(3) of the ITA . . . .  (Ministry of National Revenue, Requirement Guidelines, July 20,
1995, at p. 5)  There is no
indication that the requirement to obtain judicial authorization when the CRA
is seeking information pertaining to unnamed persons is not applicable during
the course of an audit.  [51] The
CRA says that inconsistent administrative practice is not a determinative
factor in statutory interpretation.  I agree.  However, the Guidelines include
the circumstances when judicial authorization is necessary without in any way
indicating that the procedure should be avoided if possible for practicality
reasons or that it is unnecessary when an audit is being conducted.  Indeed,
the application is made ex parte, and pursuant to s. 231.2(3) , all that
need be demonstrated is that the person or group is ascertainable and that the
purpose of the application is to verify compliance by the person or group with
any duty or obligation under the Act.  I infer that recourse to judicial
authorization when necessary should not be unduly burdensome.  [52] The
CRA says that its power under s. 231.2(1) is permissive and that the
restriction on that permissive power in s. 231.2(2)  does not transform the
permissive power into a mandatory obligation.  However, as I have indicated,
where the CRA seeks information pertaining to unnamed persons for the purpose
of verifying their compliance with the Act, it cannot obtain that information
under its authority to audit another  taxpayer.  It is open to the CRA to
resort to s. 231.2.  If it does so, it is under s. 231.2(2)  when it seeks
information about unnamed persons.  [53] The
Federal Court of Appeal was of the opinion that because there is a reciprocity
in the tax treatment of most transactions, the CRA may use the information
obtained from one taxpayer to ensure compliance by the other party to the
transaction.  The Court of Appeal stated:  The Minister
has every interest in confirming that the amount claimed as a  business expense
by the buyer is the amount recorded as revenue by the seller.  In the case of
registered charities, the same reciprocity applies.  If the Minister determines
that donations received are not eligible for deduction, then he has an interest
in reviewing the returns of those to whom a receipt has been issued in respect
of those donations.  This ability to subject both parties to a transaction to
equivalent tax treatment is a fundamental aspect of the verification process.  ([2007] 3
F.C.R. 40, 2006 FCA 325, at para.  41)   [54] I
agree that there is reciprocity of tax treatment of many commercial and
charitable transactions and that the CRA may have an interest in seeing how
both the taxpayer and the other party to a transaction have recognized it for
tax purposes.  If, during an audit, the records of the taxpayer record the
identity of the other party to a transaction and the CRA requires nothing
further, there is no need to resort to s. 231.2(2) .  But that is not an
argument that justifies bypassing the requirements of s. 231.2(2)  which would
be the case if every time a taxpayer was audited, the CRA had unfettered
licence to obtain information pertaining to unnamed persons.  [55] In
their reasons, my colleagues deal with the policy arguments surrounding the
interpretation of the Act.  They state in para. 25 that individuals have a very
low expectation of privacy in their business and tax records and that it is
indeed the case that s. 231.1 may reveal a great deal of information about
audited taxpayers and unnamed persons.  However, this case is one of statutory
interpretation.  I agree that individuals and entities may have a low
expectation of privacy in their business and tax records, but in my view, it is
still necessary to interpret the Act in a manner that gives coherent meaning to
the relevant provisions as read together.  [56] The
Chief Justice and LeBel J. say the CRA is entitled, without resort to
s. 231.2(2) , to request information that ought to be in the records of a
taxpayer according to the Act.  However, as stated, the relevant sections of
the Act are extremely broad.  Because the authority of the CRA under the Act is
so broad, it should be required to follow the procedures provided in the Act
rigorously.  Section 231.2(2)  was intended to provide some minimal restraint on
those broad powers, and in my respectful view, in the course of an audit of a
taxpayer, when the CRA forms the intention to obtain information pertaining to
unnamed persons, judicial authorization under s. 231.2(2)  is required.  [57] I
would allow the appeal with costs and restore the decision of the applications
judge with one exception.  Paragraph 4 of the application judge’s order of
October 4, 2005, reads:  The Respondent shall vacate all reassessments and proposals to reassess
in respect of any donor where identity was made known to the Respondent only by
means of the information illegally obtained;  [58] The
CRA submits that the Federal Court does not have the jurisdiction to order the
Minister of National Revenue to vacate tax assessments.  I agree.  Section
152(8)  of the Income Tax Act  deems an assessment to be valid unless
varied or vacated on objection to the CRA or on appeal to the Tax Court of
Canada.  Section 169(1)  of the Income Tax Act , providing for an appeal
to the Tax Court, is the mechanism available to taxpayers who wish to have
their assessments vacated.  Pursuant to s. 18.5  of the Federal Courts Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 ,  [the power of the Federal Court on judicial review is not applicable
where] an Act of Parliament expressly provides for an appeal to . . . the Tax
Court of Canada . . . .  The applications
judge did not have jurisdiction to vacate the tax assessments of the donors in
this case.  As the CRA quite properly conceded, any issues as to the
admissibility of evidence in respect of assessments can be made at the Tax
Court.                                                                       APPENDIX Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)   230. (1) [Records and books] Every person carrying on business
and every person who is required, by or pursuant to this Act, to pay or collect
taxes or other amounts shall keep records and books of account (including an
annual inventory kept in prescribed manner) at the person’s place of business
or residence in Canada or at such other place as may be designated by the
Minister, in such form and containing such information as will enable the taxes
payable under this Act or the taxes or other amounts that should have been
deducted, withheld or collected to be determined.  (2) [Idem] Every registered charity and registered Canadian amateur
athletic association shall keep records and books of account at an address in
Canada recorded with the Minister or designated by the Minister containing  (a)
information in such form as will enable the Minister to determine whether there
are any grounds for the revocation of its registration under this Act;  (b) a
duplicate of each receipt containing prescribed information for a donation
received by it; and  (c)
other information in such form as will enable the Minister to verify the
donations to it for which a deduction or tax credit is available under this
Act.  (2.1) [Idem, lawyers] For greater certainty, the records and books of
account required by subsection (1) to be kept by a person carrying on business
as a lawyer (within the meaning assigned by subsection 232(1)) whether by means
of a partnership or otherwise, include all accounting records of the lawyer,
including supporting vouchers and cheques.  (3) [Minister’s requirement to keep records, etc.] Where a person has
failed to keep adequate records and books of account for the purposes of this
Act, the Minister may require the person to keep such records and books of
account as the Minister may specify and that person shall thereafter keep
records and books of account as so required.  (4) [Limitation period for keeping records, etc.] Every person
required by this section to keep records and books of account shall retain  (a)
the records and books of account referred to in this section in respect of
which a period is prescribed, together with every account and voucher necessary
to verify the information contained therein, for such period as is prescribed;
and  (b)
all other records and books of account referred to in this section, together
with every account and voucher necessary to verify the information contained
therein, until the expiration of six years from the end of the last taxation
year to which the records and books of account relate.  (4.1) [Electronic records] Every person required by this section to
keep records who does so electronically shall retain them in an electronically
readable format for the retention period referred to in subsection (4).  (4.2) [Exemptions] The Minister may, on such terms and conditions as
are acceptable to the Minister, exempt a person or a class of persons from the
requirement in subsection (4.1).  (5) [Exception where no return filed] Where, in respect of any
taxation year, a person referred to in subsection (1) has not filed a return
with the Minister as and when required by section 150, that person shall retain
every record and book of account that is required by this section to be kept
and that relates to that taxation year, together with every account and voucher
necessary to verify the information contained therein, until the expiration of
six years from the day the return for that taxation year is filed.  (6) [Exception where objection or appeal] Where a person required by
this section to keep records and books of account serves a notice of objection
or where that person is a party to an appeal to the Tax Court of Canada under
this Act, that person shall retain every record, book of account, account and
voucher necessary for dealing with the objection or appeal until, in the case
of the serving of a notice of objection, the time provided by section 169 to
appeal has elapsed or, in the case of an appeal, until the appeal is disposed
of and any further appeal in respect thereof is disposed of or the time for
filing any such further appeal has expired.  (7) [Exception where demand by Minister] Where the Minister is of the
opinion that it is necessary for the administration of this Act, the Minister
may, by registered letter or by a demand served personally, require any person
required by this section to keep records and books of account to retain those
records and books of account, together with every account and voucher necessary
to verify the information contained therein, for such period as is specified in
the letter or demand.  (8) [Permission for earlier disposal] A person required by this
section to keep records and books of account may dispose of the records and
books of account referred to in this section, together with every account and
voucher necessary to verify the information contained therein, before the
expiration of the period in respect of which those records and books of account
are required to be kept if written permission for their disposal is given by
the Minister.  231.1 (1) [Inspections] An authorized person may, at all
reasonable times, for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement
of this Act,  (a)
inspect, audit or examine the books and records of a taxpayer and any document
of the taxpayer or of any other person that relates or may relate to the
information that is or should be in the books or records of the taxpayer or to
any amount payable by the taxpayer under this Act, and  (b)
examine property in an inventory of a taxpayer and any property or process of,
or matter relating to, the taxpayer or any other person, an examination of
which may assist the authorized person in determining the accuracy of the
inventory of the taxpayer or in ascertaining the information that is or should
be in the books or records of the taxpayer or any amount payable by the
taxpayer under this Act,  and for those
purposes the authorized person may  (c)
subject to subsection (2), enter into any premises or place where any business
is carried on, any property is kept, anything is done in connection with any
business or any books or records are or should be kept, and  (d)
require the owner or manager of the property or business and any other person
on the premises or place to give the authorized person all reasonable
assistance and to answer all proper questions relating to the administration or
enforcement of this Act and, for that purpose, require the owner or manager to
attend at the premises or place with the authorized person.   (3) [Application] Where, on ex parte application by the
Minister, a judge is satisfied by information on oath that      (e)
make such other order as is appropriate in the circumstances to carry out the
purposes of this Act,   231.2 (1) [Requirement to provide documents or information]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Minister may, subject to
subsection (2), for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement of
this Act,  including the collection of any amount payable under this Act by any
person, by notice served personally or by registered or certified mail, require
that any person provide, within such reasonable time as is stipulated in the
notice,  (a)
any information or additional information, including a return of income or a
supplementary return; or  (b)
any document.  (2) [Unnamed persons] The Minister shall not impose on any person (in
this section referred to as a “third party”) a requirement under subsection (1)
to provide information or any document relating to one or more unnamed persons
unless the Minister first obtains the authorization of a judge under subsection
(3).  (3) [Judicial authorization] On ex parte application by the
Minister, a judge may, subject to such conditions as the judge considers
appropriate, authorize the Minister to impose on a third party a requirement
under subsection (1) relating to an unnamed person or more than one unnamed person
(in this section referred to as the “group”) where the judge is satisfied by
information on oath that  (a)
the person or group is ascertainable; and  (b)
the requirement is made to verify compliance by the person or persons in the
group with any duty or obligation under this Act.  (c)
and (d) [repealed S.C. 1996, c. 21, s. 58(1)]  (4) [Service of authorization] Where an authorization is granted under
subsection (3), it shall be served together with the notice referred to in
subsection (1).  (5) [Review of authorization] Where an authorization is granted under
subsection (3), a third party on whom a notice is served under subsection (1)
may, within 15 days after the service of the notice, apply to the judge who
granted the authorization or, where the judge is unable to act, to another
judge of the same court for a review of the authorization.  (6) [Powers on review] On hearing an application
under subsection (5), a judge may cancel the authorization previously granted
if the judge is not then satisfied that the conditions in paragraphs (3)(a)
and (b) have been met and the judge may confirm or vary the
authorization if the judge is satisfied that those conditions have been met.  Appeal dismissed with costs, Binnie,
Deschamps and Rothstein JJ. dissenting in
part.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Miller Thomson, Toronto.  Solicitor for the respondent:  Attorney General of Canada,
Ottawa.   