R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1
S.C.R. 627  McKinlay Transport Limited and C.T. Transport
Inc. Appellants  v.  Her Majesty The Queen    Respondent  and  The Attorney General for Ontario, the Attorney General of Quebec and the Attorney General
for Alberta                                                                                    Interveners  indexed as:  r. v.
mckinlay transport ltd.  File
No.:  20761.  1988: 
November 2; 1990:  March 29.  Present: 
Lamer, Wilson, La Forest, L'Heureux-Dubé and Sopinka JJ.  on
appeal from the court of appeal for ontario      Constitutional
law -- Charter of Rights  -- Unreasonable search and seizure -- Income tax audit
-- Demand for information or documents under s. 231(3) of the Income Tax Act --
Whether a demand for information or documents under s. 231(3) constitutes
a seizure -- If so, whether seizure under s. 231(3) unreasonable -- Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, s. 8 .      Taxation
-- Income Tax -- Investigation -- Demand for information or documents under s.
231(3) of the Income Tax Act -- Whether s. 231(3) violates the guarantee
against unreasonable search and seizure in s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms .      During
an income tax audit of the appellants, Revenue Canada, pursuant to s. 231(3) of
the Income Tax Act, served them with letters demanding information and the
production of documents.  Because the appellants failed to comply with these
demands, an information was issued alleging that they had breached s. 238(2) of
the Act.  A Provincial Court judge quashed the information holding that s.
231(3) violated the guarantee to protection against unreasonable search and
seizure in s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  The
Ontario Supreme Court allowed respondent's appeal.  The court found that s.
231(3) did not authorize a seizure within the meaning of s. 8 .  The judgment
was upheld by the Court of Appeal.      Held:  The
appeal should be dismissed.      Per Lamer
and Wilson JJ.: A demand for information or documents under s. 231(3) of the Income Tax
Act, coupled with its enforcement mechanism in s. 238(2), does not violate
s. 8  of the Charter .  The purpose of ss. 231(3) and
238(2) , when read together, is not to penalize criminal conduct but to enforce
compliance with the Act.  While a demand under s. 231(3) constitutes a
"seizure", for the reasons given in Thomson, it is
not an unreasonable one.      The Income Tax
Act is essentially a regulatory statute which controls the manner in which
income tax is calculated and collected.  It is based on the principle of
self-reporting and self-assessment.  To ensure compliance with the Act, the
Minister of National Revenue must be given broad powers to audit taxpayers'
returns and inspect all relevant records whether or not he has reasonable
grounds for believing that a particular taxpayer has breached the Act.  The
integrity of the tax system can be maintained only by a system of random
monitoring and s. 231(3) provides the least intrusive means by which effective
monitoring of compliance with the Act can be effected.  A taxpayer's
expectation of privacy with regard to the documents in question vis-à-vis the
Minister is relatively low.  The taxpayer's privacy interest is protected as
much as possible by s. 241 of the Act which forbids the disclosure of the
taxpayer's records or the information contained therein to other persons or
agencies.  Therefore, the seizure contemplated by s. 231(3) is reasonable and
does not infringe s. 8  of the Charter .      The
standard of review of what is "reasonable" in a given context must be
flexible if it is to be realistic and meaningful.  It is consistent with this
approach to draw a distinction between seizures in the criminal or
quasi-criminal context to which the full rigours of the Hunter
criteria will apply, and seizures in the administrative or regulatory context
to which a lesser standard may apply depending upon the legislative scheme
under review.  In light of the regulatory nature of the legislation and the
scheme enacted, it was evident in this case that the Hunter
criteria were ill-suited to determine whether a seizure under s. 231(3) of the
Act was reasonable.      Per La
Forest J.: As in Thomson, the Income Tax Act, though
supported by penal sanctions, including imprisonment, is essentially of an
administrative nature.  For the reasons I gave in Thomson and,
subject to these reasons, for those given by Wilson J. in this appeal, s.
231(3) of the Act is reasonable and does not violate s. 8  of the Charter .      Per
L'Heureux-Dubé J.:  Subject to the reasons I gave in Thomson,
s. 231(3) of the Income Tax Act does not violate
s. 8  of the Charter .  While a demand under s. 231(3) of
the Act may be considered a seizure within the meaning of s. 8 , such a
seizure is reasonable.      Per Sopinka
J.: For the reasons I gave in Thomson, neither the
letters of demand herein nor s. 231(3) of the Income Tax Act violate
s. 8  of the Charter .  The letters of demand do not
constitute a seizure and s. 231(3) does not authorize a seizure within the
meaning of s. 8 .  Cases
Cited  By
Wilson J.      Distinguished:  Hunter v.
Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145; considered:  Thomson
Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 000, aff'g (1986), 57 O.R. (2d) 257
(C.A.); referred to:  R. v. Therens, [1985] 1 S.C.R.
613; James Richardson & Sons, Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1984]
1 S.C.R. 614; Canadian Bank of Commerce v. Attorney General of Canada, [1962]
S.C.R. 729; R. v. Grimwood, [1987] 2 S.C.R.
755; R. v. Simmons, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 495; R. v. Hufsky, [1988]
1 S.C.R. 621; Re Alberta Human Rights Commission and Alberta Blue
Cross Plan (1983), 1 D.L.R. (4th) 301; Re Reich and College
of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta (No. 2) (1984), 8 D.L.R.
(4th) 696; Re Belgoma Transportation Ltd. and Director of
Employment Standards (1985), 51 O.R. (2d) 509; R. v. Bichel, [1986]
5 W.W.R. 261.  By La
Forest J.      Referred
to:  Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of
Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), [1990]
1 S.C.R. 000.  By
L'Heureux-Dubé J.      Referred
to:  Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of
Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), [1990]
1 S.C.R. 000.  By
Sopinka J.      Referred
to:  Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of
Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), [1990]
1 S.C.R. 000; Stelco Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General), [1990]
1 S.C.R. 000.  Statutes
and Regulations Cited  Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 1 ,
8 .  Combines Investigation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c.
C-23, s. 17.  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c.
148 [am. 1970-71-72, c. 63, s. 1], ss. 221(1)(d),
231(1) to (5), 238(2) [am. 1973-74, c. 51, s. 21; am. 1975-74-76, c. 71,
s. 13], 241 [am. 1978-79, c. 5, s. 9; am. 1980-81-82-83, c. 48, s. 107;
am. idem, c. 68, s. 117; am. idem, c.
140, s. 126; am. 1984, c. 19, s. 30].  Income Tax
Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 945, Part II.  Authors
Cited  Canada.  Law Reform Commission.  Search
and Seizure Under the Income Tax Act.  A study paper
prepared by Neil Brooks and Judy Fudge, 1985.  Reid,
Alan D. and Alison Harvison Young.  "Administrative Search and Seizure
under the Charter " (1985), 10 Queen's L.J. 392.      APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (1987), 62 O.R. (2d) 757, 26
O.A.C. 352, 48 D.L.R. (4th) 765, [1988] 1 C.T.C. 426, 87 D.T.C. 6314, 40 C.C.C.
(3d) 94, dismissing appellants' appeal from a judgment of Trainor J. (1987), 58
O.R. (2d) 310, 37 D.L.R. (4th) 454, [1988] 1 C.T.C. 421, 87 D.T.C. 5051, 32
C.C.C. (3d) 1, 27 C.R.R. 109, allowing an appeal by the Crown by way of stated
case from the dismissal of charges for violations of s. 231(3) of the Income Tax
Act, [1986] 1 C.T.C. 29, 85 D.T.C. 5537, 22 C.R.R. 219.  Appeal dismissed.      Alan
Shanoff and Ted Saskin, for the appellants.      S. R.
Fainstein, Q.C., and James W. Leising, for
the respondent.      Leah
Price and Timothy Macklem, for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario.      Jean
Bouchard and Gilles Laporte, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.      Robert
C. Maybank, for the intervener the Attorney General for Alberta.  //Wilson J.//      The
reasons of Lamer and Wilson JJ. were delivered by      WILSON J. --
This appeal raises the question of the constitutional validity of s. 231(3) of
the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, in light of s. 8  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  1.  The
facts      The
appellants, McKinlay Transport Limited and C.T. Transport Inc., are both incorporated
under the laws of the province of Ontario and carry on the business of freight
transport of general commodities.  Central Cartage Company is a parent company
of McKinlay and a sister company of C.T. Transport Inc.  All these corporations
are subsidiaries of Centra Inc.      Although
both appellants have nominal head offices in Ontario, the de facto head
office of each corporation is in Sterling Heights, Michigan.  All books and
records of the appellants are kept there.      In
1982 Revenue Canada commenced an income tax audit of both appellants in respect
of their 1979-80 tax year.  In October, 1983 Revenue Canada, pursuant to s.
231(3) of the Act, served the appellants with letters demanding the production
of a wide array of information and documents.  The appellants did not comply
with these demands and an information was issued on August 9, 1984 alleging
that the appellants had breached s. 238(2) of the Income Tax Act because
of their failure to comply with the demands made pursuant to s. 231(3).      The
appellants brought an application before Langdon Prov. Ct. J. asking that the
information be quashed because s. 231(3) coupled with s. 238(2) were in
violation of the Charter .  Langdon Prov. Ct. J. found that s.
231(3) violated s. 8  of the Charter  and quashed the information:  [1986]
1 C.T.C. 29.      An
appeal was taken by the respondent to the Ontario Supreme Court where Trainor
J. found that the section did not violate s. 8  of the Charter .  He
allowed the appeal:  (1987), 58 O.R. (2d) 310.  A further appeal by the
appellants to the Ontario Court of Appeal was dismissed:  (1987), 62 O.R. (2d)
757.  Leave to appeal to this Court was granted on June 2, 1988, [1988] 1
S.C.R. xi, and the following constitutional questions were set at a later date:  1.  Is section 231(3) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C.
1952, c. 148, inconsistent with the provisions of s. 8  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  2.  If
there is such an inconsistency, does s. 1  of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms  save s. 231(3) from being declared of no force or
effect?  2.  The
Courts Below  (a)   Ontario
Provincial Court      Langdon
Prov. Ct. J., in considering whether the compelled disclosure of information
and documents pursuant to s. 231(3) violated s. 8  of the Charter ,
concluded that there did not have to be a physical intrusion by state
authorities for there to be a search or seizure.  He stated at p. 38:      If
that analysis is correct [that there must be a physical intrusion for there to
be a search or seizure], then if the State were unable to obtain a search
warrant under section 443  of the Criminal Code , would
it be lawful for Parliament in the exercise of its criminal law jurisdiction to
authorize the Attorney General of Canada, for any purposes related to the
administration or enforcement of the Criminal Code , by
registered letter or by a demand served personally, to require from any person
that he produce any document or thing.  Parliament could couple the failure or
refusal of the subject with a penalty of ten years' imprisonment.  If the
approach to the Charter of Rights  is a purposive one, it seems to me that the
guarantee against unreasonable search and seizure would then be made
meaningless by such a provision.  The effect of the hypothetical provision
would perhaps be more draconian than a power of unlimited search.  In any
event, it would seem that any subject having a defence to a charge of failing
to answer a requirement would virtually have to permit the search to exculpate
himself if charged with failing to answer the requirement.  Therefore, followed
to its logical conclusion, the unrestricted right to demand coupled with a
penalty for failure to comply is very akin to seizure.  In appropriate
circumstances, the distinction between them would indeed be a distinction
without a difference.  Langdon
Prov. Ct. J., relying on this Court's decision in Hunter v. Southam
Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145, and R. v. Therens, [1985]
1 S.C.R. 613, also rejected the argument that it was open to the individual who
received the demand to refuse to comply and determine his liabilities at a
later time.  He stated at p. 43:      I
agree with Le Dain, J. that it is unrealistic to speak of the recipient of a
letter of requirement as being free to refuse to comply.  If he is not free to
refuse to comply he is subject to compulsion.  Thus the service of the
requirement is tantamount to a seizure.      Having
found that s. 231(3) authorized a seizure within the meaning of s. 8  of the Charter ,
Langdon Prov. Ct. J. had no difficulty in concluding that the form of seizure
authorized was unreasonable.  He found that it met none of the criteria
espoused by Dickson J. (as he then was) in Hunter.  In
particular:  (1)  The legislation did not provide for a method of
prior authorization;  (2)  The Minister when acting under s. 231(3) could not
be a neutral or impartial arbiter acting judicially;  (3)  The legislation provided for no form of review of
the Minister's discretion; and  (4)  The
legislation did not require the establishment of reasonable and probable
grounds under oath that an offence had been committed or that there was
evidence to be found at the place of the search.  For
these reasons Langdon Prov. Ct. J. quashed the information.  (b)  Ontario
High Court      Trainor
J. had the advantage of the Ontario Court of Appeal's decision in Thomson
Newspapers Ltd. v. Director of Investigation and Research (1986),
57 O.R. (2d) 257 in preparing his reasons and he relied upon it heavily.  Of
importance to the Court of Appeal in Thomson was the
fact that an individual compelled to produce documents pursuant to s. 17(1) of
the Combines Investigation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c.
C-23, could, in the court's opinion, effectively challenge the order of the
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission prior to producing the documents.  The
Court of Appeal for this reason felt that s. 17(1) did not authorize a seizure
within the meaning of s. 8  of the Charter .      Trainor
J. applied similar reasoning to the appeal before him.  Relying on this Court's
decision in James Richardson & Sons, Ltd. v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 614, he found that s. 231(3) had been
given a restrictive interpretation by the Court and this allowed a person
served with an order for production an opportunity to challenge its validity
before producing the material.  He stated at p. 317:      The recipient of a demand under s. 231(3) can
successfully attack such demand before prosecution for failure to comply on a
number of grounds including the following:  (1)That a reasonable time for production has not been
afforded:  Re Joseph et al. and Minister of National Revenue (1985),
51 O.R. (2d) 658, 20 D.L.R. (4th) 577, [1985] 2 C.T.C. 164.  (2)That the Minister is engaged in a fishing expedition
and not a genuine and serious inquiry as to some taxpayer's liability.  (3)That the documents demanded are not germane or
relevant to the issues between the parties.  (4)That the documents are privileged.      There are no doubt many other grounds of attack
available, dependent on the circumstances.  For example, I would think that
where a demand is made and where the issues between the parties are not clearly
identified, unlike a case where charges have been laid, it would be incumbent
on the Minister to set out the grounds for the demand in order that relevance
could readily be ascertained, in the first instance by the recipient of the
demand and later, if necessary, by the court.      These
avenues of attack cannot be said to be illusory.  They create substantial
defences and are an answer to many of the concerns raised during argument about
ministerial excesses and oppressive conduct.      Accordingly,
Trainor J. found that s. 231(3) did not authorize a seizure.  He therefore
allowed the appeal.  He noted in obiter, however, that had
he found that a seizure was authorized by the section, it would not have been a
reasonable one since the criteria enumerated in Hunter were
not satisfied.  (c)  The
Ontario Court of Appeal      Grange
J.A. delivered the opinion of the court on behalf of himself, Lacourcière and
Goodman JJ.A.  Like Trainor J., Grange J.A. saw this case as very similar to
the Thomson case.  In Grange J.A.'s opinion, the fact that the
individual could challenge the requirement to produce was sufficient to dispel
the notion that it was a seizure.  He stated at p. 760:      As
Trainor J. pointed out, the subsection of the Income Tax Act is not
unqualified or unlimited.  It is subject to certiorari
proceedings wherein the requirement will be tested objectively to determine
whether it is authorized by the section and whether it is relevant to the tax
liability of a specific person.  No "fishing expedition" will be
permitted:  see Canadian Bank of Commerce v. A.-G. Can. (1962),
35 D.L.R. (2d) 49, [1962] S.C.R. 729, 62 D.T.C. 1236, and James
Richardson & Sons, Ltd. v. M.N.R. (1984), 9 D.L.R.
(4th) 1 at p. 7 et seq., [1984] 1 S.C.R. 614 at p. 623 et seq., [1984]
4 W.W.R. 577.  In a system where the tax authorities depend largely on the good
faith and integrity of the taxpayer to disclose information relevant to tax
liability, it is necessary to give wide investigative powers to those
authorities without compelling them to give statements under oath of reasonable
and probable grounds for the requirement to produce, particularly where the
requirement does not constitute enforced production.  The essential
consideration in my view is that the requirement to produce is not so intrusive
as a search or seizure, that it in no sense resembles a search and cannot be
tantamount to a seizure because the person subject to it has a right to take
action to circumvent the required production.  Grange
J.A. thought that in this case it was even clearer than in Thomson that the
provision did not constitute a seizure since, while the Combines
Investigation Act provided a mechanism to compel compliance with the
order to produce, the Income Tax Act provided only a
penalty for disobedience.      Accordingly,
the Ontario Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.  3.  The
Issues      The
issues arising in this appeal are as follows:  1.  Does s. 231(3) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C.
1952, c. 148, violate s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  2.  If the answer to question 1 is affirmative, can s.
231(3) of the Income Tax Act be sustained as a
reasonable limit demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society under
s. 1  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  or is
the provision of no force and effect by virtue of s. 52  of the
Constitution Act, 1982 ?  4.  Analysis      A
chief source of revenue for the federal government is the collection of income
tax.  The legislative scheme which has been put in place to regulate the
collection of tax is the Income Tax Act.  The Act requires
taxpayers to file annual returns and estimate their tax payable as a result of
calculations made in these returns.  Moreover, the Act requires various third
parties such as employers, corporations and banks to file information on wages,
dividends, interest payments and the like: see s. 221(1)(d) and
Part II of the Income Tax Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c.
945.  In essence, the system is a self-reporting and self-assessing one which
depends upon the honesty and integrity of the taxpayers for its success: see Search and
Seizure Under the Income Tax Act (1985), a study paper prepared for
the Law Reform Commission of Canada by Neil Brooks and Judy Fudge. 
Nonetheless, it would be naive to think that no one attempts to take advantage
of the self-reporting system in order to avoid paying his or her full share of
the tax burden by violating the rules set forth in the Act.  Because of this
reality Parliament enacted several provisions, among them s. 231(3), giving the
Minister of National Revenue power to investigate and audit taxpayers.  Section
231 reads in part as follows:      231. (1)  Any person thereunto authorized
by the Minister, for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement
of this Act, may, at all reasonable times, enter into any premises or place
where any business is carried on or any property is kept or anything is done in
connection with any business or any books or records are or should be kept, and  (a)  audit or examine the books and records and any
account, voucher, letter, telegram or other document which relates or may
relate to the information that is or should be in the books or records or the
amount of tax payable under this Act,  (b)  examine property described by an inventory or any
property, process or matter an examination of which may, in his opinion, assist
him in determining the accuracy of an inventory or in ascertaining the
information that is or should be in the books or records or the amount of any
tax payable under this Act,  (c)  require the owner or manager of the property or
business and any other person on the premises or place to give him all
reasonable assistance with his audit or examination and to answer all proper
questions relating to the audit or examination either orally or, if he so
requires, in writing, on oath or by statutory declaration and, for that
purpose, require  the owner or manager to attend at the premises or place with
him, and  (d)  if, during the course of an audit or examination, it
appears to him that there has been a violation of this Act or a regulation,
seize and take away any of the documents, books, records, papers or things that
may be required as evidence as to the violation of any provision of this Act or
a regulation.      (2)  The Minister shall,  (a)  within 120 days from the date of seizure of any
documents, books, records, papers or things pursuant to paragraph (1)(d), or  (b)  if within that time an application is made under this
subsection that is, after the expiration of that time, rejected, then forthwith
upon the disposition of the application,  return the documents, books, records, papers or things
to the person from whom they were seized unless a judge of a superior court or
county court, on application made by or on behalf of the Minister, supported by
evidence on oath establishing that the Minister has reasonable and probable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of this Act or a regulation
and that the seized documents, books, records, papers or things are or may be
required as evidence in relation thereto, orders that they be retained by the
Minister until they are produced in any court proceedings, which order the
judge is hereby empowered to give on ex parte
application.      (3)  The Minister may, for any purposes related to
the administration or enforcement of this Act, by registered letter or by a
demand served personally, require from any person  (a)  any information or additional information, including
a return of income or a supplementary return, or  (b)  production, or production on oath, of any books,
letters, accounts, invoices, statements (financial or otherwise) or other
documents,  within such reasonable time as may be stipulated
therein.  (4)  Where the Minister has reasonable and probable
grounds to believe that a violation of this Act or a regulation has been
committed or is likely to be committed, he may, with the approval of a judge of
a superior or county court, which approval the judge is hereby empowered to
give on ex parte application, authorize in writing any officer of the
Department of National Revenue, together with such members of the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police or other peace officers as he calls on to assist him
and such other persons as may be named therein, to enter and search, if
necessary by force, any building, receptacle or place for documents, books,
records, papers or things that may afford evidence as to the violation of any
provision of this Act or a regulation and to seize and take away any such
documents, books, records, papers or things and retain them until they are
produced in any court proceedings.  (5)  An application to a judge under subsection (4)
shall be supported by evidence on oath establishing the facts upon which the
application is based.                                                                            .
. .      238.  . . .      (2)  Every person who has failed to comply with or
contravened subsection 116(3), 127(3.1) or (3.2), 153(1), 227(5), 230.1(1) or
230.1(2), or section 230 or 231 is guilty of an offence and, in addition to any
penalty otherwise provided, is liable on summary conviction to  (a) a fine of not less than $200 and not exceeding
$10,000, or  (b) both
the fine described in paragraph (a) and imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 6 months.      This
Court had occasion to consider s. 231(3) of the Act in James
Richardson & Sons, Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, supra.  It
noted that the wording of the subsection was, on its face, extremely broad. 
The Court found, however, after reviewing its earlier decision in Canadian
Bank of Commerce v. Attorney General of Canada, [1962] S.C.R.
729, that once the appropriate rules of statutory interpretation had been
applied to the subsection, it was not to be construed so broadly.  The Court
found at p. 623 that:  (a)the test of whether the Minister is acting for a
purpose specified in the Act is an objective one and has to be decided on the
proper interpretation of the subsection and its application to the
circumstances disclosed;  (b)the obtaining of information relevant to the tax
liability of some specific person or persons whose liability to tax is under
investigation is a purpose related to the administration or enforcement of the
Act;  (c)it is not necessary that the person from whom the
information is sought be one whose liability to tax is under investigation;  (d)the
fact that the giving of the information may disclose private transactions
involving persons who are not under investigation and may not be liable to tax
does not invalidate the requirement.      Notwithstanding
that s. 231(3) has been narrowed in scope as a result of the common law rules
relating to statutory interpretation, the appellants submit that the provision
cannot withstand Charter  scrutiny.  They submit that the
demand for information or documents under s. 231(3), coupled with its
enforcement mechanism in s. 238(2), violates s. 8  of the Charter  and
cannot be saved under s. 1 .      Sections
8  and 1  of the Charter  provide:      8.  Everyone has the right to be secure
against unreasonable search or seizure.      1.  The Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  guarantees the rights and freedoms
set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can
be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.      The
seminal case on the interpretation to be given to s. 8  of the Charter  is this
Court's decision in Hunter v. Southam Inc., supra.  In Hunter the
Court found that s. 10 of the Combines Investigation Act
violated s. 8 .  In coming to that conclusion the Court determined that one of
the purposes underlying the s. 8  right was the protection of an individual's
reasonable expectation of privacy.      In Hunter it was
clear that a search was contemplated by the legislation and the Court therefore
focussed its attention on the question whether the search was reasonable.  In
the present appeal we must answer the threshold question whether s. 231(3)
authorizes a "seizure" within the meaning of s. 8  of the Charter . 
Section 231(3) has the effect of requiring the individual named in the demand
to provide information pursuant to para. (a) or
documents pursuant to para. (b).  In Thomson
Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 000 (reasons delivered concurrently
herewith), I concluded that a seizure was "the taking hold by a public
authority of a thing belonging to a person against that person's will" (p.
000).  Thomson, however, involved a seizure in a criminal or
quasi-criminal law context and I confined my remarks to that situation. 
Section 231(3) is not criminal or quasi-criminal legislation.  The Income Tax
Act is essentially a regulatory statute since it controls the manner in
which income tax is calculated and collected.  This Court pointed out in R. v.
Grimwood, [1987] 2 S.C.R. 755, at p. 756, that "the purpose
of ss. 231(3) and 238(2), when read together, is not to penalize criminal
conduct but to enforce compliance with the Act".      Since
s. 231(3) is not legislation in relation to a criminal or quasi-criminal
proceeding, the question arises whether a "seizure" within the
meaning of s. 8  takes place when the state compels the production of documents
in a regulatory context.  To answer this question one must, I think, return to
the general discussion of Dickson J. in Hunter on the
purposes underlying the s. 8  right.  One of those purposes, he found, is the
protection of the individual's reasonable expectation of privacy.  He stated at
pp. 159-60:  The
guarantee of security from unreasonable search and seizure only protects
a reasonable expectation.  This limitation on the right guaranteed by s.
8 , whether it is expressed negatively as freedom from "unreasonable"
search and seizure, or positively as an entitlement to a "reasonable"
expectation of privacy, indicates that an assessment must be made as to whether
in a particular situation the public's interest in being left alone by
government must give way to the government's interest in intruding on the
individual's privacy in order to advance its goals, notably those of law
enforcement.  [Emphasis in original.]      It
is apparent from the above that Dickson J. considered that the underlying value
to be protected by s. 8  of the Charter  was the
individual's interest in privacy.  However, it was his view that the s. 8 
protection was confined to "a reasonable expectation" because of the
fact that the words "search or seizure" were qualified by the word
"unreasonable": see also R. v. Simmons, [1988]
2 S.C.R. 495.  Undoubtedly there will be instances in which an individual will
have no privacy interest or expectation in a particular document or article
required by the state to be disclosed.  Under such circumstances, the state
authorized inspection or the state demand for production of documents will not
amount to a search or seizure within s. 8 : see R. v. Hufsky, [1988]
1 S.C.R. 621, at p. 638.  However, I do not think that is so here.  I reach
that conclusion for two reasons.  First, s. 231(3), even construed narrowly in
accordance with prior authority, envisages the compelled production of a wide
array of documents and not simply those which the state requires the taxpayer
to prepare and maintain under the legislation.  Second, the legislation
contemplates that parties who are not the subject of an investigation or audit
can be compelled to produce documents relating to another taxpayer who is the
subject of such investigation or audit.  Thus, compelled production reaches
beyond the strict filing and maintenance requirements of the Act and may well
extend to information and documents in which the taxpayer has a privacy
interest in need of protection under s. 8  of the Charter 
although it may not be as vital an interest as that obtaining in a criminal or
quasi-criminal context.  I would therefore conclude that the application of s.
231(3) of the Income Tax Act to the appellants
constitutes a "seizure" since it infringes on their expectations of
privacy.  It remains to be determined, however, whether the state's intrusion
on that privacy interest is unreasonable or, to put it another way, whether it
violates the taxpayers' reasonable expectation of privacy.      In Hunter,
Dickson J. set forth several criteria which had to be met in order that a
search be reasonable.  I summarized these criteria in Thomson (at p.
000):  (a)a system of prior authorization, by an entirely
neutral and impartial arbiter who is capable of acting judicially in balancing
the interests of the State against those of the individual;  (b)a requirement that the impartial arbiter must satisfy
himself that the person seeking the authorization has reasonable grounds,
established under oath, to believe that an offence has been committed;  (c)a requirement that the impartial arbiter must satisfy
himself that the person seeking the authorization has reasonable grounds to
believe that something which will afford evidence of the particular offence
under investigation will be recovered; and  (d)a
requirement that the only documents which are authorized to be seized are those
which are strictly relevant to the offence under investigation.      It
is important to note that these criteria were enunciated in the context of an
appeal concerning the validity of a section which was, in essence, criminal or
quasi-criminal in nature.  As I stated in Thomson (at p.
000):      Not
all seizures violate s. 8  of the Charter ; only unreasonable
ones.  Put another way, an individual is accorded only a reasonable expectation
of privacy.  At some point the individual's interest in privacy must give way
to the broader state interest in having the information or document disclosed. 
However, the state interest only becomes paramount when care is taken to
infringe the privacy interest of the individual as little as possible.  It is
because of this need for delicate balancing that Dickson J. in Hunter
identified several criteria which must be met if a search in a criminal
investigation is to meet the test of reasonableness.  I think that these
criteria were accurately summarized by Holland J. at trial as set out earlier
in these reasons.  I would agree, however, that these criteria are not hard and
fast rules which must be adhered to in all cases under all forms of
legislation.  What may be reasonable in the regulatory or civil context may not
be reasonable in a criminal or quasi-criminal context.  What is important is
not so much that the strict criteria be mechanically applied in every case but
that the legislation respond in a meaningful way to the concerns identified by
Dickson J. in Hunter.  This having been said, however, it
would be my view that the more akin to traditional criminal law the legislation
is, the less likely it is that departures from the Hunter
criteria will be countenanced.  This seems to have been what Dickson C.J. had
in mind when he said in R. v. Simmons, [1988] 2 S.C.R.
495, at p. 527, that departures from the Hunter
criteria will be exceedingly rare.      In Simmons, supra, this
Court departed from the rigidity of the Hunter
criteria.  In that case the Court found that it was not necessary for the Hunter
criteria to be met in the context of customs searches since a person's
reasonable expectation of privacy was quite low at border crossings.  Dickson 
C.J. stated at p. 528:      I
accept the proposition advanced by the Crown that the degree of personal
privacy reasonably expected at customs is lower than in most other situations. 
People do not expect to be able to cross international borders free from
scrutiny.  It is commonly accepted that sovereign states have the right to
control both who and what enters their boundaries.  For the general welfare of
the nation the state is expected to perform this role.  Without the ability to
establish that all persons who seek to cross its borders and their goods are
legally entitled to enter the country, the state would be precluded from
performing this crucially important function.  Consequently, travellers seeking
to cross national boundaries fully expect to be subject to a screening process.      In
my opinion, flexibility is key to interpreting any constitutional document
including the Charter .  It would be wrong, I think, for the
courts to apply a rigid approach to a particular section of the Charter  since
that provision must be capable of application in a vast variety of legislative
schemes.  As Dickson J. stated in Hunter at p. 155:      It
is clear that the meaning of "unreasonable" cannot be determined by
recourse to a dictionary, nor for that matter, by reference to the rules of
statutory construction.  The task of expounding a constitution is crucially
different from that of construing a statute.  A statute defines present rights
and obligations.  It is easily enacted and as easily repealed.  A constitution,
by contrast, is drafted with an eye to the future.  Its function is to provide
a continuing framework for the legitimate exercise of governmental power and,
when joined by a Bill or a Charter of Rights , for
the unremitting protection of individual rights and liberties.      Since
individuals have different expectations of privacy in different contexts and
with regard to different kinds of information and documents, it follows that
the standard of review of what is "reasonable" in a given context
must be flexible if it is to be realistic and meaningful.  I think the point is
aptly made by A. D. Reid and A. H. Young in "Administrative Search and
Seizure under the Charter " (1985), 10 Queen's L.J. 392,
at pp. 398-400:      A person's expectations of privacy with respect to
administrative search and seizure have been less well defined [than criminal
search and seizure].  There are facets of state authority, generically
associated with search or seizure, that are so intertwined with the regulated
activity as to raise virtually no expectation of privacy whatsoever. 
Inspections may be blended into product grading functions, and in fact, they
may be so integrated into the production process that a refusal to
inspect can by law be invoked as a sanction to enforce the maintenance of
prescribed sanitary conditions within the plant.  Other activities are
regulated so routinely that there is virtually no expectation of privacy from
state intrusion.  Annual filing requirements for banks, corporations, trust
companies, loan companies, and the like are inextricably associated with
carrying on business under state licence.      There are other situations in which government
intrusion cannot be as confidently predicted, yet the range of discretion
extended to state officials is so wide as to create in the regulatee an expectation
that he may be inspected or requested to provide information at some point in
the future.  This may arise in the form of an inspection carried out either on
a "spot check" basis, or on the strength of suspected
non-compliance.  The search may be in the form of a request for information
that is not prescribed as an annual filing requirement, but is required to be
produced on a demand basis.  For the most part, there is no requirement that
these powers be exercised on belief or suspicion of non-compliance.  Rather,
they are based on the common sense assumption that the threat of unannounced
inspection may be the most effective way to induce compliance.  They are based
on a view that inspection may be the only means of detecting non-compliance,
and that its detection serves an important public purpose.  Inspections to
determine work place safety, building safety, aviation safety, fire safety,
environmental quality, food quality, health standards and the like have been
routinely authorized by statute without specifying grounds for intruding upon
someone's privacy.      There
is, therefore, a large circle of social and business activity in which there is
a very low expectation of privacy.  The issue is not whether, but
rather when, how much, and under what conditions information must be disclosed
to satisfy the state's legitimate requirements.  Every person who files an
annual tax return may be said to enjoy a low expectation of privacy with
respect to information about his income.  But that is surely tempered by an
expectation that demands for information have limits, and will be administered
under terms that are fair and reasonable.  That is what section 8  of the Charter  is all
about.  [Emphasis added.]      The
lower courts, generally speaking, have shown no hesitation in applying s. 8 
flexibly in relation to a wide variety of regulatory schemes.  A few examples
make the point.  In Re Alberta Human Rights Commission and Alberta Blue
Cross Plan (1983), 1 D.L.R. (4th) 301 (Alta. C.A.), the court held
that the provisions of the Individual's Rights Protection Act which
allowed for the compulsory production of an individual's documents by the Human
Rights Commission were not unreasonable.  In that case the court did not apply
the standard of reasonableness applicable to criminal cases.  Rather, the court
applied the rough model of reasonableness employed in production of documents
in civil cases.  The rationale for this was that what is reasonable
"depends upon consideration of what is sought, from whom, for what
purpose, by whom, and in what circumstances": see p. 307.  This approach
was followed in Re Reich and College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Alberta (No. 2) (1984), 8 D.L.R. (4th) 696 (Alta. Q.B.), wherein McDonald
J. held that the provisions of the Medical Profession Act which
compelled the production of a doctor's documents and records were reasonable.      In Re Belgoma
Transportation Ltd. and Director of Employment Standards (1985),
51 O.R. (2d) 509 (C.A.), the court upheld the validity of the provisions of the Employment
Standards Act which allowed an employment standards officer to enter
upon business premises and require the production of certain documents and
remove them for copying.  MacKinnon A.C.J.O. stated at p. 512:      The
standards to be applied to the reasonableness of a search or seizure and the
necessity for a warrant with respect to criminal investigations cannot be the
same as those to be applied to search or seizure within an administrative and regulatory
context. . . . The "search or seizure" in the instant case, if such
it is, is not aimed at detecting criminal activity, but rather, as indicated,
in ensuring and securing compliance with the regulatory provisions of the Act
enacted for the purpose of protecting the public interest.      In R. v.
Bichel, [1986] 5 W.W.R. 261 (B.C.C.A.), the court considered
the validity of a by-law which authorized the entry of a building inspector on
property or premises to ascertain whether there had been compliance with the
by-law.  The court applied the reasoning in Belgoma and
ruled that an individual's privacy interests in connection with this type of
inspection were much less than those in Hunter.      I
refer to these cases not to approve or disapprove the results achieved but
rather as evidence of the need to take a flexible and purposive approach to s.
8  of the Charter .  It is consistent with this
approach, I believe, to draw a distinction between seizures in the criminal or
quasi-criminal context to which the full rigours of the Hunter
criteria will apply, and seizures in the administrative or regulatory context
to which a lesser standard may apply depending upon the legislative scheme
under review.  I do not believe that when the Chief Justice said in Simmons at p.
527 that departures from the Hunter criteria would be rare he was
applying his mind to searches or seizures in the context of regulatory
legislation.  I think he was addressing as in the cases of Hunter and Simmons
themselves searches or seizures in a criminal or quasi-criminal context.  It is
with these considerations in mind that I examine the reasonableness of s.
231(3) of the Income Tax Act.      At
the beginning of my analysis I noted that the Income Tax Act was
based on the principle of self-reporting and self-assessment.  The Act could
have provided that each taxpayer submit all his or her records to the Minister
and his officials so that they might make the calculations necessary for
determining each person's taxable income.  The legislation does not so provide,
no doubt because it would be extremely expensive and cumbersome to operate such
a system.  However, a self-reporting system has its drawbacks.  Chief among
these is that it depends for its success upon the taxpayers' honesty and
integrity in preparing their returns.  While most taxpayers undoubtedly respect
and comply with the system, the facts of life are that certain persons will
attempt to take advantage of the system and avoid their full tax liability.      Accordingly,
the Minister of National Revenue must be given broad powers in supervising this
regulatory scheme to audit taxpayers' returns and inspect all records which may
be relevant to the preparation of these returns.  The Minister must be capable
of exercising these powers whether or not he has reasonable grounds for
believing that a particular taxpayer has breached the Act.  Often it will be
impossible to determine from the face of the return whether any impropriety has
occurred in its preparation.  A spot check or a system of random monitoring may
be the only way in which the integrity of the tax system can be maintained.  If
this is the case, and I believe that it is, then it is evident that the Hunter
criteria are ill-suited to determine whether a seizure under s. 231(3) of the Income Tax
Act is reasonable.  The regulatory nature of the legislation and the
scheme enacted require otherwise.  The need for random monitoring is
incompatible with the requirement in Hunter that
the person seeking authorization for a search or seizure have reasonable and
probable grounds, established under oath, to believe that an offence has been
committed.  If this Hunter criterion is inapplicable, then so
too must the remaining Hunter criteria since they all depend for
their vitality upon the need to establish reasonable and probable grounds.  For
example, there is no need for an impartial arbiter capable of acting judicially
since his central role under Hunter is to ensure that the person seeking
the authorization has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that a particular
offence has been committed, that there are reasonable and probable grounds to
believe that the authorization will turn up something relating to that particular
offence, and that the authorization only goes so far as to allow the seizure of
documents relevant to that particular offence.      This
is not to say that any and all forms of search and seizure under the Income Tax
Act are valid.  The state interest in monitoring compliance with the
legislation must be weighed against an individual's privacy interest.  The
greater the intrusion into the privacy interests of an individual, the more
likely it will be that safeguards akin to those in Hunter will be
required.  Thus, when the tax officials seek entry onto the private property of
an individual to conduct a search or seizure, the intrusion is much greater
than a mere demand for production of documents.  The reason for this is that,
while a taxpayer may have little expectation of privacy in relation to his
business records relevant to the determination of his tax liability, he has a
significant privacy interest in the inviolability of his home.      In
my opinion, s. 231(3) provides the least intrusive means by which effective
monitoring of compliance with the Income Tax Act can be
effected.  It involves no invasion of a taxpayer's home or business premises. 
It simply calls for the production of records which may be relevant to the
filing of an income tax return.  A taxpayer's privacy interest with regard to
these documents vis-à-vis the Minister is relatively low.  The
Minister has no way of knowing whether certain records are relevant until he
has had an opportunity to examine them.  At the same time, the taxpayer's
privacy interest is protected as much as possible since s. 241 of the Act
protects the taxpayer from disclosure of his records or the information
contained therein to other persons or agencies.  5.  Disposition      For
these reasons I conclude that the seizure contemplated by s. 231(3) of the Income Tax
Act is reasonable and does not violate s. 8  of the Charter .  That
being so, it is unnecessary for me to consider whether the section is justified
under s. 1  of the Charter .  I would dismiss the appeal and make
no order as to costs.  //La Forest
J.//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      La
Forest J. -- I have had the advantage of reading the reasons of my colleague
Wilson J., who sets forth the facts, the issues and the judicial history of
this appeal.  As in Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of
Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), 
[1990] 1 S.C.R. 000, released concurrently, we are dealing with a statute
which, though supported by penal sanctions, including imprisonment, is
essentially of an administrative nature.  These sanctions, as in Thomson, appear
in the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, for strictly instrumental reasons
and, as in Thomson, the impugned provision is necessary
to ensure compliance with the Act.  For the reasons I gave in Thomson and,
subject to what I there said, those of Wilson J. in this appeal, I would
dispose of the appeal and answer the constitutional question in the manner
proposed by her.  //L'Heureux-Dubé//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      L'Heureux
Dubé J. -- Subject to the reasons set out in my opinion in the case of Thomson
Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 000, released concurrently, I concur
with Wilson J. in her disposition of the present appeal and I would answer the
constitutional questions as she does.  //Sopinka J.//      The
following are the reasons delivered by      Sopinka
J. -- This appeal was heard together with Thomson Newspapers
Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 000, and Stelco Inc. v. Canada
(Attorney General), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 000, and judgment in the three appeals
is being delivered concurrently.  The issues in the appeal are set out in the
constitutional questions which have been stated:  1. Is section 231(3) of the Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, inconsistent with the provisions of
s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  2. If
there is such an inconsistency, does s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  save s. 231(3) from being
declared of no force or effect?      I
agree with the disposition of this appeal proposed by Justice Wilson but for
different reasons.  For the reasons which I gave in Thomson, I am
of the opinion that neither the letters of demand herein nor s. 231(3) of
the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, violate s. 8  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  The letters of demand do not constitute
a seizure and s. 231(3) does not authorize a seizure within the meaning of
s. 8  of the Charter .  The demand authorized by
s. 231(3) is less intrusive than an order under s. 17 of the Combines
Investigation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-23, and therefore what I said
in Thomson applies a fortiori to the demand
letters in issue in this appeal.      I
would answer the constitutional questions:  1. Is
section 231(3) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952,
c. 148, inconsistent with the provisions of s. 8  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  Answer:  No.  2. If
there is such an inconsistency, does s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  save s. 231(3) from being
declared of no force or effect?  Answer: Need not be answered.      Appeal
dismissed.      Solicitors
for the appellants:  Goodman & Goodman, Toronto.      Solicitor
for the respondent:  John C. Tait, Ottawa.      Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General for Ontario:  Richard F. Chaloner,
Toronto.      Solicitors
for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec:  Jean Bouchard and Gilles
Laporte, Ste-Foy.      Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General for Alberta:  The Department of the
Attorney General, Edmonton.   