Duha Printers (Western) Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 795  Duha Printers (Western) Ltd.                                                           Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Duha Printers (Western) Ltd. v. Canada  File No.:  25513.  1998:  March 17; 1998:  May 28.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Income tax -- Deductions from income -- Non-capital
losses -- Amalgamation of corporations -- Predecessor corporation -- Meaning of
“control” -- Corporation acquiring shares of inactive company in order to take
advantage of its accumulated non-capital losses -- Corporation amalgamating
with inactive company -- Whether change in control prevented corporation from
deducting inactive company’s non-capital losses -- Whether unanimous
shareholder agreement to be considered in assessing who has de jure control of
corporation -- Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, ss. 87(2.1), 111(1), (5).  A predecessor of the appellant corporation decided to
acquire the shares of an inactive company (“Outdoor”) in order to take
advantage of the substantial non-capital losses it had accumulated.  The
company which owned the shares of Outdoor (“Marr’s”) subscribed for a
sufficient number of shares in the appellant’s predecessor  to give it a
majority of the voting shares.  An agreement was entered into among all the
shareholders of the appellant’s predecessor pursuant to which its affairs were
to be managed by a board of directors, elected by the shareholders from a list
of nominees specified in the agreement.  The agreement also restricted the
transfer of shares so that no shares could be transferred without the consent
of the majority of the directors.  The appellant’s predecessor purchased all
the outstanding shares of Outdoor from Marr’s for $1.  It then amalgamated with
Outdoor, thereby creating the appellant.  In its 1985 tax return the appellant deducted from its
income non-capital losses which had been incurred by Outdoor in previous years,
pursuant to s. 111(1) of the Income Tax Act (“ITA”).  Section
87(2.1) of the ITA provides that where there has been an amalgamation of
two or more corporations, the new corporation is deemed to be the same
corporation as each predecessor corporation for the purposes of determining the
non-capital losses of the new corporation.  Under s. 111(5), however, where
“control” of a corporation has been acquired by another person (the
“purchaser”), that corporation’s non-capital losses from the carrying on of a
business are only deductible by the purchaser in a subsequent taxation year if,
throughout that year, the business in question was carried on by the purchaser
with a reasonable expectation of profit -- that is, as a going concern.  The
Minister of National Revenue disallowed the deduction on the basis that Marr’s
did not control the appellant’s predecessor prior to its amalgamation with
Outdoor.  The Tax Court of Canada allowed the appellant’s appeal, but that
decision was overturned by the Federal Court of Appeal.  Held:  The appeal should be allowed.  Under the ITA, “control” of a corporation
normally refers to de jure, not de facto, control.  The general
test is whether the majority shareholder enjoys “effective control” over the
affairs and fortunes of the corporation, as manifested in the ownership of such
a number of shares as carries with it the right to a majority of the votes in
the election of the board of directors (the Buckerfield’s test).  While
the general approach to the determination of control has been to examine the
share register of the corporation to ascertain which shareholder, if any,
possesses the ability to elect a majority of the board of directors, it is
entirely proper to look beyond the share register when the constating documents
provide for something unusual which alters the control of the company. 
Although “ordinary” shareholder agreements and other external documents
generally should not be considered in assessing de jure control, a
unanimous shareholder agreement (“USA”) is a constating document and as such
must be considered for the purposes of this analysis.  The USA is a corporate
law hybrid, part contractual and part constitutional in nature.  It can result
in a fundamental change in the management of the company, since under s. 140(5)
of the Manitoba Corporations Act (the “Corporations Act”) the
shareholders who are parties to the USA assume all the rights, powers, duties
and liabilities of the directors which are removed by the agreement, and the
directors are relieved of their duties and liabilities to the same extent.  The
fact that the USA has supplanted the long-standing principle of shareholder
non-interference with the directors’ powers to manage the corporation, an
otherwise exclusive right which is granted by the statute and the corporate
constitution, clearly indicates that it is at least as important as the
articles and by-laws in assessing de jure control.  Under s. 140(2) of the Corporations Act, to be
valid a USA must restrict, in whole or in part, the powers of the directors to
manage the business and affairs of the corporation.  The agreement in this case
constituted a USA within the meaning of s. 140(2).  Article 4.4 of the
agreement, which prevented the corporation from issuing further shares “without
the written consent of all of the Shareholders”, imposed a clear restriction
upon the directors’ statutory powers of management.  However, the mere
existence of a USA does not necessarily alter the de jure control of a
corporation.   Rather, it is possible to determine whether de jure
control has been lost as a result of a USA by asking whether the USA leaves any
way for the majority shareholder to exercise effective control over the affairs
and fortunes of the corporation in a way analogous or equivalent to the power
to elect the majority of the board of directors.  The provisions in the USA at issue in this case did
not in fact result in the loss of de jure control by Marr’s.  The
inability to issue new shares without unanimous shareholder approval, while
surely a restriction on the powers of the directors to manage the business and
affairs of the appellant’s predecessor, was not so severe a restriction that
Marr’s could be said to have lost the ability to exercise effective control
over the affairs and fortunes of the company through its majority
shareholdings.  Marr’s, by virtue of its ability to elect the majority of the
board of directors, enjoyed de jure control over the appellant’s
predecessor immediately prior to its amalgamation with Outdoor.  Nothing in the
constating documents, including the USA, served to alter this state of
affairs.  Accordingly, there was no change in control occasioned by the
amalgamation, which means that s. 111(5) of the ITA did not prevent the
appellant from deducting from its 1985 taxable income the non-capital losses
accumulated in previous years by Outdoor, regardless of whether or not the
business of Outdoor was intended to be or was actually carried on by the
appellant as a going concern.  Cases Cited  Distinguished:  Oakfield
Developments (Toronto) Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1971] S.C.R.
1032; Minister of National Revenue v. Consolidated Holding Co., [1974]
S.C.R. 419; The Queen v. Lusita Holdings Ltd., 84 D.T.C. 6346; Alteco
Inc. v. Canada, [1993] 2 C.T.C. 2087; referred to:  Buckerfield’s
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1964] C.T.C. 504; Minister of
National Revenue v. Dworkin Furs (Pembroke) Ltd., [1967] S.C.R. 223; Canada
v. Antosko, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 312; International Iron & Metal Co. v.
Minister of National Revenue, [1974] S.C.R. 898, aff’g [1969] C.T.C. 668; Vina-Rug
(Canada) Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1968] S.C.R. 193; British
American Tobacco Co. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1943] 1 All E.R. 13;
Donald Applicators Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, 69 D.T.C. 5122,
aff’d 71 D.T.C. 5202; The Queen v. Imperial General Properties Ltd.,
[1985] 2 S.C.R. 288; Harvard International Resources Ltd. v. Provincial
Treasurer of Alberta, 93 D.T.C. 5254; Motherwell v. Schoof, [1949] 4
D.L.R. 812; Atlas Development Co. v. Calof (1963), 41 W.W.R. 575; Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canada Business Corporations
Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-44 .  Corporations Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. C225, ss. 1(1) “affairs”, “business”, 6(3), (4),
20(1), 25(1), 97(1), 98(1), 116, 129(5), 140(2), (5), 207(1)(b), 240.  Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148 [am. 1970-71-72, c. 63], ss. 87(2.1) [ad.
1977-78, c. 1, s. 42; am. 1984, c. 1, s. 38], 111(1) [rep. & sub. 1984, c.
1, s. 54], (5) [rep. & sub. 1980-81-82-83, c. 140, s. 70; rep. & sub.
1984, c. 1, s. 54], 251(2)(c), 256(5.1) [ad. 1988, c. 55, s. 192], (7)(a)(i)
[ad. 1977-78, c. 1, s. 99; am. 1980-81-82-83, c. 48, s. 112, c. 140, s. 131].  Authors Cited  Concise Oxford Dictionary of
Current English, 9th ed.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press,
1995, “affairs”.  Dickerson, Robert W. V., John L.
Howard and Leon Getz.  Proposals for a New Business Corporations Law for
Canada, vol. 1.  Ottawa:  Information Canada, 1971.  Iacobucci, Frank.  “Canadian
Corporation Law:  Some Recent Shareholder Developments”.  In Nancy E. Eastham
and Boris Krivy, eds., The Cambridge Lectures 1981:  Selected Papers Based
upon Lectures Delivered at the Conference of the Canadian Institute for
Advanced Legal Studies, 1981, held at Cambridge University, England, and
l’Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1982, 88.  Iacobucci, Frank, and David L.
Johnston.  “The Private or Closely-held Corporation”.  In Jacob S. Ziegel, ed.,
Studies in Canadian Company Law, vol. 2.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1973,
68.  Welling, Bruce.  Corporate Law
in Canada:  The Governing Principles, 2nd ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths,
1991.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal,
[1996] 3 F.C. 78, 198 N.R. 359, 27 B.L.R. (2d) 89, [1996] 3 C.T.C. 19, 96
D.T.C. 6323, [1996] F.C.J. No. 738 (QL), reversing a judgment of the Tax Court
of Canada, [1995] 1 C.T.C. 2481, 95 D.T.C. 828, [1994] T.C.J. No. 1140 (QL),
ordering a reassessment.  Appeal allowed.  Joel Weinstein and Jonathan
Kroft, for the appellant.  Robert Gosman, Sean
D. Shore and Roger Taylor, for the respondent.  //Iacobucci J.//  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Iacobucci J. -- In this
appeal, this Court is required to examine the definition of “control” for the
purposes of s. 111(5) of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, as
amended, in order to determine whether the appellant corporation was entitled
to deduct from its 1985 taxable income certain non-capital losses incurred by a
predecessor corporation in an amalgamation.  In this regard, it will be
necessary to consider which of various factors may properly be considered in
assessing the de jure control of a corporation, and in particular,
whether a unanimous shareholder agreement, as contemplated by the Manitoba Corporations
Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. C225 (the “Corporations Act”) (and by other
statutes modelled after the Canada Business Corporations Act, R.S.C.,
1985, c. C-44  (the “CBCA ”)), is to be considered a constating document
for the purposes of the de jure control inquiry.  I.  Facts  2                                  
This case proceeded on an agreed statement of facts, and therefore the
facts are not in dispute.  Duha Printers (Western) Ltd. (“Duha No. 1”),
incorporated in Manitoba in 1963, carried on business as a specialty printer. 
Prior to and as at February 7, 1984, all of the voting shares of Duha No. 1
were held either directly or indirectly by Emeric Duha, his wife, Gwendolyn
Duha, and their three children.  3                                  
Outdoor Leisureland of Manitoba Ltd. (“Outdoor”), incorporated in
Manitoba in 1971, carried on business as a retailer of recreational vehicles. 
As at February 8, 1984, the shares of Outdoor were held by Marr’s Leisure
Holdings Inc. (“Marr’s”), of which William Marr and his wife, Norah Marr, owned
62.16 percent of the voting shares.  On that date, and as early as 1983,
Outdoor was inactive and had accumulated non-capital losses in the amount of $541,044.  4                                  
On December 3, 1983, the directors of Duha No. 1 authorized the
president of the corporation, Emeric Duha, to proceed at his discretion to
acquire the shares of Outdoor in order to attempt to take advantage of the
substantial non-capital losses which the latter had accumulated, so long as the
losses could be purchased advantageously and if the related costs did not
exceed $10,000.  This set into motion the chain of events which ultimately gave
rise to this litigation.  5                                  
On February 7, 1984, Duha No. 1 amalgamated with 64457 Manitoba Ltd., a
wholly owned subsidiary of Duha No. 1, to form Duha Printers Western Ltd.
(“Duha No. 2”).  This caused a deemed year-end, permitting Duha No.1 to take
advantage of  a small business deduction, and the shareholders of Duha No. 2
received the same number of shares as they had previously owned in Duha No. 1. 
On February 8, 1984, the articles of Duha No. 2 were amended to increase the
authorized capital of the company by creating an unlimited number of Class “C”
preferred shares.  These shares entitled their holders to non-cumulative
dividends equal to 9 percent of the redemption price (the stated capital for
each share).  Each share also carried with it the right to one vote, which was
to cease either upon the transfer of the share or upon the death of its
holder.  The Class “C” shares were redeemable by Duha No. 2 with the consent of
the holder, or without the consent of the holder in the event that the shares
were transferred.  6                                  
Marr’s subscribed for 2,000 Class “C” shares at a price of one dollar
each, for a total of $2,000, on February 8, 1984.  Consequently, Marr’s then
held a 55.71 percent majority of the voting shares in Duha No. 2.  It is worth
noting that, for the period ending December 31, 1983, Duha No.1 had net income
of $182,223 and retained earnings of $296,486.  For the period ending January
2, 1985, it had net income of $630,115 and retained earnings of $571,543.  7                                  
Also on February 8, 1984, an agreement was entered into among all of the
shareholders of the new corporation, Duha No. 2 (the “Agreement”).  Aside from
describing itself in Article 3.1 as a “unanimous shareholders agreement”, the
Agreement stated that it dealt with the operation and management of the
company’s business and affairs.  According to Article 2 of the Agreement, the
affairs of Duha No. 2 were to be managed by a board of directors elected by the
shareholders and composed of any three of Emeric Duha, Gwendolyn Duha, William
Marr and Paul Quinton.  Although Mr. Quinton was a close friend of both Emeric
Duha and William Marr, and had served as a director of Duha No. 1 since 1974,
it is common ground that he, Emeric Duha, and William Marr were not “related to
each other” within the meaning of s. 251 of the Income Tax Act.  8                                  
The Agreement also restricted the transfer of shares so that no shares
could be transferred without the consent of the majority of the directors
(Article 4.1); prohibited any shareholder from selling, assigning,
transferring, or otherwise encumbering its shares in any manner (Article 4.3);
and provided that new shares could only be issued with the unanimous consent of
the existing shareholders (Article 4.4).  Further, in Article 6.1, the
Agreement provided that shareholder disputes regarding the business, accounts,
or transactions of Duha No. 2 were to be resolved by arbitration.  9                                  
On February 9, 1984, Duha No. 2 purchased all of the outstanding shares
of Outdoor from Marr’s for $1.  On the same date, 64099 Manitoba Ltd., a wholly
owned subsidiary of Duha No. 2, purchased from Marr’s Leisure Products (1977)
Ltd. (“Marr’s Leisure”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Marr’s, a receivable in
the amount of $441,253 owed by Outdoor to Marr’s Leisure.  Half of the total
purchase price of $34,559 was payable on June 1, 1984, and the balance was
payable upon the redemption of the 2,000 Class “C” shares of Duha No. 2 held by
Marr’s.  10                              
On February 10, 1984, Duha No. 2 and Outdoor effected a statutory
amalgamation under the Corporations Act to form Duha Printers (Western)
Limited (“Duha No. 3”).  The shares of Outdoor were cancelled and the
shareholders of Duha No. 3 received the same number and class of shares as they
had previously owned in Duha No. 2.  On March 12, 1984, the shareholders of
Duha No. 3 elected Emeric Duha, Gwendolyn Duha and Paul Quinton as the three
directors of Duha No. 3.  11                              
On January 4, 1985, Duha No. 3, with the consent of Marr’s, redeemed the
2,000 Class “C” shares owned by Marr’s for a redemption price of $2,000.  On February
15, 1985, the Agreement was terminated and Paul Quinton resigned as a director
of Duha No. 3.  12                              
In its corporate tax return filed on June 28, 1985, Duha No. 3 deducted
from its income non-capital losses in the amount of $463,820, of which $460,786
had been incurred by Outdoor in previous years.  The Minister of National
Revenue disallowed the deduction on the basis that Marr’s did not control Duha
No. 2 prior to its amalgamation with Outdoor, and that the transactions at
issue were artificial and a sham.  The Tax Court of Canada allowed Duha No. 3’s
appeal, but this decision was overturned on appeal to the Federal Court of
Appeal.  II.  Relevant
Statutory Provisions  13                              
Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, as amended  87.  . . .  (2.1)   Where there has been an amalgamation of two
or more corporations, for the purposes only of    the new corporation shall be deemed to be the same corporation as, and
a continuation of, each predecessor corporation, except that this subsection
shall in no respect affect the determination of  (c)  the fiscal period of the new corporation or any of its
predecessors,  (d)  the income of the new corporation or any of its
predecessors, or  (e)  the taxable income of, or the tax payable under this Act
by, any predecessor corporation.  111.     (1)    For the purpose of computing
the taxable income of a taxpayer for a taxation year, there may be deducted
such portion as he may claim of                                                                      .
. .  (5)  Where, at any time, control of a corporation
has been acquired by a person or persons (each of whom is in this subsection referred
to as the “purchaser”)   (i)  only if throughout the particular year and after that time that
business was carried on by the corporation for profit or with a reasonable
expectation of profit ...  251. . . .  (2)    For the purposes of this Act “related
persons”, or persons related to each other, are                                                                     .
. .  (c) any two corporations  (i)  if they are controlled by the same person or
group of persons ...   256.  . . .  (7)    For the purposes of subsections 66(11) and
(11.1), 87(2.1), 88(1.1) and (1.2) and section 111  (a)  where shares of a particular corporation have been acquired
by a person after March 31, 1977, that person shall be deemed not to have
acquired control of the particular corporation by virtue of such share
acquisition if that person  (i)  was, immediately before such share acquisition, related (otherwise
than by virtue of a right referred to in paragraph 251(5)(b)) to the
particular corporation...  Corporations
Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. C225  6(3) Subject to subsection (4), if the articles or a unanimous
shareholder agreement require a greater number of votes of directors or
shareholders than that required by this Act to effect any action, the
provisions of the articles or of the unanimous shareholder agreement prevail.  6(4) The articles may not require a greater number of votes of
shareholders to remove a director than the number required by section 104.  20(1) A corporation shall prepare and maintain, at its
registered office and, subject to subsection (5), at any other place in
Manitoba designated by the directors, records containing  (a) the articles and the by-laws and all amendments thereto, and a copy
of any unanimous shareholder agreement;                                                                     .
. .  97(1) Subject to any unanimous shareholder agreement, the
directors of a corporation shall  (a) exercise the powers of the corporation directly or indirectly
through the employees and agents of the corporation; and  (b) direct the management of the business and affairs of the
corporation.  140(2)  An otherwise lawful written agreement among all the
shareholders of a corporation, or among all the shareholders and a person who
is not a shareholder, that restricts, in whole or in part, the powers of the
directors to manage the business and affairs of the corporation is valid.   140(5)  A shareholder who is a party to a unanimous shareholder
agreement has all the rights, powers and duties and incurs the liabilities of a
director of the corporation to which the agreement relates to the extent that
the agreement restricts the discretion or powers of the directors to manage the
business and affairs of the corporation, and the directors are thereby relieved
of their duties and liabilities to the same extent.  240  If a corporation or any director, officer, employee, agent,
auditor, trustee, receiver, receiver-manager or liquidator of a corporation
does not comply with this Act, the regulations, articles, by-laws, or a
unanimous shareholder agreement, a complainant or a creditor of the corporation
may, in addition to any other right he has, apply to a court for an order
directing any such person to comply with, or restraining any such person from
acting in breach of, any provisions thereof, and upon such application the
court may so order and make any further order it thinks fit.    14                              
A few explanatory words regarding this rather complex legislative scheme
may be useful at this stage.  Under s. 87(2.1) of the Income Tax Act,
where there has been an amalgamation of two or more corporations, for the
purposes of determining the non-capital loss of the new corporation for any
taxation year, the new corporation is deemed to be the same corporation as, and
a continuation of, each predecessor corporation.  Therefore, for the purposes
of s. 111(1), the new corporation is entitled to deduct from its taxable income
for a year its non-capital losses for the seven years immediately preceding,
and the three years immediately following, the year in question.  However, this
is subject to at least one important qualification: under s. 111(5), where
“control” of a corporation has been acquired by another person (the
“purchaser”), that corporation’s non-capital losses from the carrying on of a
business are only deductible by the purchaser in a subsequent taxation year if,
throughout that year and after that time, the business in question was carried
on by the corporation with a reasonable expectation of profit -- that is, as a
going concern.  The foregoing provisions of the Corporations Act are
relevant, potentially, as indicators of where “control” of a corporation lay at
the material time or times.  III.  Judicial
History  A.  Tax
Court of Canada, [1995] 1 C.T.C. 2481  15                              
Rip J.T.C.C. observed first that, if Marr’s acquired control of Duha No.
2 on February 8, 1984, then ss. 251(2) and 256(7)(a)(i) of the Income
Tax Act would deem there to have been no change of control when its shares
were acquired the next day by Duha No. 2, given that the two companies would
have been related to one another.  As such, s. 111(5) would not prevent Duha
No. 3 from deducting from its income the non-capital losses previously incurred
by Outdoor, pursuant to s. 87(2.1), even though the business of Outdoor was not
carried on by Duha No. 3 as a going concern.  16                              
As a preliminary matter, Rip J.T.C.C. noted that, although the parties
had referred to the Agreement as a “unanimous shareholders’ agreement”, the
Agreement did not by its terms restrict the powers of the directors of Duha No.
2 to manage the business and affairs of the company, as required by the
definition of “unanimous shareholder agreement” in s. 140(2) of the Corporations
Act.  In his view, the Agreement, while admittedly unanimous, was simply an
ordinary shareholders’ agreement, not the special type of “unanimous
shareholder agreement” contemplated by that statute.  17                              
Turning to the substantive issues on the appeal, Rip J.T.C.C. began by
stating that “control” of a corporation, for the purposes of the Income Tax
Act, means de jure control, or the ownership of such a number of
shares as carries with it the right to a majority of the votes in the election
of the board of directors, and not de facto control: Buckerfield’s
Ltd. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1964] C.T.C. 504 (Ex. Ct.) (a
definition adopted by this Court in Minister of National Revenue v. Dworkin
Furs (Pembroke) Ltd., [1967] S.C.R. 223, inter alia).  Rip J. noted
also that, in assessing de jure control, the courts may examine the
incorporating or constating documents of the company, which are “in effect an
agreement between the shareholders and binding upon all the shareholders” (p.
2490).  18                              
The Minister had argued that, although Marr’s owned a majority of the
voting shares of Duha No. 2, the Agreement “totally neutralized” the ability of
Marr’s to manage the company, since it effectively prevented Marr’s from:
electing a majority of its choice to the board of directors, dissenting from
corporate transactions and applying to the court for redemption of its shares,
or selling its shares.  However, after an extensive review of the case law, Rip
J. was unable to find authority for the proposition that the Agreement should
be taken to vitiate the apparent de jure control of Duha No. 2 by
Marr’s.  At the relevant time, Marr’s held more than 50 percent of the voting
shares in Duha No. 2 and, in the view of Rip J.T.C.C., nothing in the
constating documents prevented Marr’s from voting its shares in the normal
course, nor was there any evidence that Marr’s was not the beneficial owner of
the shares and thus unable to decide for itself how the shares were to be
voted.  19                              
Even if Rip J.T.C.C. had accepted that documents other than the
constating documents could be considered, he found that nothing in the
Agreement obliged Marr’s to vote its shares in the manner in which it did, that
is, to vote for a majority of directors who were representatives of the Duha
family.  Marr’s was in a position to alter the board of directors, and there
was no evidence, in the view of Rip J.T.C.C., that Mr. Quinton was a nominee of
the Duha family.  Therefore, Marr’s was free, by electing to the board Mr.
Quinton, either Mr. or Mrs. Duha, and Mr. Marr, to ensure that neither Marr’s
nor the Duha family would have a majority on the board of directors.  Rip
J.T.C.C. thus concluded that Marr’s, by virtue of its ownership of the majority
of the voting shares on February 8, 1984, controlled Duha No. 2 at that time.  20                              
Turning to whether the transaction was a sham, Rip J.T.C.C. acknowledged
that the sole purpose of the chain of events was to enable Duha No. 3 to make
use of the losses incurred by Outdoor, that de facto control of Duha No.
2 was never transferred to Marr’s, and that Marr’s never intended to control
the company.  However, he could not agree that the transaction was a sham,
given that there was no attempt to disguise its true character.  The various
transactions were binding upon the parties and did precisely what they appeared
to do.  As for the argument that the transaction was contrary to the “object
and spirit” of s. 111, Rip J.T.C.C. simply observed that the purpose of the
section was to permit corporations to apply non-capital losses against income
earned in subsequent years,  that amalgamated corporations are entitled to
deduct the losses of predecessor corporations in this manner  if the
amalgamated corporation is controlled by the same person or group as the
predecessor, and that “control” in this sense refers to de jure and not de
facto control.  In his view, there was nothing in the transaction that
violated the “object and spirit” of the provision.  21                              
Therefore, Rip J.T.C.C. concluded that Marr’s did control Duha No. 2 on
and immediately prior to February 8, 1984, when Duha No. 2 and Outdoor were
amalgamated, and that it controlled Duha No. 3 during the taxation year on
appeal.  Accordingly, the appeal was allowed.  B.  Federal
Court of Appeal, [1996] 3 F.C. 78                      (1)  Reasons of
Linden J.A. (Isaac C.J. concurring) 22                              
Like the trial judge, Linden J.A. was not persuaded that the transaction
was a sham. The legal obligations between the parties were real and
accomplished exactly what they purported to do.  However, this was not
sufficient to achieve the tax results ultimately desired by the parties.  It
remained to be seen whether the transactions came within the relevant sections
of the Income Tax Act.  23                              
Linden J.A. refused to treat as a distinct issue the “object and spirit”
of the provisions in question, stating that, instead, the interpretation of the
sections should reflect their objects.  The object and spirit of a section will
only be practically relevant when the application of that section to factual
circumstances admits of doubt, not where the meaning of the section is clear
and free of ambiguity or uncertainty: Canada v. Antosko,
[1994] 2 S.C.R. 312.  In the view of Linden J.A., the purpose of the provisions
at issue on this appeal was “to permit a deduction of a loss if control has not
changed hands but to deny it if control has changed hands” (p. 109).  24                              
Linden J.A. acknowledged that control, for these purposes, means de
jure and not de facto control, and that the single most important
factor to consider is the voting rights attaching to shares.  However, he was equally
of the opinion that the scope of scrutiny under the de jure test has
been extended “beyond a mere technical reference to the share register” (p.
109).  After an exhaustive review of the case law, including cases which he
interpreted as relying upon restrictions in the constating documents and “other
agreements” as an indicator of de jure control -- and, in particular, Minister
of National Revenue v. Consolidated Holding Co., [1974] S.C.R. 419
-- Linden J.A. concluded (at p. 118) that:  . . . it is important to look to the legal position of the parties as
displayed in the wider circumstances of the parties’ affairs. . . . [T]rue de
jure control is just what it is stated to be, control at law.  Any binding
instrument, therefore, must be reckoned in the analysis if it affects voting
rights.   25                              
Linden J.A. held that, “[i]n determining issues of corporate control,
the Court will look to the time in question, to legal documents pertaining to
the issue, and to any actual or contingent legal obligations affecting the
voting rights of shares” (p. 121).  These factors, he held, “are simply facts
with legal consequences, so that the distinction between de jure and de
facto is not as stark as it once was”.  In his view, then, “corporate
control must be real, effective legal control over the company in question” (p.
121).  Such an analysis, he continued, incorporates an appreciation for various
considerations which might affect the way in which shares are or could be
voted.  He concluded that, “if majority ownership does not allow for real legal
control over a company, the de jure test of control will not have been
met” (p. 124).  26                              
Applying the law to the facts of the instant appeal, Linden J.A. held
that Marr’s did not control Duha No. 2 because the Agreement determined that
the majority of the Board of Directors would always be nominees of the Duha
family.  He found that Mr. Quinton was effectively a nominee of the Duha family
because he had been a longtime friend of Mr. Duha, had been a director of Duha
No. 1 for ten years, and had signed the resolution authorizing the subscription
by Marr’s of the 2,000 Class “C” shares,  the entering into the Agreement by
the corporation, and the purchase of Outdoor’s shares.  On this basis, Linden
J.A. concluded that an election of any combination of the directors listed in
the Agreement assured the Duha family of control over Duha No. 2.  He also
noted that Duha No. 2 was worth almost $600,000, and opined that no reasonable
person would believe that a $2,000 share purchase would actually yield control
of a company of such value.  In his view, it was not coincidental that the
three Duha family nominees were in fact elected as directors and that Marr’s
did not elect its own majority shareholder to the board.  27                              
Linden J.A. was of the view that the Agreement likely qualified as a
unanimous shareholder agreement (“USA”) under s. 140(2) of the Corporations
Act, given that it operated to restrict the powers of the directors both
directly and indirectly.  However, he also held that the Agreement did not have
to meet this statutory requirement  before it could be considered in a de
jure control analysis.  The Agreement, signed by all the shareholders and
by Duha No. 2, was legally binding and had significantly affected how the
shareholders could vote their shares.  These, in his view, were the minimum
conditions to be met before the Agreement could be considered in a de jure
control examination, given that “[c]ertain cases of the Supreme Court of Canada
explicitly state” (p. 125) that external agreements are not to be considered
irrelevant to the issue of de jure control.  He distinguished the case
of International Iron & Metal Co.  v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1974] S.C.R. 898, aff’g [1969] C.T.C. 668, on the basis that the
agreement in that case was “contrived to multiply a tax benefit” (p. 126) and
that the parties to whom control was supposedly transferred by the agreement
were not parties to it, per se.  28                              
Moreover, there was other evidence that Marr’s did not control Duha No.
2.  Linden J.A. noted that the amended articles of Duha No. 2 stated that the
company could not issue new voting shares without unanimous shareholder consent
and found that this meant that Marr’s could not change its restricted choice of
directors by using its majority share position.  He held that Marr’s ability to
dissolve Duha No. 2 was not determinative and was little more than “a chimera”
because, upon a dissolution, Marr’s would receive nothing beyond the stated
value of its shares, would forfeit the receivable and would actually suffer a
net loss.                       (2)  Reasons of Stone J.A. (Isaac C.J. concurring)  30                              
Like Linden J.A., Stone J.A. would have allowed the appeal, but for
different reasons.  In his view, the Agreement was to be considered along with
the constating documents of the corporation because it was a USA within the
meaning of  the Corporations Act.  Stone J.A. noted that s. 97(1) of the
Corporations Act gives directors the power to direct “the business and
affairs of the corporation” and that s. 1(1) defines “affairs” as including
“the relationships among a body corporate, its affiliates and the shareholders,
directors and officers of those bodies corporate but . . . not . . . the
business carried on by those bodies corporate”.  He further held that, to be a
USA for the purposes of s. 140(2) of the Corporations Act, the Agreement
had to restrict the powers of the directors to manage the business and affairs
of the corporation.  31                              
Stone J.A. noted that Article 2.1 of the Agreement required the
shareholders to “cause the affairs of the Corporation to be managed by a
board of three (3) directors” (emphasis added), and reasoned that this, by
exclusion, did not leave the directors with the power to manage the business
of Duha No. 2.  Further, Article 6.1 of the Agreement provided for the resolution
by arbitration of any dispute arising among the shareholders with respect to
the “business or accounts or transactions” of the company.  Ordinarily, in his
view, no dispute as to the “business” of the company would arise between the
shareholders, as the business of a corporation is, in the absence of a USA, to
be directed by the board of directors.  On this basis, he concluded that the
Agreement restricted the powers of the directors and was thus a USA within the
meaning of the Corporations Act.  Thus, in his view, the Agreement had
to be considered when examining de jure control.  32                              
In the circumstances of this case, Stone J.A. concluded that the
Agreement prevented Marr’s from obtaining the de jure control that it
otherwise might have held by virtue of owning 55.71 percent of the voting
shares of Duha No. 2.  Even though Marr’s could in theory determine the
composition of the board of directors, its ability to elect a board that could
manage only the “affairs” and not the “business” of Duha No. 2 was not de
jure control.  Stone J.A. also observed that the referral to arbitration of
irreconcilable differences between shareholders implied that the unanimous
agreement of all shareholders, not simply a majority of votes, was required for
business decisions.  In this respect, Marr’s clearly lacked de jure
control over Duha No. 2.  Stone J.A. concluded, therefore, that Outdoor and
Duha No. 2 had not been related before they amalgamated and that Outdoor’s
losses could not be utilized by Duha No. 3.  33                              
While it was not necessary to the manner in which he proposed to dispose
of the case, Stone J.A. also held that the transaction was not a sham, as the
Minister alleged, given that the requisite element of deceit as to the true
nature of the transaction was not present in the circumstances.  IV.  Issues  34                              
The ultimate issue on this appeal is whether Duha No. 3 should have been
entitled to deduct from its 1985 business income non-capital losses incurred in
previous years by Outdoor, pursuant to s. 111(5) of the Income Tax Act. 
To answer this question, it will be necessary to decide whether documents other
than the constating documents of a corporation should be considered in
determining de jure control of a company for the purposes of ss. 111(5)
and 251(2)(c) of the Act, and whether USAs enjoy any special status in
this regard.  If either or both of these questions are resolved in the
affirmative, it will then be necessary to establish whether or not the
Agreement was a USA within the meaning of s. 140(2) of the Corporations Act
and, if so, whether it in fact deprived Marr’s of de jure control over
Duha No. 2.  On appeal to this Court, the Minister did not pursue the argument
that the transaction was a sham.  V.  Analysis  A.   “Control”
of a corporation  35                              
It has been well recognized that, under the Income Tax Act,
“control” of a corporation normally refers to de jure control and not de
facto control.  This Court has repeatedly cited with approval the following
test, set out by Jackett P. in Buckerfield’s, supra, at p. 507:  Many approaches might conceivably be adopted in
applying the word “control” in a statute such as the Income Tax Act to a
corporation.  It might, for example, refer to control by “management”, where
management and the board of directors are separate, or it might refer to
control by the board of directors. . . .  The word “control” might conceivably
refer to de facto control by one or more shareholders whether or not
they hold a majority of shares.  I am of the view, however, that in Section 39
of the Income Tax Act [the former section dealing with associated
companies], the word “controlled” contemplates the right of control that
rests in ownership of such a number of shares as carries with it the right to a
majority of the votes in the election of the board of directors. [Emphasis
added.]   Cases in which
this Court has applied the foregoing test have included, inter alia, Dworkin
Furs, supra, and Vina-Rug (Canada) Ltd. v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1968] S.C.R. 193.  36                              
Thus, de jure control has emerged as the Canadian standard, with
the test for such control generally accepted to be whether the controlling
party enjoys, by virtue of its shareholdings, the ability to elect the majority
of the board of directors.  However, it must be recognized at the outset that
this test is really an attempt to ascertain who is in effective control of the
affairs and fortunes of the corporation.  That is, although the directors
generally have, by operation of the corporate law statute governing the
corporation, the formal right to direct the management of the corporation, the
majority shareholder enjoys the indirect exercise of this control through his
or her ability to elect the board of directors.  Thus, it is in reality the
majority shareholder, not the directors per se, who is in effective
control of the corporation.  This was expressly recognized by Jackett P. when setting
out the test in Buckerfield’s.  Indeed, the very authority cited for the
test was the following dictum of Viscount Simon, L.C., in British American
Tobacco Co. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1943] 1 All E.R. 13,
at p. 15:  The owners of the majority of the voting power in a company are the
persons who are in effective control of its affairs and fortunes. 
[Emphasis added.]    37                              
Viewed in this light, it becomes apparent that to apply formalistically
a test like that set out in Buckerfield’s, without paying appropriate
heed to the reason for the test,  can lead to an unfortunately artificial
result.  The task before this Court, then, is to determine whether, just prior
to the amalgamation, Marr’s was in effective control of the affairs and
fortunes of Duha No. 2 by virtue of its majority shareholdings.  38                              
There is no real dispute between the parties that the de jure
control test is applicable in the present circumstances.  Rather, the dispute
is as to which factors may be considered in assessing de jure control. 
In the submission of the appellant, both Linden and Stone JJ.A. erred in their
respective applications of the test: Linden J.A. by holding that this Court has
widened the test such that bare contractual agreements between shareholders may
be considered, and Stone J.A. by concluding that the agreement here in question
was a unanimous shareholder agreement within the definition of that term in the
Corporations Act, and that a USA may be considered in assessing de jure
control for the purposes of ss. 111(5) and 251(2)(c) of the Income
Tax Act.  I will examine each of these submissions in turn.  (1)  External agreements  39                              
In his reasons, after reviewing a number of authorities, Linden J.A.
concluded (at p. 118) that  . . . true de jure control is just what it is stated to be,
control at law.  Any binding instrument, therefore, must be reckoned in the
analysis if it affects voting rights.   In the view of
Linden J.A. (at p. 118) “it is important to look to the legal position of the
parties as displayed in the wider circumstances of the parties’ affairs”.  But
while this might seem a sensible approach at first glance, I can find no
general support in the extensive authorities cited for Linden J.A.’s
application of it. 40                              
The general approach to the determination of control, as I have already
noted, has been to examine the share register of the corporation to ascertain
which shareholder, if any, possesses the ability to elect a majority of the
board of directors and, therefore, has the type of power contemplated by the Buckerfield’s
test, supra.  The case law seems to point only to limited circumstances
in which other documents may be examined, and then only to a narrow range of
documents which may be considered.  In my view, this is readily apparent even
in the case law cited by Linden J.A. in support of the opposite position, which
I shall now briefly discuss.  41                              
The first case in which the Buckerfield’s test was applied by this
Court was Dworkin Furs, supra.  Of the five appeals decided
together in Dworkin Furs, the one that is most relevant to the instant
case is Aaron’s Ladies Apparel Limited, which involved a provision in
the articles of association of the corporation which required the unanimous
consent of all shareholders or directors, as the case may be, for the
successful passage of any resolution.  A group of shareholders held two-thirds
of the total voting shares of the corporation, and the issue before the Court
was whether the aforementioned provision deprived this group of de jure
control.  Hall J., writing for the Court, held that the provision did nullify
the shareholders’ control of the company (at p. 236):  Control of a company within Buckerfield rests with the shareholders
as such and not as directors.  A contract between shareholders to vote in a
given or agreed way is not illegal.  The Articles of Association are in effect
an agreement between the shareholders and binding upon all shareholders. 
Article 6 in question here was neither illegal nor ultra vires.   42                              
In his reasons, Linden J.A. appears to have taken this statement to
support the proposition that the court is entitled to consider ordinary
contracts between shareholders to assess control.  However, the flaw in this
interpretation is immediately obvious: in Dworkin, Hall J. was dealing
not with an “ordinary” contractual arrangement but with a provision of the
company’s articles of association, one of its constating documents.  It is
entirely proper to look beyond the share register when the constating documents
provide for something unusual which alters the control of the company.  To
consider every legally binding arrangement between shareholders as such,
however, is another matter entirely.  As I will explain in more detail below,
the distinction between contractually binding agreements outside the constating
documents on the one hand, and legally binding provisions within the constating
documents on the other, is crucial.  With respect, Linden J.A.’s interpretation
of Dworkin Furs cannot be sustained.  In fact, Gibson J. in International
Iron & Metal Co. v. Minister of National Revenue, [1969] C.T.C.
668 (Ex. Ct.), expressly distinguished the shareholders’ agreement there at
issue from the “contract” considered in Dworkin Furs, which was “part of
the constitution of the Company” (p. 674).  43                              
Attempted analogies to other cases cited by Linden J.A. suffer from
similar frailties.  For example, Linden J.A. cites Donald Applicators Ltd. v.
Minister of National Revenue, 69 D.T.C. 5122 (Ex. Ct.), aff’d 71 D.T.C.
5202 (S.C.C.), as standing for the proposition that de jure control is
to be determined in light of the overall voting structure of the company,
including “the effect of any restrictions imposed on the decision-making powers
of the directors by the memorandum, the Articles, and by any shareholders
agreements” (pp. 115-16).  In fact, Thurlow J. (as he then was) made no
reference whatsoever in that case to shareholders’ agreements as an indicator of
de jure control, restricting his analysis and comments, at p. 5125, only
to the memorandum and articles of the company.  44                              
What does emerge, however, from Donald Applicators, is the notion
that, in determining de jure control, the court is not limited to a
strictly technical and narrow interpretation of the share register and
associated share rights of a corporation.  Rather, as this Court confirmed in The
Queen v. Imperial General Properties Ltd., [1985] 2 S.C.R.
288, at p. 295, “these rights must be assessed in their impact ‘over the long
run’”.  However, this view of control, at least as enunciated by Thurlow J. in Donald
Applicators, still depends upon the share rights and other powers granted by
the corporate constitution, not upon any external shareholders’ agreement.  Donald
Applicators turned on the power of the shareholders to pass any ordinary
resolution as well as special resolutions by which they could remove the powers
of the directors and reserve decisions to their particular class of
shareholders.  Given that extensive power, it could not be said that the
particular shareholders lacked de jure control “in the long run”. 
However, as shall be seen, the question of control “in the long run” does not
arise in the instant case, as the majority shareholder group retained the immediate
voting power to elect directors.  45                              
Similarly, in Imperial General Properties, supra, the
issue of control arose following a corporate reorganization which saw the
original majority owners of the corporation create non-participating preference
shares which were issued to another group of shareholders.  While each class of
shareholders then held 50 percent of voting shares,
meaning that neither enjoyed clear majority control, the corporate constitution
provided that a 50 percent vote was sufficient to wind up the company, in which
case the assets of the corporation would be distributed only among the common
shareholders.  Therefore, Estey J., writing for the majority of this Court,
held that the common shareholders had a clear advantage over the preferred
shareholders and thus enjoyed de jure control.  While the apparent
equality of voting power in this case made it necessary for the majority to
resort to the constating documents of the corporation to assess the reality of
the situation, Estey J., at p. 298, made clear that this was no extraordinary
step in the law:  The approach to “control” here taken does not involve any departure
from prior judicial pronouncements nor does it involve any “alteration” of the
existing statute.  The conclusions reached above merely result from applying
existing case law and existing legislation to the particular facts of the case
at bar.  The application of the “control” concept, as earlier enunciated by the
courts, to the circumstances now before the court is, in my view, the ordinary
progression of the judicial process and in no way amounts to a transgression of
the territory of the legislator.   46                              
With this admonition in mind, I do not believe that Imperial General
Properties assists the Minister’s case.  The approach taken by the majority
in deciding the case flows logically from its facts, and, in particular, the
voting equality that was apparent on the share register.  Indeed, the
limitation of this case to the corporate structure and combination of share
interests of its particular circumstances was explicitly acknowledged by Estey
J. at p. 298.  No such parity of shareholding is present in the circumstances
of the instant appeal.  In addition, in the emphatic words of Wilson J.,
dissenting (McIntyre J. and Lamer J., as he then was, concurring), at pp.
307-8:   Although the scope of scrutiny under the de jure
test has been extended beyond a mere examination of the share register in order
to determine who really has voting control, there has been no deviation from
the principle that voting control is the proper indicium of control
until [Oakfield Developments (Toronto) Ltd. v. Minister of National
Revenue, [1971] S.C.R. 1032].  I am of the view, therefore, that the
decision in Oakfield is anomalous and should not be followed.  For the
courts suddenly to change direction in face of well-settled and long-standing
authority in our tax jurisprudence is, in my view, quite inappropriate. . . .  
I do not think that this is a suitable area for judicial creativity.  People
plan their personal and business affairs on the basis of the existing law and
they are entitled to do so.   47                              
Apart from whether or not it is good authority in light of the foregoing
dictum of Wilson J., Oakfield Developments (Toronto) Ltd. v. Minister of
National Revenue, [1971] S.C.R. 1032, which was also cited by Linden J.A.
in the instant appeal, is, in my view, clearly distinguishable from the case at
bar.  In that case, as in Imperial General Properties, the Court had
recourse to the constating documents of the corporation only because there was
no other clear indicator of de jure control, as each of two shareholder
groups held 50 percent of the overall voting shares of the company.  Therefore,
the Court considered the share rights attached to each class of shares and
concluded that, because the holders of one class had the power to dissolve the
company and to receive all surplus upon its dissolution, that class had de
jure control even though its voting power was no greater than that of the
other class.  Perhaps more importantly, though, there is no indication that the
Court in either case looked to any external shareholder agreement as an
indicium of control; rather, only the specifics of the constating documents
were considered.  48                              
Equally distinguishable, in my view, are Consolidated Holding,
supra, and The Queen v. Lusita Holdings Ltd., 84 D.T.C. 6346
(F.C.A.), two cases in which the courts considered documents other than the
constating documents only because the majority of the shares in the companies
in question were held by trustees.  It was therefore necessary to examine the
trust instruments in order to determine what, if any, limitations existed on
the trustees’ powers to vote the shares.  As it happened, in both cases, the
trustees could be constrained in their voting of the shares by the actions of
their co-trustees: in Consolidated Holding, the will of the deceased
shareholder provided that “the views, discretion or direction of any two of my
trustees shall be binding upon the other of my trustees” (p. 422), while in Lusita
Holdings it was found as a fact by Stone J.A. that “[t]he right to control
the voting rights resided in the co-trustees and not in either of them” (p.
6348).  49                              
These factors, in my view, clearly demonstrate the distinction between a
trust instrument and other external documents for the purposes of assessing de
jure control.  A trust imposes upon the trustee a fiduciary obligation to
act within the terms of the trust instrument and for the benefit of the
beneficiary.  That is, the trustee is not free to act other than in accordance
with the trust document, and if the trust document imposes limitations upon the
capacity of the trustee to vote the shares then these must accordingly be taken
into account in the de jure control analysis.  By contrast, any
limitations which might be imposed by an outside agreement are limitations
freely agreed to by the shareholders, and not at all inconsistent with their de
jure power to control the company.  In other words, limitations on the
voting powers of trustees must be seen as limitations on their capacity as free
actors in the circumstances.  No such limitations encumber the ordinary
shareholder in his or her exercise of de jure control, even if an
outside agreement exists to limit actual or de facto control.  50                              
In any event, I certainly do not think it can be said that Consolidated
Holding supports the very broad proposition gleaned from it by Linden J.A.
(at p. 118), that “[a]ny binding instrument . . . must be reckoned in the
analysis if it affects voting rights.”  For precisely the reasons expressed by
Wilson J. in the above-quoted passage of her dissent in Imperial General
Properties, and in keeping with the approach taken by courts since Buckerfield’s,
it is clear that the general test for de jure control remains majority
voting control over the corporation, as manifested by the ability to elect the
directors of the corporation.  While this Court has occasionally been willing
to examine factors other than the share register of the company, its assessment
has been restricted only to the constating documents, not external agreements. 
The only exception to this rule has been in cases like Consolidated Holding,
where the shareholders’ very capacity to act has been limited by external
documents, but this has to date been manifested only in cases where the shares
are held by trustees.  51                              
Thus, I would conclude that, as a general rule, external agreements are
not to be taken into account as determinants of de jure control.  This
is consistent with the relatively recent decision of the Alberta Court of
Queen’s Bench in Harvard International Resources Ltd. v. Provincial
Treasurer of Alberta, 93 D.T.C. 5254, in which Hutchinson J. declined to
interpret the reasons of Estey J. in Imperial General Properties, supra,
as inviting the consideration of agreements other than constating documents,
other than possibly as an indicium of de facto control.  For Linden J.A.
to rest his disposition of the instant case on the basis that, in determining
issues of corporate control, “the Court will look to the time in question, to
legal documents pertaining to the issue, and to any actual or contingent legal
obligations affecting the voting rights of shares” (p. 121) was, with respect,
inconsistent with the Canadian jurisprudence in this area.  52                              
Moreover, as Wilson J. correctly observed in her dissent in Imperial
General Properties, supra, taxpayers rely heavily on whatever
certainty and predictability can be gleaned from the Income Tax Act.  As
such, a simple test such as that which has been followed since Buckerfield’s
is most desirable.  If the distinction between de jure and de facto control
is to be eliminated at this time, this should be left to Parliament, not to the
courts.  In fact, while it is not directly relevant to the outcome of this
appeal, I would observe nonetheless that Parliament has now recognized the
distinction between de jure and de facto control, adopting the
latter as the new standard for the associated corporation rules by means of s.
256(5.1) of the Income Tax Act, enacted in 1988.  53                              
In addition, I do not think that the respondent’s case is assisted by
the decision of the Tax Court of Canada in Alteco Inc. v. Canada,
[1993] 2 C.T.C. 2087.  Alteco concerned an agreement which provided, inter
alia, that no shares in the corporation could be sold or pledged without
unanimous shareholder consent, that the five-member board of the company could
not be altered without unanimous consent, and that the minority (49 percent)
shareholder was entitled to three of the five seats on the board.  This agreement
was indeed considered in deciding that the minority shareholder enjoyed de
jure control over the company.  But two significant distinctions separate Alteco
from the case at bar.  For one, Bell J.T.C.C. found that the agreement at issue
in Alteco was a “unanimous shareholder agreement” within the definition
of that term in the Saskatchewan Business Corporations Act.  While it
may be that the agreement in the present case was also a USA, a possibility
which I shall consider below, this was not the basis for the reasoning of
Linden J.A., and it simply cannot be said that giving effect to a USA as a
determinant of de jure control necessarily opens the door to the
consideration of all shareholder agreements for this purpose.  54                              
Secondly, the agreement in Alteco guaranteed the minority
shareholder a majority of seats on the board of directors. As I see it, it is
not clear in the case at bar that either party enjoyed this type of guaranteed
control.  While it is true that Marr’s could only elect one direct nominee of
its own, it would have been possible, as the trial judge found, for it to elect
its own nominee, one Duha nominee, and Paul Quinton, who could not be said to
be a nominee of either party.  While Mr. Quinton was a longtime friend of the
Duha family and a director of Duha No. 1, he was also a friend of William Marr
and no actual evidence was adduced to suggest that his loyalties lay with the
Duhas.  If anything, this assessment must have come down to a question of
credibility, and with respect, it was not open to Linden J.A. to interfere with
such a finding of the trial judge in the absence of palpable and overriding
error.  In any event, however, the major concern of the de jure test is
to ascertain which shareholder or shareholders have the voting power to elect a
majority of the directors.  The test neither requires nor permits an inquiry
into whether a given director is the nominee of any shareholder, or any
relationship or allegiance between the directors and the shareholders.  55                              
Therefore, as I have indicated, I conclude that Linden J.A. erred in
considering the Agreement for the purposes of ascertaining de jure
control, even assuming, for the sake of argument only, that he was correct in
treating it as an ordinary shareholders’ agreement.  This determination is
generally to be restricted to the share register of the company, as is clear
from Buckerfield’s and the related case law.  However, as I have already
mentioned, it would be unduly artificial to restrict the analysis in this way
if something exists in the corporate constitution of the company to alter the
picture of de jure control.  Thus, to ensure an accurate result, the
share register should be read in light of the relevant corporate law
legislation (in this case, the  Corporations Act) and the constating
documents of the corporation.  External agreements, however, have no place in
this analysis; they are relevant only to de facto control.  56                              
Of course, all of this begs the question of the status of the unanimous
shareholder agreement, in its statutory form, as a determinant of de jure
control.  It is to this question that I now turn.  (2)  Unanimous shareholder agreements  (a)   The nature and significance of the USA
for the purposes of de jure control   57                              
Stone J.A. based his concurring reasons on the characterization of the
agreement in question as a USA.  Important references to such agreements in the
Corporations Act are to be found in ss. 97(1) and 140(2).  Section
97(1)(b) contemplates the abrogation, by a USA, of the power of the directors
to “direct the management of the business and affairs of the corporation”,
while s. 140(2) confirms the validity of such agreements for the purpose of
restricting the powers of the directors to manage said business and affairs.  58                              
The legal status of the USA, which is a unique species of agreement
given its statutory origin and recognition, has nonetheless been a matter of
some uncertainty.  At the outset, it is important to bear in mind the
distinction between the tests of de jure and de facto control
developed by the courts.  In my view, the de jure standard was chosen
because in some respects it is a relevant and relatively certain and
predictable concept to employ in determining control.  In general terms, de
jure refers to those legal sources that determine control: namely, the
corporation’s governing statute and its constitutional documents, including the
articles of incorporation and by-laws.  The de facto concept was
rejected because it involves ascertaining control in fact, which can
lead to a myriad of indicators which may exist apart from these sources.  See,
for example, F. Iacobucci and D. L. Johnston, “The Private or Closely-held
Corporation”, in J. S. Ziegel, ed., Studies in Canadian Company Law
(1973), vol. 2, 68, at pp. 108-12.  59                              
As I have already indicated, agreements among shareholders, voting
agreements, and the like are, as a general matter, arrangements that are not
examined by courts to ascertain control.  In my view, this is because they give
rise to obligations that are contractual and not legal or constitutional in
nature.  Thus, to my mind, the issue comes down to whether the USA is to be
characterized as constitutional or contractual in nature.  If it is the former,
then its provisions are to be examined under the de jure control
analysis; if it is the latter, then its provisions are beyond the scope of that
test.  For a discussion of the origin of the USA in Canadian corporate law,
see, generally, R. W. V. Dickerson, J. L. Howard and L. Getz, Proposals for
a New Business Corporations Law for Canada (1971), vol. 1, at paras.
298-299.  60                              
Fortunately, the instant case provides ample opportunity to put this
debate to rest.  In my view, for the reasons that follow, the USA is to be
considered a constating document for the purposes of determining de jure
control of a corporation.  61                              
The argument for treating a USA as part of the corporate constitution,
along with and equivalent to the articles of incorporation and the by-laws, is
strong, given the role of such an agreement in the overall context of corporate
governance.  As Professor Welling points out in Corporate Law in Canada
(2nd ed. 1991), at pp. 481 et seq., prior to statutory provision for
USAs, the ability of shareholders to control a corporation incorporated in
Canadian jurisdictions (and which, I would add, did not follow the English
memorandum and articles of association system of incorporation) was in reality
limited to the power to elect and dismiss directors.  Directors generally owe a
duty not to the shareholders but to the corporation, and shareholders could
not, therefore, control the day-to-day business decisions made by the directors
and their appointed officers.  In other words, although the shareholders could
elect the individuals who would make up the board, the board members, once
elected, wielded virtually all the decision-making power, subject to the
ability of the shareholders to remove or fail to re-elect unsatisfactory
directors.  62                              
However, in a private or closely held corporation, it may generally be
assumed that the dominant interests to be served by decision-making are the
expectations and needs of the shareholders, as opposed to the corporation in
the abstract.  These corporations were modelled to some extent on incorporated
partnerships, and the underlying economic policy was thought to be best met by
enabling the shareholders to arrange the organization of their enterprise as
they choose: see Iacobucci and Johnston, supra.  63                              
Because, at common law, shareholders could not agree to fetter or
interfere with the discretion of the directors, even unanimously (see Motherwell
v. Schoof, [1949] 4 D.L.R. 812 (Alta. S.C.), and Atlas
Development Co.  v. Calof (1963), 41 W.W.R. 575 (Man. Q.B.)),
legislative intervention was needed to allow shareholders to choose their
corporate control and management structure.  See Iacobucci, “Canadian
Corporation Law: Some Recent Shareholder Developments”, in The Cambridge
Lectures 1981 (1982), 88, at pp. 92 et seq.  64                              
The advent of the USA, first in the CBCA  and then in other
statutes modelled after it, materially altered this situation by providing a
mechanism by which the shareholders, through a unanimous agreement, could strip
the directors of some or all of their managerial powers as desired by the
shareholders.  Rather than removing the directors from their positions, a USA
simply relieves them of their powers, rights, duties, and associated
responsibilities.  This may be accomplished without specific formality; all
that is required appears to be some unanimous written expression of shareholder
will.  The result, however, amounts to a fundamental change in the management
of the company, as s. 140(5) of the Corporations Act provides that the
shareholders who are parties to the USA assume all the rights, powers, duties
and liabilities of the directors which are removed by the agreement, and that
the directors are relieved of their duties and liabilities to the same extent. 
As I have already intimated, what is in effect created is an “incorporated
partnership” with statutory force.  65                              
Stone J.A. opined that, if an agreement can be viewed as a USA within
the definition in the Corporations Act, it is to be read alongside the
corporation’s constating documents in determining the issue of de jure
control.  I agree.  The fact that the USA has supplanted the long-standing
principle of shareholder non-interference with the directors’ powers to manage
the corporation, an exclusive right which is granted by the statute and the
corporate constitution, clearly indicates that it is at least as important as
the “traditional” constating documents in assessing de jure control. It
would be truly artificial to conclude, only on the basis of the share register,
the articles of incorporation, and the by-laws, that one shareholder has de
jure control over the corporation by virtue of its apparent power to elect
the majority of the board of directors, if a USA exists which limits
substantially the power of the board itself.  66                              
In other words, the USA is a corporate law hybrid, part contractual and
part constitutional in nature.  The contractual element is immediately apparent
from a reading of s. 140(2): to be valid, a USA must be an “otherwise lawful
written agreement among all the shareholders of a corporation, or among all the
shareholders and a person who is not a shareholder”.  It seems to me that this
indicates not only that the USA must take the form of a written contract, but
also that it must accord with the other, general requirements for a lawful and
valid contract.  More generally, the USA is by its nature able to govern both
the procedure for running the corporation and the personal or individual rights
of the shareholders: see Iacobucci, supra.  67                              
The constitutional element of the USA is even more potent than its
contractual features.  Numerous provisions of the Corporations Act that
govern fundamental aspects of the running of the corporation, including the
management of its business and affairs (s. 97(1)), the issuing of shares (s.
25(1)), the passing of by-laws (s. 98(1)), the appointment of officers (s.
116), and the situations in which a dissenting shareholder can request
dissolution of the company (s. 207(1)(b)), are expressly made subject to the
USA.   More generally, s. 6(3) reads as follows:  6(3)     Subject to subsection (4), if the articles or a
unanimous shareholder agreement require a greater number of votes of
directors or shareholders than that required by this Act to effect any action,
the provisions of the articles or of the unanimous shareholder agreement
prevail. [Emphasis added.]   Subsection (4)
stipulates only that the articles may not require a greater number of votes to
remove a director than that required elsewhere in the Act, but does not place
any such limitation on a USA.  This denotes the equivalent constitutional
status of the USA vis-à-vis the articles of incorporation.  68                              
This status is greatly reinforced by s. 20(1) of the Corporations Act,
which requires that a copy of any USA, along with the articles and by-laws of
the corporation, be contained in the corporate records required by that section
to be maintained at the registered office of the corporation.  This is cogent
evidence that the legislator has treated the corporation’s constating documents
and the USA in pari materia.  It is also significant that s. 240 of the Corporations
Act includes USAs along with the Act, the regulations promulgated
thereunder, and the articles and by-laws of a corporation as documents the
breach of which entitle a complainant or a creditor to seek a compliance order
or other remedy deemed appropriate by the court. As well, the provisions of a
USA may be enforced against the corporation and its officers and directors
although they need not be parties to the agreement.  This stands as a further
indication of the constitutional character of the USA.  69                              
Thus, a USA can play a vital role in the de jure control
analysis.  If the Buckerfield’s test were to be followed slavishly and
the inquiry limited only to the share register of the corporation, or even
extended to the articles of incorporation and by-laws but not to USAs, then a
company could circumvent the test or obfuscate the picture of corporate control
simply by confining to a USA provisions that substantially alter the way in
which corporate decisions are made.  If, by a USA, the board of directors is
deprived of the power to manage the business and affairs of the corporation,
this is more than simply an issue of de facto control.  It would defy
logic to treat de jure control as remaining unaltered by an agreement
which, by the very statute which governs the incorporation of the company and
the governance thereof by its articles and by-laws, is given the same power as
the articles to supersede the statutory provisions for corporate control.  Not
only is this a distinction without a difference, but it is also one without any
principled foundation.  70                              
As I have said, the essential purpose of the Buckerfield’s test
is to determine the locus of effective control of the corporation.  To my mind,
it is impossible to say that a shareholder can be seen as enjoying such control
simply by virtue of his or her ability to elect a majority of a board of
directors, when that board may not even have the actual authority to make a
single material decision on behalf of the corporation.  The de jure
control of a corporation by a shareholder is dependent in a very real way on
the control enjoyed by the majority of directors, whose election lies within
the control of that shareholder.  When a constating document such as a USA
provides that the legal authority to manage the corporation lies other than
with the board, the reality of de jure control is necessarily altered
and the court must acknowledge that alteration.  71                              
Therefore, I would conclude that, while “ordinary” shareholder
agreements and other external documents generally should not be considered in
assessing de jure control, in keeping with the long line of jurisprudence
to this effect, the USA is a constating document and as such must be considered
for the purposes of this analysis.  To this end, I must add that, to the extent
that it held that a USA is not one of the constating documents of a
corporation, Alteco, supra, was wrongly decided.  It is true
that, at common law, a unanimous agreement between or among shareholders would
have been considered only as part of the de facto analysis.  However, in
my view, the unique status of the statutory form of USA in corporate law, when
compared to other shareholder agreements, provides a complete answer to the
appellant’s concern that the consideration of the USA for the present purpose
would open the door to the consideration of all agreements between shareholders.
 Unlike an “ordinary” shareholder agreement, which cannot interfere with the
exercise of the directors’ powers, a USA can and must do so.  Moreover, as we
have seen, a USA can in fact incorporate provisions that would otherwise be
contained in the articles.  Viewed in this light, I fail to see how the USA can
be ignored as a vital determinant of de jure control.  72                              
The appellant correctly points out that to recognize the USA as
affecting de jure control begs the question of how much power must be
removed from the directors before one may safely conclude that the majority
voting shareholder no longer has de jure control.  Certainly, the
existence of a USA does not necessarily imply the loss of de jure
control.  But I cannot agree that there is no rational basis for determining
when a majority shareholder loses de jure control on the basis of a
restriction of the directors’ powers.  As I will discuss in more detail below,
this issue comes down to a question of fact, turning on the extent to which the
powers of the directors to manage are restricted, to what extent these powers
have devolved to the shareholders, and to what extent the majority shareholders
are thereby able to control the exercise of the governing powers.  73                              
Accordingly, two questions remain to be answered: whether the Agreement
in this case was a USA, and, if so, whether it in fact deprived Marr’s of de
jure control over Duha No. 2.  (b)  Was the Agreement a USA?  74                              
       Section 1(1) of the Corporations Act defines a USA as, inter
alia, an agreement of the type described in s. 140(2).  Stone J.A.
recognized that this section discloses a number of requirements for a valid
USA: the agreement must be “otherwise lawful”, must be among all the
shareholders of the corporation (as well as, possibly, a non-shareholder), and
must restrict, in whole or in part, the powers of the directors to manage “the
business and affairs of the corporation”.  There is really no room for debate
as to whether the Agreement satisfied the first two criteria.  To the extent
that the status of the Agreement is in question, the issue is whether it
satisfied the third.  75                              
In the view of Stone J.A., the Agreement satisfied those requirements
and was therefore a USA.  He based this conclusion on a technical analysis of
the Agreement, and especially Article 2.1, which provided that the “affairs” of
the corporation were to be managed by the board of directors, and Article 6.1,
which provided for the settlement by arbitration of disputes between
shareholders on matters concerning the “business” of the corporation.  From
these provisions, Stone J.A. inferred that the Agreement deprived the directors
of Duha No. 2 of the power to manage the “business” of the corporation, leaving
them with control only over its “affairs”.  Because s. 1(1) of the Corporations
Act defines “business” as a concept separate from and exclusive of
“affairs”, Stone J.A. concluded that the Agreement restricted the s. 97(1)
management power of the directors and was therefore a USA within the meaning of
s. 140(2).  76                              
For my part, I find this conclusion difficult to accept.  To provide
that the directors shall have the power to manage the “affairs” of the
corporation cannot, without more, be taken to exclude them from the management
of the “business”.  Despite the separate definitions of the two concepts in s.
1(1), it seems to me that clearer language would be required to remove such a
fundamental power from the directors.  Moreover, it is not at all clear that
“affairs” must be defined, for the purposes of the Agreement, by reference to
its statutory definition -- especially, as I will discuss below, when to so
define this term could lead to a rather awkward result.  Indeed, the Concise
Oxford Dictionary (9th ed. 1995) defines “affairs” as including “business
dealings”.  Considering this linguistic ambiguity in addition to the foregoing
concerns, I do not think it safe to conclude that the intention of Article 2.1
was to deprive the directors of their power to manage the business of Duha No.
2.  77                              
I take a similar view of the effect of Article 6.1.  The presence of
this arbitration clause to resolve disputes among shareholders does not lead to
the conclusion that all business of the corporation was to be transacted by
unanimous shareholder resolution, as the Minister contends.  Again, clearer
language would be required to achieve this end, particularly when it is
considered that the result of such an arrangement would be that the entire
corporation could be paralyzed by the dissent of a single shareholder on a very
minor issue.  A better interpretation, as contended for by the appellant, is
that the word “business” in Article 6.1 was used to refer to corporate business
that is ordinarily transacted among shareholders, rather than business of the
corporation which is within the power of the directors to manage.  In fact,
this is consistent with s. 129(5) of the Corporations Act, which makes
specific reference to “business” transacted by shareholders at an annual or
special meeting of shareholders.  78                              
Generally speaking, USAs exist to deal with major issues facing a
corporation: corporate structure, issuance of shares, declaration of dividends,
election of directors, appointment of officers, and the like.  General business
decisions are not ordinarily touched by such arrangements, and with good
reason: it would not be efficient, for business purposes, to remit every
decision, however minor, to a shareholder vote, let alone to require unanimous
agreement among the shareholders on such decisions.  Fundamental disagreements
among shareholders are ordinarily dealt with by different means, such as, for
example, buy-sell arrangements or other methods of dispute resolution.  In
exceptional cases, a USA may provide that an aggrieved shareholder may apply to
the court for dissolution of the corporation and the return of his or her share
capital.  But these are long-term solutions which are agreed upon with a view
to facilitating the ongoing operation of the business, undisturbed by the
day-to-day wrangling and disagreements that often characterize the
relationships among shareholders in closely-held companies, while permitting
insurmountable disputes to be resolved by special measures.  This is vastly
different from requiring unanimous consent to every action taken in furtherance
of the business of a corporation.  Such an extraordinary corporate policy would
require specific expression in the constating documents.  In my view, the
provisions cited by the Minister do not qualify as such.  79                              
However, this is not to say that the Agreement does not affect the
powers of the directors at all and, as such, is not a USA.  On the contrary,
Article 4.4, which prevented the corporation from issuing further shares
“without the written consent of all of the Shareholders”, imposed a clear
restriction upon the directors’ power to manage.  According to s. 25(1) of the Corporations
Act,  Subject to the articles, the by-laws and any unanimous shareholder
agreement  . . .  shares may be issued at such times and to such persons and
for such consideration as the directors may determine. [Emphasis added.]   Thus, by
reserving to themselves one of the powers of management which the Act expressly
grants to the directors, the shareholders obviously restricted in part the
ability of the directors to manage the corporation.  Additionally, the language
of s. 25(1) makes clear that, in the absence of a specific provision in the
constating documents, such can only be accomplished by means of a USA.  To my
mind, there is no doubt that this brings the Agreement within the terms of s.
140(2).  80                              
To summarize my conclusions on this point, I agree with Stone J.A. that
the Agreement constituted a USA, within the meaning of s. 140(2) of the Corporations
Act, but for different reasons.  While the provisions of Articles 2.2 and
6.1 did not, to my mind, pose any restrictions on the power of the directors to
manage the business and affairs of the corporation, Article 4.4 surely did. The
next question, therefore, is whether this particular USA had the effect of
depriving Marr’s of de jure control over Duha No. 2.  (c)   The effect of the USA  81                              
As I have already said, the simple fact that the shareholders of a
corporation have entered into a USA does not have the automatic effect of
removing de jure control from a shareholder who enjoys the majority of the
votes in the election of the board of directors.  Rather, the specific
provisions of the USA must alter such control as a matter of law.  But to what
extent must these powers be compromised before the majority shareholder can be
said to have lost de jure control over the company?  82                              
In my view, it is possible to determine whether de jure
control has been lost as a result of a USA by asking whether the USA leaves any
way for the majority shareholder to exercise effective control over the affairs
and fortunes of the corporation in a way analogous or equivalent to the power
to elect the majority of the board of directors (as contemplated by the Buckerfield’s
test).  There need be no concern that the consideration of USAs in the de
jure analysis will lead either to uncertainty or to a situation where every
USA would automatically imply a loss of de jure control by the majority
shareholder.  It will in every case be necessary to establish this result by
examining the specific provisions of the USA in question.  83                              
In my view, the provisions in the Agreement at issue in this case did
not in fact result in the loss of de jure control by Marr’s.  The
inability to issue new shares without unanimous shareholder approval, while
surely a restriction on the powers of the directors to manage the business and
affairs of Duha No. 2, was not so severe a restriction that Marr’s can be said
to have lost the ability to exercise effective control over the affairs and
fortunes of the company through its majority shareholdings.  In fact, Thurlow
J. expressly found in Donald Applicators, supra, at p. 5125, that
“the authority of the directors of the appellant companies [was] only slightly
restricted or modified” from their statutory powers by their inability to issue
new shares, and that this restriction did not have “any serious effect on the
authority of the directors to govern the business of the company and generally
to direct its affairs”.  These holdings, along with the balance of the reasons
in Donald Applicators, were affirmed by this Court.  84                              
Thus, I would conclude that, in the circumstances of this case, the
general rule holds.  Marr’s, by virtue of its ability to elect the majority of
the board of directors, enjoyed de jure control over Duha No. 2
immediately prior to its amalgamation with Outdoor.  Nothing in the constating
documents, including the USA, served to alter this state of affairs. 
Accordingly, there was no change in control occasioned by the amalgamation,
which means that s. 111(5) of the Income Tax Act did not prevent Duha
No. 3 from deducting from its 1985 taxable income the non-capital losses
accumulated in previous years by Outdoor, regardless of whether or not the
business of Outdoor was intended to be or was actually carried on by Duha No. 3
as a going concern.  (3)  Summary of principles and conclusion as to control  85                              
It may be useful at this stage to summarize the principles of corporate
and taxation law considered in this appeal, in light of their importance.  They
are as follows:  (1)  Section 111(5) of the Income Tax Act
contemplates de jure, not de facto, control.  (2)  The general test for de jure control
is that enunciated in Buckerfield’s, supra: whether the majority
shareholder enjoys “effective control” over the “affairs and fortunes” of the
corporation, as manifested in “ownership of such a number of shares as carries
with it the right to a majority of the votes in the election of the board of
directors”.  (3)  To determine whether such “effective control”
exists, one must consider:  (a)       the corporation’s governing statute;  (b)       the share register of the corporation;
and  (c)       any specific or unique limitation on
either the majority shareholder’s power to control the election of the board or
the  board’s power to manage the business and affairs of the company, as
manifested in either:  (i)   the constating documents of the corporation; or  (ii)  any unanimous shareholder agreement.  (4)  Documents other than the share register, the
constating documents, and any unanimous shareholder agreement are not generally
to be considered for this purpose.  (5)  If there exists any such limitation as
contemplated by item 3(c), the majority shareholder may nonetheless possess de
jure control, unless there remains no other way for that shareholder to
exercise “effective control” over the affairs and fortunes of the corporation
in a manner analogous or equivalent to the Buckerfield’s test.  B.  Object
and spirit  86                              
In light of the foregoing conclusions, it is not necessary to consider
whether the Federal Court of Appeal erred in considering the object and spirit
of the Income Tax Act provisions, the intentions of the parties, and the
commercial reality of the transactions, given that the relevant provisions of
the Act are clear and unambiguous.  However, I would like to comment briefly on
the suggestion by the appellant that Linden J.A. would have denied the taxpayer
the benefit of the provisions of the Act “simply because the transaction was
motivated solely for tax planning purposes”.  87                              
It is well established in the jurisprudence of this Court that no
“business purpose” is required for a transaction to be considered valid under
the Income Tax Act, and that a taxpayer is entitled to take advantage of
the Act even where a transaction is motivated solely by the minimization of
tax: Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536. 
Moreover, this Court emphasized in Antosko, supra, at p. 327
that, although various techniques may be employed in interpreting the Act,
“such techniques cannot alter the result where the words of the statute are
clear and plain and where the legal and practical effect of the transaction is
undisputed”.  88                              
Although Linden J.A. cites these principles in his reasons, he appears
not to have adhered to them in his analysis.  At various junctures, he comments
broadly about the apparent structuring of transactions, including the one at
issue in this appeal, solely for tax purposes, and seems to imply, particularly
in his analysis of the International Iron and Buckerfield’s
cases, supra, that the courts will not permit shareholders to attain tax
benefits by means of “contrived” transactions.  To the extent that this
analytical approach may have affected his ultimate decision, Linden J.A. was,
with respect, in error.  It was entirely open to the parties to use what Linden
J.A. referred to as “technicalities of revenue law” to achieve their desired
end: to transfer de jure control of Duha No. 2 to Marr’s while
preventing Marr’s from exercising actual or de facto control over the
business of the corporation.  Indeed, this is what they accomplished, and
nothing in the “object and spirit” of any of the various provisions can serve
to displace this result.  That is, while the general purpose of s. 111(5) may
be to prevent the transfer of non-capital losses from one corporation to
another, the parties successfully excepted themselves from the general rule by
bringing the two companies under common control prior to their amalgamation.  VI.  Disposition  89                              
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of
the Federal Court of Appeal, and restore the judgment of the Tax Court of
Canada, with costs to the appellant throughout.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Aikins, MacAulay &
Thorvaldson, Winnipeg.  Solicitor for the respondent:  George Thomson, Winnipeg.   