Canada v. Antosko, [1994] 2
S.C.R. 312  H. Boris Antosko         Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  and between  Stanley F. Trzop           Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  and between  Stanley F. Trzop           Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Canada v.
Antosko  File Nos.:  23282, 23283,
23284.  1994:  February 2;
1994:  May 26.   on appeal from the federal court of
appeal                        Interest on the
debenture was treated as accruing daily from the date the board discharged the
bank loan.  Interest on the four promissory notes also accrued daily.  In the
1977 taxation year, the appellants each received $38,335 from the company in
partial payment of interest which had accrued on the total debt and was owed to
the board prior to the transfer.  The appellants included this interest as
income pursuant to s. 12(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act, and
then deducted these amounts pursuant to s. 20(14)(b).  In the 1980
taxation year, the appellant Trzop received $283,363 from the company as a
similar partial payment of interest.  This amount was also included as income
and then claimed as a deduction.                     The Minister of
National Revenue disallowed the deductions.  The appellants successfully
appealed these disallowances to the Tax Court of Canada.  An appeal by the Minister
to the Federal Court, Trial Division was allowed, and a further appeal by the
appellants to the Federal Court of Appeal was dismissed, with the result that
the deductions were disallowed.  At issue here was:  (1) whether the
transaction fell within the ambit of s. 20(14) of the Income Tax Act;
(2) if so, whether s. 20(14) was to be interpreted as stating that no
deduction pursuant to s. 20(14)(b) is available to the transferee
unless it is shown that the transferor included this same amount in the computation
of its income, pursuant to s. 20(14)(a); and (3) whether all
the interest sought to be deducted by the appellants, given completion of the
other requirements for deduction, met the conditions set out in s. 20(14).                     Held:  The appeals should be allowed.                     A taxpayer is
entitled to structure his or her affairs so as to avoid liability for tax. 
Where the general standards legislated to determine unacceptable tax avoidance
mechanisms are inapplicable, the court has no authority to legislate additional
ones.  The courts, however, will not permit the taxpayer to take advantage of
deductions or exemptions which are founded on a sham transaction.                     Two conditions must
be met in order to come within the opening words of s. 20(14).  First,
there must be an assignment or a transfer of a debt obligation.  Second, the
transferee must become entitled, as a result of the transfer, to interest
accruing before the date of the transfer but not payable until after that
date.  These two conditions were met here.  A purchase of accrued interest by
the appellants in the acquisition of debt obligations occurred and the
agreement to postpone payment of interest until after the transfer was legally
enforceable.                     The adequacy of the
consideration is not relevant, absent allegations of artificiality or of a
sham.  This transaction was not a sham.  The terms of the section were met in a
manner that was not artificial.                     Where the words of
the section are not ambiguous, this Court should not find that the appellants
are nonetheless disentitled to a deduction because they do not deserve a
"windfall".  In the absence of a situation of ambiguity, such that
the court must look to the results of a transaction to assist in ascertaining
the intent of Parliament, a normative assessment of the consequences of the
application of a given provision is within the ambit of the legislature, not
the courts.                     The purpose of
s. 20(14) is to avoid double taxation by apportioning accrued interest
between transferor and transferee.  The interest accrued prior to the transfer
date is allocated to the transferor's calculation of income, presumably because
the transferor, as owner of the debt obligation, will be legally entitled to
interest up to the date of transfer and this fact will be reflected in the consideration
to be paid by the transferee for the debt obligation.  The accrued interest is
therefore part of the income of the transferor, and not of the income of the
transferee.                     The ability of a
taxpayer to claim a deduction pursuant to s. 20(14)(b) is not
dependent on the inclusion by the transferor pursuant to s. 20(14)(a)
of the same amount in his or her calculation of income.  Arguments to the
contrary would transform the section from one meant to avoid double taxation
into one designed to ensure taxation of the entire amount of interest accrued
during the taxation year.  Where specific provisions of the Income Tax Act
intend to make the tax consequences for one party conditional on the acts or
position of another party, the sections are drafted so that this
interdependence is clear.                      The appellants are
entitled to the full amount of the deductions.  The legally enforceable
agreement to suspend repayment of the interest during the two-year period meant
that the accrued interest was not payable before the transfer; nor was it
payable coincident with the transfer.  All the accrued interest became payable
immediately after the transfer was completed, thus meeting the terms of s.
20(14).  Cases Cited                     Distinguished:  Hill v. M.N.R., 81 D.T.C. 167;
Courtright v. M.N.R., 80 D.T.C. 1609; disapproved:  Husain v.
M.N.R., 91 D.T.C. 278; considered:  Stubart Investments Ltd. v.
The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536; referred to:  McClurg v. Canada,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 1020; Mattabi Mines Ltd. v. Ontario (Minister of Revenue),
[1988] 2 S.C.R. 175; Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited   Authors Cited   Dreidger,
Elmer A.  Construction of Statutes, 2nd ed. Toronto:  Butterworths,
1983.  Nadeau,
Claude.  "The Interpretation of Taxing Statutes Since Stubart"
(1990), 42 Can. Tax Found. 49:1.   Ulmer,
John M.  "Taxation of Interest Income" (1990), 42 Can. Tax
Found. 8:1.                      Eugene J.
Mockler, Q.C.,
for the appellants.                     Donald G.
Gibson and Josée
Tremblay, for the respondent.                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered by                     Iacobucci
J. -- These appeals
concern the interpretation of s. 20(14) of the Income Tax Act, S.C.
1970-71-72, c. 63.  This section permits a transferee of a debt instrument to
deduct from the calculation of his or her taxable income the interest accruing
on the instrument prior to the date of transfer.  The narrow issue in these
appeals is whether, when the debt in question was transferred from a non-taxable
government body to investors trying to rehabilitate a failing company, such a
transaction came within the scope of s. 20(14).  As the three appeals are based
on essentially identical facts, and indeed relate to the same transaction, I
will refer to them collectively as "the appeal".  I.                 Facts                     Atlantic Forest
Products Ltd. (the "company") was the owner of a plant, located in
Minto, New Brunswick, which manufactured charcoal briquettes.  The New
Brunswick Industrial Finance Board (the "board"), a provincially
incorporated agency of the Province of New Brunswick, provided financing to the
company.  The board became the controlling shareholder of the company, holding
80% of its issued and outstanding shares.  In February and March 1971, the
board guaranteed a $3 million loan from the Bank of Nova Scotia (the
"bank") to the company.  The company executed in favour of the board
a fixed and floating charge debenture securing the board's guarantee of the
loan.  This debenture contained a covenant on the part of the company to repay
all expenditures made by the board in protecting its security, together with
interest, and to repay the bank loan according to a specified schedule.  The
parties agreed that, in the event of default by the company on the repayment,
the board could pay to the bank the amounts in default and these payments would
then constitute a further charge on the lands and premises of the company.        Between January 1972 and July
1973, the board made four direct loans to the company totalling $1.425
million.  The board received four demand promissory notes for the principal
amounts of these loans, with interest payable monthly at rates varying from 5
to 9.5%.  In September 1974, the company defaulted on the bank loan, and the
board was compelled to make good on its guarantee.  The board paid $3.375
million to the bank in full satisfaction of all outstanding principal and
interest on the loan.  By March 1975, the total indebtedness of the company to
the board was approximately $5 million.        On March 1, 1975, the board
entered into an agreement with the appellants, Antosko and Trzop, in which the
appellants acquired all of the board's common shares in the company for a
consideration of $1.  The board also covenanted to ensure that the company was
debt free, except for the indebtedness to the board in the amount of $5 million
plus accrued interest, and to postpone the obligation to repay this
indebtedness, and interest thereon, for a period of two years.  In return, the
appellants promised to operate the company during this two-year period in a
good and business-like manner.  The board agreed that, upon expiration of the
two-year period and if all its conditions were met, it would then sell to the
appellants the $5 million debt plus accrued interest for the sum of $10.                     Following the
execution of the above agreement, the appellants changed the name of the
company to Resort Estates Limited.  In 1976, the obligations of the board
passed to the Province of New Brunswick as represented by the Minister of
Commerce and Development.  The agreement, however, remained unchanged.  The
appellants satisfied their obligations under the agreement and thus, on July 6,
1977, the board sold to them the total indebtedness of the company.  The
Minister of Commerce and Development assigned to the appellants the debenture,
promissory notes, realty mortgage and chattel mortgage that had been given as
security for the outstanding indebtedness of the company to the board.                     Interest on the
debenture issued by the company as security for the $3.375 million paid by the
board to the bank in fulfilment of its loan guarantee was treated as accruing
daily at a rate of 11.5% per annum from the date the bank was paid.  Interest
on the four promissory notes had also accrued daily.  In the 1977 taxation year,
the appellants each received $38,335 from the company in partial payment of
interest which had accrued on the total debt prior to transfer.  The appellants
included this interest as income pursuant to s. 12(1)(c) of the Income
Tax Act, and then claimed deductions of these amounts pursuant to s.
20(14)(b).  In the 1980 taxation year, the appellant Trzop received
$283,363 from the company as a similar partial payment of interest.  This
amount was also included as income and then claimed as a deduction.                     The Minister of
National Revenue disallowed the deductions.  The appellants successfully
appealed these disallowances to the Tax Court of Canada.  An appeal by the
respondent Minister to the Federal Court, Trial Division was allowed, and a
further appeal by the appellants to the Federal Court of Appeal was dismissed,
with the result that the deductions were disallowed.  The appellants now appeal
the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal to this Court.  II.                Relevant
Statutory Provisions  Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63                    12. (1) There shall be included in
computing the income of a taxpayer for a taxation year as income from a
business or property such of the following amounts as are applicable:                                                                     .
. .  (c)
any amount received by the taxpayer in the year or receivable by him in the
year (depending upon the method regularly followed by the taxpayer in computing
his profit) as, on account or in lieu of payment of, or in satisfaction of,
interest;                                                                     .
. .                            20. ...                     (14)
Where, by virtue of an assignment or other transfer of a bond, debenture or
similar security (other than an income bond or an income debenture), including
for greater certainty an assignment or other transfer after June 18, 1971 of a
bill, note, mortgage, hypothec or similar obligation, the transferee has become
entitled to interest in respect of a period commencing before the time of
transfer and ending after that time that is not payable until after the time of
transfer, an amount equal to that proportion of the interest that the number of
days in the portion of the period that preceded the day of transfer is of the
number of days in the whole period  (a)
shall be included in computing the transferor's income for the taxation year in
which the transfer was made, and  (b)
may be deducted in computing the transferee's income for a taxation year in the
computation of which there has been included  (i)
the full amount of the interest                                       under
section 12, or  (ii)
a portion of the interest                                       under
paragraph (a).     III.               Judgments Below   Tax Court of Canada  (St-Onge T.C.J.)                      The Tax Court judge
began his discussion by considering the decisions in Hill v. M.N.R., 81
D.T.C. 167, and Courtright v. M.N.R., 80 D.T.C. 1609, relied upon by the
respondent for the correct interpretation of s. 20(14).  The Tax Court judge
held that these decisions were distinguishable; in Hill, no legal
transfer of a debt took place, and in Courtright, there was no evidence
to show that any accrued interest was due and transferred.  In this case, the
existence of both of these factors was not in doubt.        The Tax Court judge interpreted
s. 20(14) as stating that, when a transfer of a debt with accrued interest took
place, the transferor was required to include this interest in his or her
income in the year of transfer, while the transferee could deduct the amount of
accrued interest that he or she received.  In the view of the Tax Court judge,
the ability of the transferee to deduct the income was not dependent on the
transferor's inclusion of it: This
section does not say that the transferee has to inquire to know whether the
transferor has included the said accrued interest in his income.  The taxpayer
is not an employee nor an investigator for the Department of National Revenue.  Furthermore,
a taxpayer has no means to know if another taxpayer has reported all his
income.        Section 20(14) did not state
that the right of the transferee to deduct the accrued interest was in any way
affected in a case where the transferor was tax exempt.  The Tax Court judge
concluded that the appellants met the terms of the exempting section, and
allowed the taxpayers' appeals with costs.  Federal Court, Trial Division, 90 D.T.C. 6111 (McNair J.)                     McNair J. agreed
with the factual finding of the Tax Court judge that interest had accrued on
the debt during the time that its repayment was suspended.  However, McNair J.
rejected the construction advanced by the appellants and accepted by the Tax
Court judge as to the correct interpretation of s. 20(14).  Relying on the
decision of this Court in Stubart Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984]
1 S.C.R. 536, he concluded at p. 6115:  . .
.one cannot blithely ignore the mandatory requirement of paragraph 20(14)(a)
that the amount of accrued interest must be included in the transferor's income
before the transferee of the debt obligation can deduct it under paragraph
20(14)(b).  In my view, the section was designed to provide for the
apportionment of accrued interest as between the transferor and transferee of a
bond or other debt obligation where the same is transferred between interest
dates, thus avoiding the incidence of double taxation.                     The appellants were
therefore not entitled to rely on the deduction provision, as there was no
evidence that the interest sought to be deducted was included in the income of
the transferor during the years in question.  Relying on the reasoning of the
Tax Appeal Board in Courtright, supra, and in Hill, supra,
McNair J. allowed the appeals.  Federal Court of Appeal, 92 D.T.C. 6388 (Isaac C.J., Heald
and Stone JJ.A.)        Writing for the Federal Court of
Appeal, Stone J.A. approached the matter by considering, in light of economic
and commercial reality, the purpose of s. 20(14) at the time it was adopted. 
Stone J.A. relied on the reasons of this Court in Stubart Investments Ltd.,
supra, and McClurg v. Canada, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 1020, which
indicated that the object and spirit of the section should be derived from the
existing jurisprudence.  Stone J.A. found at p. 6393 that the purpose of s.
20(14) was the avoidance of double taxation:  The
effect is that, ordinarily, interest which accrues before the transfer date
becomes taxable in the hands of the transferor only and that the transferee is
taxable on the interest which accrues after that date.         In the view of Stone J.A., when
this purpose was compared to the specific transaction at issue, it was clear
that the board did not receive payment from the appellants for the interest
which had accrued on the debt obligations during the two-year period
immediately following the agreement to transfer these debts at a later date. 
What bound the board to carry out the transfer was not the nominal monetary
consideration received, but rather the fulfilment by the appellants of their
promise to operate the company in a business-like manner.  Similarly, the
objectives of the appellants were not to purchase accrued interest by acquiring
debt obligations, but rather to take control of a company in distress and turn
its fortunes around, to the benefit of themselves and its employees.  Stone
J.A. stated at pp. 6393-94: In
my opinion, the subsection was not intended to apply in such unique
circumstances.  If, on the other hand, the debt obligation could be viewed as
one to which the subsection applies, I would agree that a deduction under
paragraph (b) is not available because it has not been shown that the
Board, whose identity is unquestioned, included the same amount in computing
its income.  In my view, the word "and" at the end of paragraph (a)
and the object and spirit of the subsection support this construction.  Stone J.A. concluded that the
deduction was not open to the appellants, and dismissed the appeals with costs.  IV.              Issues  1.Whether
the transaction at issue in these appeals falls within the ambit of s. 20(14)
of the Income Tax Act; and  2.If
so, whether s. 20(14) is to be interpreted as stating that no deduction
pursuant to s. 20(14)(b) is available to the transferee unless it is
shown that the transferor included this same amount in the computation of its
income, pursuant to s. 20(14)(a); and  3.Whether,
if the appellants have otherwise fulfilled the requirements for deduction, all
of the interest sought to be deducted by them meets the conditions set out in
s. 20(14).  V.                Analysis  A.Does
This Transaction Come Within the Ambit of Section 20(14) of the Income Tax Act?                     The Federal Court
of Appeal, while agreeing with the conclusion of the Trial Division that the
appellants were not entitled to a deduction of interest because the board, as a
non-taxable entity, had not included that amount in the calculation of its own
income, also found against the appellants on another ground.  The Court of
Appeal held that the transaction in this appeal, within which the accrued
interest was transferred, was not meant to give rise to a deduction pursuant to
s. 20(14).                     For
the purposes of analysis, I repeat the operative portion of s. 20(14):                            20. ...                     (14)
Where, by virtue of an assignment or other transfer of a bond, debenture or
similar security. . . the transferee has become entitled to interest in respect
of a period commencing before the time of transfer and ending after that time
that is not payable until after the time of the transfer, an amount equal to
that proportion of the interest that the number of days in the portion of the
period that preceded the day of transfer is of the number of days in the whole
period                            (a) 
shall be included in computing the transferor's income for     the taxation
year in which the transfer was made, and  (b) 
may be deducted in computing the transferee's income for a taxation year in the
computation of which there has been included  (i) 
the full amount of the interest under section 12, or  (ii) 
a portion of the interest under paragraph (a).                     In order to come
within the opening words of the subsection, two conditions must be satisfied. 
First, there must be an assignment or a transfer of a debt obligation.  Second,
the transferee must become entitled, as a result of the transfer, to interest accruing
before the date of the transfer but not payable until after that date.  All of
the courts below agreed that these two conditions were met in fact.                     However, the
Federal Court of Appeal, the only court to deal with this point, took the view
that the transaction in question in this appeal was nonetheless not included
within the class of transactions giving rise to a deduction pursuant to this
section.  The Court of Appeal held that this transfer of accrued interest was
not in accord with the purpose of the section, when the section was viewed in
light of economic and commercial reality.  In its view, the object or spirit of
the provision was the avoidance of double taxation, and the transfer between
the board and the appellants had nothing to do with such a purpose.  An
evaluation of the correctness of this conclusion requires first, a review of
the proper approach to the interpretation of taxing statutes and, second, a
closer scrutiny of the transaction that took place between the appellants and
the board.                     The starting point
for this inquiry is the judgment of this Court in Stubart Investments Ltd.
v. The Queen, supra.  That case concerned a sale of assets from one
sister company to another.  The transferee ran the transferor's business as
agent for the transferor, and sought to avail itself of a deduction of the
transferor's loss carry-forward.  Estey J. reaffirmed the traditional position
that the taxpayer is entitled to structure his or her affairs so as to avoid
liability for tax.  He also noted that the legislature provided general
standards for the determination of what sort of tax avoidance mechanisms are
unacceptable.  Where these limitations are inapplicable, the court has no
authority to legislate additional ones.                     However, the courts
will not permit the taxpayer to take advantage of deductions or exemptions
which are founded on a sham transaction.  Such a situation would arise where
(at p. 572): The
transaction and the form in which it was cast by the parties and their legal
and accounting advisers [can] be said to have been so constructed as to create
a false impression in the eyes of a third party, specifically the taxing
authority.  In this case, the respondent agrees
that this transaction cannot be characterized as a sham.  There was a legally
valid transfer of the assets of the company to the appellants, and a subsequent
transfer to them of the company's debt obligations.                     Estey J. went on to
reject the submission that the courts should adopt a test which required a
strict business purpose for the transaction, independent of the goal of tax
avoidance, before an entitlement to a deduction or exemption would be
recognized.  In his view, this would run counter to the modern legislative
intent infusing the provisions of the Income Tax Act.  The statute had
to be viewed as not only a tool for raising revenue, but also as a device for
the attainment of certain economic policy objectives.  Estey J. concluded at p.
576:  It
seems more appropriate to turn to an interpretation test which would provide a
means of applying the Act so as to affect only the conduct of a taxpayer which
has the designed effect of defeating the expressed intention of Parliament.  In
short, the tax statute, by this interpretive technique, is extended to reach
conduct of the taxpayer which clearly falls within "the object and
spirit" of the taxing provisions.                     In this appeal, the
appellants argue that their transaction was not structured so as to defeat the
intention of Parliament.  They sought to acquire the company's debt to preserve
their economic control of the company.  The respondent argues that the conduct
of the taxpayers in this case does not fall within the object and spirit of s.
20(14), and that to interpret the section to cover the transaction in this appeal
is to give to the appellants a windfall not intended by Parliament.                     In my view, this
disagreement can be resolved by viewing the passage of Estey J. quoted above in
the context of his subsequent comments on statutory interpretation.  After
setting out the traditional approach of strict construction of taxing statutes,
Estey J. notes at p. 578:  Gradually,
the role of the tax statute in the community changed, as we have seen, and the
application of strict construction to it receded.  Courts today apply to this
statute the plain meaning rule, but in a substantive sense so that if a
taxpayer is within the spirit of the charge, he may be held liable.  Estey J. relied at p. 578 on the
following passage from Dreidger, Construction of Statutes (2nd ed.
1983), at p. 87:                    Today
there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be
read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense
harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the
intention of Parliament.                     It is this
principle that must prevail unless the transaction is a sham or is so blatantly
synthetic as to be effectively artificial.  As Estey J. concludes at p. 580: . .
. where the substance of the Act, when the clause in question is contextually
construed, is clear and unambiguous and there is no prohibition in the Act
which embraces the taxpayer, the taxpayer shall be free to avail himself of the
beneficial provision in question.  This principle is determinative of the
present dispute.  While it is true that the courts must view discrete sections
of the Income Tax Act in light of the other provisions of the Act and of
the purpose of the legislation, and that they must analyze a given transaction
in the context of economic and commercial reality, such techniques cannot alter
the result where the words of the statute are clear and plain and where the
legal and practical effect of the transaction is undisputed:  Mattabi Mines
Ltd. v. Ontario (Minister of Revenue), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 175, at p. 194; see
also Symes v. Canada, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 695.                     It is quite true
that, as the respondent points out, this transaction was not one where a debt
obligation was purchased on the open market.  It is equally true that the
motivation of the parties was not specifically to buy and sell accrued
interest.  The parties were concerned with returning the company to a solvent
and stable position so as to generate profit and preserve jobs in a small
community.  All this, however, is somewhat tangential to the application of s.
20(14).  The section requires the transfer of a debt obligation whose value
includes interest accruing before the date of transfer, but payable after that
date.  The motives of the parties, and the setting in which the transfer took
place, are simply not determinative of the application of the subsection.                     The respondent
relies on two cases in which deductions under s. 20(14) were disallowed because
of the nature of the transactions at issue.  In my view, these cases are
distinguishable from the present appeal.  The first of these is Courtright
v. M.N.R., supra. In that case the taxpayer purchased Government of
Canada bonds with accrued interest shortly before maturity.  The taxpayer had
the bonds delivered to his bank as collateral against a loan and, on maturity,
the bonds were redeemed and credited to the taxpayer.  The taxpayer sought to
deduct as an interest expense the interest accruing prior to the transfer.                     The Minister
opposed this deduction on three grounds.  First, the Minister argued that the
bonds were not "assigned" or "transferred" to the taxpayer
within the meaning of s. 20(14).  Second, the Minister argued that the accrued
interest on transfer was capital in the hands of the taxpayer such that no
interest was earned from the ownership of the bonds within the meaning of s.
12(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act.  Finally, the Minister argued
that no interest was receivable in the 1975 taxation year within the meaning of
s. 12(1)(c).  As is evident then, the issue in Courtright was
whether the taxpayer met the terms of these sections on their face.  This
required some consideration of the commercial reality of the transaction, but
did not involve disallowing reliance on a provision when the factual
requirements for its application were met.                     In this appeal,
despite conceding that these factual elements are present, the respondent is
asking the Court to examine and evaluate the transaction in and of itself, and
to conclude that the transaction is somehow outside the scope of the section in
issue.   In the absence of evidence that the transaction was a sham or an abuse
of the provisions of the Act, it is not the role of the court to determine
whether the transaction in question is one which renders the taxpayer deserving
of a deduction.  If the terms of the section are met, the taxpayer may rely on
it, and it is the option of Parliament specifically to preclude further
reliance in such situations.                     The respondent also
relies on another "bond flip" case, Hill v. M.N.R., supra. 
There the taxpayer sold a quantity of bonds within four days of their
purchase.  Again the Minister supported the disallowance of the deduction by
arguing that there had been no assignment or transfer within the meaning of s.
20(14), and that the taxpayer was not entitled to interest within the meaning
of that section.  The Minister also argued that no interest was receivable
within the meaning of s. 12(1)(c).  Chairman Cardin found at p. 170:                    The
evidence forces me to conclude that what we have here is a classic example of
so-called bond flip transactions, the very nature of which and indeed their
ultimate purpose and use do not. . . meet the requirements of Section 20(14) of
the Act.                     Chairman Cardin
stated that there was no evidence that there had been any physical transfer and
assignment of the bonds to the taxpayer.  After discussing the relationship of
s. 20(14)(a) and s. 20(14)(b), an issue which is dealt with later
in these reasons, he stated at p. 171: What
I find to be contrary to the provisions of Section 20(14) of the Act is that
the taxpayer in acquiring and in disposing of the bonds within a very short
period of time, confers upon himself simultaneously the role of both the transferor
and transferee of the bonds in each of the transactions.  This sort of
artificial blending of the role of transferor and transferee by the taxpayer in
the acquisition and disposition of bonds in bond flip cases does not, in my
view, come within the wording and the meaning of the interest of Section 20(14)
of the Act.                     The reasoning in
this case does not assist the respondent herein.  The Tax Review Board in Hill
was again faced with the basic question of the applicability of s. 20(14) on
the terms of its own express wording.  This required an analysis of the
transaction which occurred, but did not dilute or obscure the plain meaning of
the requirements of the section.  The board found that no transfer or
assignment had been proved.  The alternate conclusion of the board that this
sort of transaction did not create a transfer of accrued interest was again
based on an analysis of the transaction, and not a reinterpretation of a
clearly drafted subsection.  The board found that the transfer was artificial,
since the taxpayer acted as both transferor and transferee for bonds that were
acquired and resold almost instantaneously.                      This transaction
was obviously not a sham.  The terms of the section were met in a manner that
was not artificial.  Where the words of the section are not ambiguous, it is
not for this Court to find that the appellants should be disentitled to a
deduction because they do not deserve a "windfall", as the respondent
contends.  In the absence of a situation of ambiguity, such that the Court must
look to the results of a transaction to assist in ascertaining the intent of
Parliament, a normative assessment of the consequences of the application of a
given provision is within the ambit of the legislature, not the courts. 
Accordingly, I find that the transaction at issue comes within s. 20(14).  B.                Does Section
20(14) Permit the Deductions?                     The respondent
argues in the alternative that, even if s. 20(14) is prima facie
applicable to the transaction in this case, the appellants are not entitled to
claim a deduction pursuant to s. 20(14)(b), because the amount of
interest accrued prior to the transfer was not included in the calculation of
the income of the transferor, as required by s. 20(14)(a).  It is not
disputed in this case that the board, as transferor, is a non-taxable entity
which did not file a tax return in the time period in question.  The Trial
Division found, and the Court of Appeal agreed, that these two paragraphs were
to be interpreted conjunctively such that no deduction could be claimed under
s. 20(14)(b) in the absence of evidence that the amount deducted had
been included in the transferor's income under s. 20(14)(a).  The
respondent points to the word "and", which links the two subsections,
and argues that an interpretation which precludes a deduction, unless the
interest is included in the transferor's income, best accords with the object
and spirit of the provision.                     The respondent
characterizes the purpose of s. 20(14) as the avoidance of double taxation.  I
agree.  Section 20(14) operates to apportion accrued interest between
transferor and transferee so as to avoid the double taxation that would occur
if both parties included all the interest accrued in their respective
calculations of income.  The interest that has accrued prior to the date of
transfer is allocated to the transferor's calculation of income, based
presumably on the reasoning that the transferor, as owner of the debt
obligation, will be legally entitled to interest up to the date of transfer and
that this fact will be reflected in the consideration to be paid by the
transferee for the debt obligation.  The accrued interest is therefore part of
the income of the transferor, and not of the income of the transferee.                     The respondent,
however, goes on to argue that since amounts received or receivable as interest
are included in the calculation of income under s. 12(1)(c), s. 20(14)
acts to ensure not only that double taxation is avoided, but also that the
entire amount of interest is included in someone's taxable income.  In my view,
such an assertion transforms the proposition that the section is meant to avoid
double taxation into one that the section is designed to ensure taxation of the
entire amount of interest accrued during the taxation year.  This is, however, not
true, since if the board as non-taxable owner of the debt obligation did not
transfer it, none of the accrued interest would be taxable.  Parliament
anticipates just such an outcome in creating a tax-exempt status for certain
entities.  Section 20(14) deals with the allocation of interest.  Whether the
government will ultimately recover tax on that interest is governed by other
sections of the Act.                     In this regard I
find helpful the comments of M. D. Templeton, in "Subsection 20(14) and
the Allocation of Interest -- Buyers Beware" (1990), 38 Can. Tax J.
85, at pp. 87-88, on the reasons of the Trial Division on this point: . .
. no words in subsection 20(14) or the Act as a whole make paragraph (b) of the
subsection conditional on the application of paragraph (a).  On the contrary,
the grammatical construction of subsection 20(14) suggests that paragraphs (a)
and (b) become applicable, independent of one another, once the conditions set
out in the paragraph of subsection 20(14) that precedes paragraphs (a) and (b)
are met.                     The
grammatical structure of subsection 20(14) is similar to a number of other
provisions in the Act in which Parliament lists the income tax consequences
that arise when certain preconditions are met.  Usually, the preconditions are
set out in an introductory paragraph or paragraphs and the consequences in
separate subparagraphs.  We do not know of any canon of statutory
interpretation that makes a tax consequence listed in the text of a provision
subject to the taxpayer's compliance with all the other tax consequences listed
before it. To carry this observation further,
where specific provisions of the Income Tax Act intend to make the tax
consequences for one party conditional on the acts or position of another
party, the sections are drafted so that this interdependence is clear:  see, e.g.,
ss. 68, 69(5), 70(2), (3) and (5).                     The respondent
relies on the comments of the Tax Review Board in Courtright, supra,
and in Hill, supra, that the entitlement to a deduction under
s. 20(14)(b) is dependent upon inclusion by the transferor in income of
the amount sought to be deducted, pursuant to s. 20(14)(a).  The
statements of the Tax Appeal Board to that effect in those cases were obiter,
and not necessary to the disposition of those appeals.  The "bond
flips" were designed to give the taxpayer a double deduction under both s.
20(14)(b) and s. 110.1 (now repealed).  They were wholly synthetic
transactions that did not even meet the facial requirements of the section, let
alone accord with its object and spirit when analyzed in light of economic and
commercial reality:  see Claude Nadeau, "The Interpretation of Taxing
Statutes Since Stubart" (1990), 42 Can. Tax Found. 49:1, at p.
49:21.  As discussed above, the same cannot be said of the transaction in this
case.  The interpretation of the relationship between paras. (a) and (b)
was not necessary to the result reached in those cases and, in my view, should
not be considered to be a correct statement of the law.                     The same can be
said for the more recent decision of the Tax Court in Husain v. M.N.R.,
91 D.T.C. 278.  There the court held that the taxpayer could not rely on s.
20(14)(b) to claim a deduction of interest on Canada Savings Bonds which
accrued prior to the date of transfer.  The taxpayer acquired the bonds under a
testamentary disposition from her husband who, at the time of his death, was
not a resident of Canada.  While the court may well have been correct in
concluding that s. 20(14)(a) was inapplicable to the taxpayer's
non-resident husband, it does not follow, for the reasons set out above, that
the taxpayer should have been disentitled from relying on s. 20(14)(b).                     This conclusion is
fortified by the consequences that would ensue were s. 20(14) not read in this
straightforward manner.  Section 20(14) does not draw distinctions between the
contexts in which debt instruments are transferred.  The interpretation
advanced by the Trial Division and endorsed by the Court of Appeal would be
equally applicable in open-market bond transactions.  It is simply unworkable
to require market purchasers to discern whether the vendor of the bond is
tax-exempt in order to be able to assess whether a s. 20(14)(b)
deduction is permitted.  Without this knowledge, the prospective purchaser
would thus be unable to gauge the true value of the security.                     Moreover, a debt
instrument held by a non-taxable entity would be worth less than an identical
instrument held by a body that was liable to tax.  Any taxpayer who purchased a
security previously held by either the federal or the provincial Crown, or by
one of the persons enumerated in s. 149(1) of the Act, would be disentitled
from deducting.  Given that many of the bonds sold on the open market are sold
by the Bank of Canada, a body to whom s. 20(14)(a) does not apply, the
interpretation of the section advanced by the respondent would mean that these
bonds would have to be sold at a discount compared with identical bonds sold by
other parties:  Templeton, supra, at p. 88; see also John M.
Ulmer, "Taxation of Interest Income" (1990), 42 Can. Tax Found.
8:1, at p. 8:20.                     Therefore, I am of
the view that, on the plain meaning of the section, the ability of a taxpayer
to claim a deduction pursuant to s. 20(14)(b) is not dependent on the
inclusion by the transferor pursuant to s. 20(14)(a) of the same amount
in his or her calculation of income.  The consequences of this straightforward
grammatical reading do not persuade me that it is incorrect.  In fact, the opposite
is true.                     Given that the
inability of the transferor to include the amount of accrued interest
transferred in its calculation of income is irrelevant to the ability of the
appellants to claim a deduction of that interest, and in light of the earlier
finding that there was in this case a transfer of a debt obligation which
included interest accruing before the transfer but not payable until after the
transfer, I am of the view that the appellants are entitled to rely on s.
20(14)(b) to claim a deduction of this interest.  C.What
is the Amount of the Deduction to Which the Appellants Are Entitled?                     The respondent
argued that, if the appellants were entitled to a s. 20(14)(b)
deduction, the correct amount of the deduction was far less than the amounts
claimed by the appellants.  The appellants each claimed a deduction of $38,335
in the 1977 taxation year, and the appellant Trzop claimed a further
$283,363 in 1980.  As will be explained below, the respondent argues that the
total deduction to which the appellants were entitled was $3,345.                     It appears that
this argument was raised for the first time before the Federal Court, Trial
Division.  By the operation of the former s. 175(3), this appeal was deemed to
be an action in the Trial Division, such that it was permissible to raise this
new submission.  However, neither the Trial Division nor the Court of Appeal
considered the argument, as it was unnecessary to do so, having found that no
deduction under s. 20(14) was available.  The respondent argued before the Tax
Court judge that the accrued interest on the debt was far less than the
approximately $1,000,000 calculated by the appellants, because the promissory
notes stated that interest was not payable between 1975 and 1977, pursuant to
the agreement between the board and the appellants to suspend repayment of the
debt.  The Tax Court judge rejected this argument, stating:  It
is obvious from the evidence adduced that what happened in the period between
1975 to 1977 was not a forgiveness of the accrued interest, but a suspension
thereof.  The appellants had the right to sue the company and obtain the
accrued interest that they did receive in the years under appeal.                     The reasons of the
Tax Court judge do not indicate that he considered the alternate argument
advanced by the respondent that most of the interest deducted by the appellants
did not meet the requirement of s. 20(14) that it must have accrued prior to
the transfer but be payable after the transfer.  The argument of the
respondent, simply put, is that interest on the promissory notes accrued daily
and was payable monthly, and that interest on the debenture accrued daily and
was payable on demand.  Therefore, nearly all of the interest accruing during
the two-year period during which repayment of the debt was suspended became
payable on demand at the time of the transfer of the debt to the appellants. 
The fact that the appellants chose not to collect on it immediately does not
alter that fact.                     Therefore, the
respondent argues, since this interest was payable at the time of, rather than
after, the transfer, it does not meet the terms of s. 20(14).  The only
interest which satisfies the opening words of the subsection is the interest
accruing on the four promissory notes between the June and July payment dates. 
The appellants are consequently entitled to deduct $3,325 as the amount which
accrued prior to the transfer but was not payable until after the transfer.                     This argument
cannot succeed.  The interest which accrued during the two-year period during
which the debt was suspended was payable after the transfer and therefore meets
the terms of s. 20(14).  This agreement to suspend repayment of accruing
interest that would otherwise have been payable was legally enforceable by the
appellants so long as they continued to fulfil their part of the agreement. 
Therefore, the accrued interest was not payable before the transfer.                     Moreover, to say
that the interest became payable at the very moment of the transfer, rather
than after it, is somewhat artificial.  It must be remembered that the board,
as transferor, could not collect that accrued interest at all, so long as the
appellants met the terms of the agreement.  Therefore, the interest that
accrued during that period became payable on demand immediately after the
transfer of the debt to the appellants was completed.  I find it difficult to
understand how the appellants could have made a valid demand for payment of the
interest until after the debt had been fully transferred to them.  Therefore,
this means that the interest accrued before the transfer but was payable after
that time, and that it gave rise to a permissible deduction under s. 20(14)(b).  VI.              Conclusion and Disposition                     The appellants are
entitled to a deduction of interest accruing prior to the transfer and payable
thereafter.  The transaction between the appellants and the board meets the
requirements of s. 20(14).  The interest which accrued during the period that
repayment of the debt was suspended did not become payable until after the
transfer.  However, the parties agree that this result may have other tax
consequences for the appellants, such as a taxable capital gain pursuant to s.
40(3).  In this connection, these and any other possible consequences can be
taken into account by the respondent in reassessment.                     Therefore, the
appeals are allowed, the judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal is set aside,
and the matters referred back to the Minister for reassessment in accordance
with these reasons.  The appellants shall have their costs here and in the
courts below.                     Appeals allowed
with costs.                     Solicitors for the
appellants:  Mockler, Allen & Dixon, Fredericton.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  John C. Tait, Ottawa.  