SCC Case Information: 35892   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: Canada (Attorney General) v. Chambre des notaires du
  Québec, 2016 SCC 20, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 336 Appeal
  heard: November 3, 2015 Judgment
  rendered: June 3, 2016 Docket: 35892  Between: Attorney
General of Canada and Canada Revenue Agency Appellants  and  Chambre
des notaires du Québec and Barreau du Québec Respondents  - and -  Advocates’
Society, Canadian Bar Association, Federation
of Law Societies of Canada and Criminal
Lawyers’ Association Interveners  Official English Translation  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner and Gascon JJ.  Joint Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 96) Wagner and Gascon JJ. (McLachlin C.J. and
  Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)    Canada
(Attorney General)
v. Chambre des notaires du
Québec, 2016 SCC 20, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 336 Attorney General of Canada and Canada Revenue Agency                                                                             Appellants v. Chambre des notaires du Québec and Barreau du Québec                                                                                    Respondents and Advocates’ Society, Canadian Bar Association, Federation of Law Societies of Canada
and Criminal Lawyers’ Association                                                                   Interveners Indexed as: Canada (Attorney
General) v. Chambre des
notaires du Québec 2016 SCC 20 File No.: 35892. 2015: November 3; 2016: June 3. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis, Wagner and Gascon JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec                     Some
notaries practising law in Quebec received requirements to provide documents or
information from the Minister of National Revenue under s. 231.2 of the ITA.
The purpose of these requirements was to obtain information or documents
relating to clients of the notaries for tax collection or audit purposes. Some
of the notaries who received such requirements contacted the Chambre des
notaires du Québec (« Chambre ») to raise concerns about their clients’ right
to professional secrecy. The Chambre instituted a declaratory action against
the Attorney General of Canada and the Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”) for the
purpose of having ss. 231.2 and 231.7 of the ITA and the exception
for the accounting records of notaries and lawyers set out in the definition of
“solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1)  declared to be unconstitutional
and of no force or effect with respect to notaries. The Barreau du Québec («
Barreau ») joined in the proceedings as an intervener for the purpose of having
any declaration made by the courts concerning the legislative provisions in
question apply equally to its members.                     The
Superior Court and the Court of Appeal ruled in favour of the Chambre and the
Barreau. The Court of Appeal found that, pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution
Act, 1982, ss. 231.2(1)  and 231.7  and the accounting records exception
set out in s. 232(1)  are unconstitutional and of no force or effect with
respect to Quebec notaries and lawyers for all information and documents
protected by professional secrecy.                     Held: The
appeal should be dismissed.                     Section 8 
of the Charter  protects against unreasonable searches and seizures.
There are two questions that must be answered to determine whether a government
action was contrary to s. 8 : whether the government action intruded upon
an individual’s reasonable expectation of privacy, in which case it constituted
a seizure within the meaning of s. 8 , and whether the seizure was an
unreasonable intrusion on that right to privacy.                     The
first of these questions is not problematic, as the Court has already established
that a requirement constitutes a seizure within the meaning of s. 8 . The
seizure in this case involves information or documents that may be protected by
the professional secrecy of notaries or lawyers. Professional secrecy must
remain as close to absolute as possible, and it is generally seen as a
fundamental and substantive rule of law. In this respect, professional secrecy
has a deep significance regardless of the nature of the legal advice being
sought or the context in which it is sought. For the purposes of the analysis
under s. 8  of the Charter , the civil and administrative context of
the requirement scheme does not diminish the taxpayer’s expectation of privacy
for information that is protected by professional secrecy. A client of a notary
or a lawyer has a reasonable expectation of privacy for information and
documents that are in the possession of the notary or lawyer and in respect of
which a requirement is issued.                     In
answering the second question, the courts must balance the interests at stake,
namely an individual’s privacy interest on the one hand and the state’s
interest in carrying out a search or seizure on the other. Where the interest
at stake is the professional secrecy of legal advisers, which is a principle of
fundamental justice and a legal principle of supreme importance, the usual
balancing exercise under s. 8  will not be particularly helpful. Stringent
standards must be adopted to protect professional secrecy. This means that any
legislative provision that interferes with professional secrecy more than is
absolutely necessary will be labelled unreasonable.                     In
this case there are several defects that cause a requirement sent to a notary
or lawyer concerning information that is protected by professional secrecy to
be unreasonable and contrary to s. 8 , namely that the client is given no
notice of the requirement, that an inappropriate burden is placed solely on the
notary or lawyer concerned, that compelling disclosure of the information being
sought is not absolutely necessary and that no measures have been taken to help
mitigate the impairment of professional secrecy. The requirement scheme serves
legitimate purposes, namely the collection of amounts owed to the CRA and tax
audits, but the existence of an important purpose cannot justify sidestepping
the protection afforded by s. 8  of the Charter . The constitutional
defects in the requirement scheme are all the more unacceptable given that they
could easily be mitigated and remedied by way of measures that are compatible
with the state’s obligations relating to the protection of professional
secrecy. Currently, therefore, the impairment permitted by the requirement
scheme set out in ss. 231.2(1) and 231.7 of the ITA is not
consistent with the principle of minimization.                     The exception whose effect is to exclude the accounting
records of notaries and lawyers from the protection of professional secrecy and
which is set out in s. 232(1) of the ITA also infringes the rights
guaranteed by s. 8  of the Charter . To determine whether an abrogation
of professional secrecy in the context of a seizure is constitutional, a court
must consider what characterizes professional secrecy as a substantive right.
Thus, a legislative provision cannot, by abrogating professional secrecy,
authorize the state to gain access to information that is normally protected,
where the abrogation is not absolutely necessary to achieve the purposes of the
legislation. Limits on professional secrecy must take into account the duty
recognized by the Court to minimize impairments, and the exceptions must be
precisely defined. In this case, the exception is broad and undefined, as it
permits the seizure of any accounting record of a notary or a lawyer, and is
therefore problematic from the standpoint of the absolute necessity test.
Moreover, for all practical purposes, the exception removes from the court’s
jurisdiction the determination of whether accounting records in respect of
which a requirement has been issued are privileged. In sum, in the absence of
absolute necessity and given that there is no possibility of judicial review to
ensure that professional secrecy is protected, the accounting records exception
allows the unreasonable seizure of information found in the accounting records
of notaries or lawyers. Cases Cited                     Distinguished:
Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research,
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 425; applied:
Lavallee, Rackel & Heintz v. Canada (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 61,
[2002] 3 S.C.R. 209; Canada (Attorney General) v. Federation of Law
Societies of Canada, 2015 SCC 7, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 401; referred to: Maranda
v. Richer, 2003 SCC 67, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 193; R. v. Edwards, [1996] 1
S.C.R. 128; R. v. McKinlay Transport Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627; Solosky
v. The Queen, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 821; Descôteaux v. Mierzwinski, [1982]
1 S.C.R. 860; Smith v. Jones, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 455; Canada (Privacy
Commissioner) v. Blood Tribe Department of Health, 2008 SCC 44, [2008] 2
S.C.R. 574; R. v. McClure, 2001 SCC 14, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 445; R. v.
National Post, 2010 SCC 16, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 477; R. v. Brown, 2002
SCC 32, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 185; Goodis v. Ontario (Ministry of Correctional
Services), 2006 SCC 31, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 32; Foster Wheeler Power Co. v.
Société intermunicipale de gestion et d’élimination des déchets (SIGED) inc.,
2004 SCC 18, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 456; Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2
S.C.R. 145; R. v. Cunningham, 2010 SCC 10, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 331; Canada
(National Revenue) v. Thompson, 2016 SCC 21, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 381; Organic
Research Inc. v. Minister of National Revenue (1990), 111 A.R. 336; Pritchard
v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission), 2004 SCC 31, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 809; R.
v. Dunbar (1982), 68 C.C.C. (2d) 13; A. (L.L.) v. B. (A.), [1995] 4
S.C.R. 536; R. v. Seaboyer, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 577; Carter v. Canada
(Attorney General), 2015 SCC 5, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 331. Statutes and Regulations Cited Act to amend the Income Tax Act, S.C.
1956, c. 39, s. 28. Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 1 , 7 , 8 . Constitution Act, 1982, s. 52 . Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952,
c. 148. Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1
(5th Supp .), ss. 230  to 232 , 231.1 , 231.2 , 231.7 , 232(1)  “solicitor-client
privilege”, (2)(a), 238. Authors Cited Lederman, Sidney N., Alan W. Bryant and Michelle K. Fuerst. The
Law of Evidence in Canada, 4th ed. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2014. Wigmore, John Henry. Evidence in Trials at Common Law,
vol. 8., revised by John T. McNaughton. Boston: Little, Brown, 1961.                     Marc Ribeiro, Christopher Rupar and Chantal
Comtois, for the appellants.                     Raymond Doray and Loïc Berdnikoff, for the respondent Chambre des notaires du Québec.                     Giuseppe Battista, for the respondent Barreau du Québec.                     Pierre Bienvenu and Andres Garin, for the intervener the
Advocates’ Society.                     Mahmud Jamal, Alexandre Fallon and W. David Rankin, for the intervener the
Canadian Bar Association.                     John B.
Laskin and Yael Bienenstock, for the intervener the
Federation of Law Societies of Canada.                     Brian Gover, Justin Safayeni and Carlo Di Carlo, for the intervener the
Criminal Lawyers’ Association.                     English version of the
judgment of the Court delivered by                     Wagner
and Gascon JJ. — I.             
Overview [1]                             
In this appeal, the Attorney General of Canada
(“AGC”) and the Canada Revenue Agency (“CRA”), on the one hand, and the Chambre
des notaires du Québec (“Chambre”) and the Barreau du Québec (“Barreau”), on
the other, disagree about the requirement procedure set out in the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .) (“ITA ”). This procedure enables the tax authorities to
require any person to provide information or documents for any purpose related
to the administration of the ITA . [2]                             
The Chambre and the Barreau submit that, when a
“requirement to provide documents or information” is sent to a notary or a
lawyer, there is a risk that the information or documents being sought will,
unbeknownst to the legal adviser’s client, reveal particulars that are
protected by the professional secrecy of notaries and lawyers, otherwise known
as solicitor-client privilege. To this extent, it is argued, the relevant
provisions of the ITA  infringe the rights guaranteed by ss. 7  and 8 
of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  (“Charter ”), and
the infringement cannot be justified under s. 1 . [4]                             
The Superior Court and the Court of Appeal ruled
in favour of the Chambre and the Barreau. The Court of Appeal found that,
pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution Act, 1982, ss. 231.2(1)  and
231.7  and the accounting records exception are unconstitutional and of no force
or effect with respect to Quebec notaries and lawyers for all information and
documents protected by professional secrecy. We are in substantial agreement
and would dismiss the appeal. [5]                             
The Court has held in the past that professional
secrecy is a principle of fundamental justice within the meaning of s. 7  (Lavallee,
Rackel & Heintz v. Canada (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 61, [2002] 3 S.C.R.
209, at para. 49). It is also a civil right of supreme importance in the
Canadian justice system. Professional secrecy must thus remain as close to
absolute as possible, and the courts must adopt stringent standards to protect
it. [6]                             
A requirement under the ITA  constitutes a
seizure within the meaning of s. 8  of the Charter . The seizures
made in this case are unreasonable and are contrary to that section, because
the requirement scheme and the exception for accounting records do not provide
adequate protection for the professional secrecy of notaries and lawyers. The
procedure set out in the ITA  does not require that the client, who is
the holder of the privilege, be informed of the requirement or of any
proceeding brought by the CRA to obtain an order to provide information or
documents. The procedure also places the entire burden of protecting the
privilege on the notary or lawyer. Finally, the AGC and the CRA have not
established that it is absolutely necessary here to impair professional
secrecy. Because the impugned provisions do not minimally impair the right to
professional secrecy, they also cannot be saved under s. 1 . In light of
this conclusion, a separate analysis under s. 7  of the Charter  will
not be necessary. II.          
Background A.          
Requirement Scheme of the ITA [7]                             
Three provisions of the ITA  relating to
the requirement scheme are central to this appeal. They are set out in
full in the appendix. [8]                             
The first of these provisions, s. 231.2(1),
authorizes the Minister of National Revenue (“Minister”), by notice served
personally or by registered or certified mail, to require a person to provide
information or documents concerning a taxpayer within a reasonable time
stipulated in the notice. This section therefore allows the CRA, for and on
behalf of the Minister, to send a notary or lawyer a requirement concerning a
client. But in most cases, the client in question has no knowledge of the
requirement. The CRA generally sends the notice to the notary or lawyer without
sending a copy to the client, that is, to the taxpayer about whom information
is being sought. Moreover, the requirement is issued without judicial
intervention. [11]                         
This definition was added to the Income Tax
Act, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, in 1956 (c. 39, s. 28). At the time, professional
secrecy had not yet attained the status it is given today. As for the
“accounting record of a lawyer” exception, it was added to the definition in
1965 (c. 18, s. 26), although the term “accounting record” is not defined in
the ITA . The definition and the exception have remained unchanged since
they were first enacted. The third paragraph of s. 232(1)  provides that,
for the purposes of s. 232 , the term “lawyer” includes both notaries and
advocates in Quebec. [12]                         
It should be added that the ITA ’s
requirement scheme provides for sanctions up to and including imprisonment for
persons who have failed to comply with any of ss. 230  to 232 
(s. 238(1)  of the ITA , also reproduced in the appendix). However, a
notary or lawyer who is prosecuted for failure to comply with a requirement can
raise professional secrecy as a defence and must be acquitted if the judge is
satisfied that the notary or lawyer had reasonable grounds to believe that
solicitor-client privilege applied to the information or document being sought
(s. 232(2) (a) of the ITA ). B.           
Source of the Dispute [14]                         
Some of the notaries who received such
requirements contacted the Chambre to raise concerns about their clients’ right
to professional secrecy. The Chambre tried unsuccessfully to negotiate a
compromise with the CRA on what should be done when requirements are issued to
notaries. The failure of the negotiation led the Chambre to institute a
declaratory action against the AGC and the CRA in the Superior Court for the
purpose of having ss. 231.2  and 231.7  of the ITA  and the accounting
records exception declared to be unconstitutional and of no force or effect
with respect to notaries. The Chambre argued, inter alia, that
those provisions authorized unreasonable seizures contrary to the Charter 
because they did not include adequate protection for professional secrecy. In
its action, the Chambre also requested that a series of documents regularly
held or prepared by its members in their practice be declared to be prima facie
privileged. [15]                         
The Barreau, whose members are lawyers
practising in Quebec to whom similar requirements could be issued for
information and documents relating to their clients, joined in the proceedings as
an intervener for the purpose of having any declaration made by the courts
concerning the legislative provisions in question apply equally to its members. III.       
Judicial History A.          
Quebec Superior Court, 2010
QCCS 4215, [2010] R.J.Q. 2069 [17]                         
In his reasons, Blanchard J. noted at the
outset that there was no need for a lengthy discussion of the distinction
between notaries and lawyers. Both are legal advisers. As such, they have the
same duty and obligation to respect their clients’ right to professional
secrecy. After reviewing this Court’s decisions on the professional secrecy of
notaries and lawyers, Blanchard J. concluded that, in this case, there was
no reason to draw a distinction based on whether the seizure in question
occurred in a civil or a criminal context. He added that the distinction
advanced by the CRA between “facts” and “communications” was not justified. In
his view, the relationship between a legal professional and a client
presupposes that all actions, documents and information resulting from that
relationship are prima facie privileged. He also expressed the view
that exceptions to professional secrecy should be made very rarely and only as
a last resort. [18]                         
Concerning the impugned provisions of the ITA ,
Blanchard J. observed that the procedure established by Parliament does
not provide a way for clients who hold the right to professional secrecy to
know that their right is in jeopardy or to ensure that it is protected: only
the person against whom an order is sought has to be given notice of a summary
application made by the Minister to a judge. In the context of this case, that
person is the notary. The fact that a judge can order a person to provide documents
does not ensure that the holder of the right to professional secrecy is given a
reasonable opportunity to raise an objection in order to maintain the
confidentiality of privileged information. Blanchard J. concluded that
ss. 231.2  and 231.7  result in an unreasonable search and seizure contrary
to s. 8  of the Charter . [19]                         
As to the accounting records exception,
Blanchard J. found that it also had to be declared to be of no force or
effect under the Constitution. In his view, the CRA should always have to apply
directly to a superior court judge when seeking to obtain privileged
information. B.           
Quebec Court of Appeal, 2014 QCCA 552 [20]                         
The Court of Appeal unanimously allowed the
appeal, but solely to make a minor change to para. 125 of the trial judge’s
judgment and to strike out paras. 126-27 thereof. The primary purpose of
the changes was to make it clear that where s. 231.2  of the ITA  was
concerned, only subs. (1) was to be declared to be of no force or effect
with respect to a requirement sent to a taxpayer’s notary or lawyer. In
addition, the changes limited the scope of the declaration of
unconstitutionality to the accounting records exception set out in
s. 232(1)  of the ITA . The paragraphs of the judgment that were
struck out concerned the list of documents that Blanchard J. had
recognized as being prima facie protected by professional secrecy.
Bich J.A., who wrote the Court of Appeal’s reasons, found that it was
risky to establish in advance a presumption as to what documents or classes of
documents were privileged. [22]                         
As to the requirement scheme provided for in
ss. 231.2(1)  and 231.7  of the ITA , Bich J.A. found that,
insofar as it concerns notaries and lawyers, it infringes s. 8  of the Charter 
because of one principal, fatal feature: the potential breach of the
professional secrecy of legal advisers without the knowledge or consent of the
client in respect of whom a requirement is issued. For this reason,
Bich J.A. was of the opinion that the provisions lead to an unreasonable
seizure and that the impairment is not minimal, given that it does not meet the
constitutional requirements for the seizure of documents that could be
protected by professional secrecy. Nor, in her view, was the requirement scheme
consistent with the principle of minimization enunciated in Maranda v. Richer, 2003 SCC 67,
[2003] 3 S.C.R. 193, according to which a seizure may be carried out at
the office of a legal adviser only where there are no
reasonable alternative measures for obtaining the information being sought. She
added that a seizure cannot be justified by mere convenience. IV.       
Issues [24]                         
The Chief Justice stated the following
constitutional questions for the purposes of the appeal: 2.                 
If so, is the infringement a reasonable limit
prescribed by law that can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
society under s. 1  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ? 4.                 
If so, is the infringement a reasonable limit
prescribed by law that can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
society under s. 1  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ? [25]                         
As can be seen from these questions, the
constitutional validity of the relevant provisions of the ITA  is at
issue under both s. 7  and s. 8  of the Charter . In Lavallee,
at para. 34, and in Canada (Attorney General) v. Federation of Law
Societies of Canada, 2015 SCC 7, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 401 (“FLS”), at
para. 33, the Court stated that there is no need to undertake a s. 7 
analysis where a s. 8  analysis leads to the conclusion that the impugned
provisions are unconstitutional. [26]                         
Since that is in fact the conclusion we reach in
the instant case, it will suffice for us to begin by outlining the framework
for the s. 8  analysis and then to discuss the constitutional defects
identified by the courts below in the requirement scheme as a whole and more
particularly in the accounting records exception. Because the scope of the
professional secrecy of legal advisers is central to this case, it will be
necessary for us to discuss it in our analysis, as the Superior Court and the
Court of Appeal did in their respective reasons. V.          
Analysis A.          
Section 8 and Professional Secrecy (1)          
Reasonable Expectation of Privacy [29]                         
From this perspective, Blanchard J. was
right to note that [translation]
“[t]he fundamental importance of the right to professional secrecy of lawyers
is a cornerstone not only of our judicial system but, more broadly, of our
legal system” (para. 86). [30]                         
In this respect, professional secrecy has a deep
significance regardless of the nature of the legal advice being sought or the
context in which it is sought (Smith, at para. 46). We therefore
conclude, contrary to the argument of the AGC and the CRA, that for the
purposes of the analysis under s. 8  of the Charter , the civil and
administrative context of the requirement scheme does not diminish the taxpayer’s
expectation of privacy for information that is protected by professional
secrecy. [31]                         
It is true that this Court stated in Thomson
Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 425, that it might be
appropriate to find that there is a lower expectation of privacy in an
administrative context and therefore to apply a “less strenuous and more
flexible” standard of reasonableness in determining whether a seizure is
constitutional (pp. 506-7). To justify its reasoning in that case, the Court
stated that “there can only be a relatively low expectation of privacy in
respect of premises or documents that are used or produced in the course of
activities which, though lawful, are subject to state regulation as a matter of
course” (p. 507). In such cases, the routine performance of the activities
in question often involves the inspection by agents of the state of premises or
documents that would otherwise be considered private. Since the state is
therefore expected to have access to information for regulatory purposes, it
would make no sense to find that, on the one hand, the disclosure of such
information is normal but that, on the other, the expectation of privacy
associated with the information is extremely high. [34]                         
We recognize that, in that case,
Cromwell J. rejected the AGC’s contention that the impugned scheme had to
be characterized as merely an administrative law regulatory compliance scheme.
Cromwell J. stated that the purposes of the scheme were instead to deter
criminal offences and to facilitate the investigation and prosecution of
serious offences. He noted that the scheme had “a predominantly criminal
law character and [that] its regulatory aspects serve[d] criminal law purposes”
(FLS, at para. 37). However, this takes nothing away from the clear
and unequivocal remarks quoted above, which, in our view, apply to this
appeal. The protection afforded to professional secrecy in the context of
a s. 8  analysis is invariably high regardless of whether the seizure has
occurred in a criminal or an administrative context. [35]                         
In our view, therefore, it is well established
that a client of a notary or a lawyer has a reasonable expectation of privacy
for information and documents that are in the possession of the notary or
lawyer and in respect of which a requirement is issued. Indeed, the Court wrote
in Lavallee that “[a] client has a reasonable expectation of privacy in
all documents in the possession of his or her lawyer, which constitute
information that the lawyer is ethically required to keep confidential”
(para. 35). (2)          
Unreasonable Intrusion on the Right to Privacy [39]                         
Thus, where professional secrecy is in issue,
what matters is not the context in which a privileged document or privileged
information could be disclosed to the state, but rather the fact that the
document or information in question is privileged. It is important that a
client consulting a legal adviser feel confident that there is little danger
that information or documents shared by the client will be disclosed in the
future regardless of whether the consultation takes place in the context of an
administrative, penal or criminal investigation: “The lawyer’s obligation of
confidentiality is necessary to preserve the fundamental relationship of trust
between lawyers and clients” (Foster Wheeler, at para. 34). B.           
Constitutional Defects in the Requirement Scheme [44]                         
The Superior Court and the Court of Appeal
identified several defects that cause a requirement sent to a notary or lawyer
concerning information that is protected by professional secrecy to be
unreasonable and contrary to s. 8 . We agree with that conclusion. The
defects in question are that the client is given no notice of the requirement,
that an inappropriate burden is placed solely on the notary or lawyer
concerned, that compelling disclosure of the information being sought is not
absolutely necessary and that no measures have been taken to help mitigate the
impairment of professional secrecy. In the end, the AGC and the CRA have not
made any persuasive arguments that can overcome these defects identified by the
courts below. (1)         
Absence of Notice to the Client [46]                         
Nothing in the ITA  obliges CRA officials
to send a requirement to anyone other than the person from whom they are
seeking information or documents. There is therefore no obligation to give
notice to the client of a notary or lawyer to whom a requirement is issued, not
even where the information or documents being sought will help facilitate
collection from or an audit of that client. In fact, according to the evidence
in the record of the Superior Court, the vast majority of the requirements sent
to Quebec notaries were not served on their clients, thus indiscriminately
putting the clients at risk of losing the protection of professional secrecy to
which they are entitled in respect of privileged information that might be
found in “accounting records” prepared by their legal advisers. [47]                         
At the hearing, the AGC and the CRA argued that
it is the government’s usual practice to always contact a notary or lawyer
rather than his or her client. The government’s expectation is that the notary
or lawyer will act in a manner consistent with his or her ethical obligations
and will therefore notify the client and ensure that the client’s right to
professional secrecy is protected. We find this argument unpersuasive for two
reasons. [48]                         
First, as Arbour J. noted in Lavallee,
a notary or a lawyer is not the alter ego of his or her client. Legal
advisers and their clients may sometimes have conflicting interests. The
professional relationship between the notary or lawyer and the client may even
have been terminated before the requirement is sent. In any event, the right to
claim professional secrecy does not belong to the legal adviser. The
constitutionality of a seizure cannot rest on the unverifiable expectation that
a legal adviser will always act diligently and solely in the client’s interests
when faced with a seizure by the state (Lavallee, at para. 40; FLS,
at para. 49). [49]                         
Second, although it is true that for practical
reasons it can sometimes be necessary for third parties to contact an
individual’s legal adviser rather than contacting the individual directly, that
is not the case here. Notaries to whom requirements are sent must instead be
considered third parties who are in possession of information and
documents relevant to collection from or an audit of the taxpayer, that is, the
client. The notaries in question are placed in a situation similar to that of
banks holding financial information or companies doing business with the
taxpayer that have kept information relevant to a particular transaction. A
requirement sent to a taxpayer’s legal adviser cannot be regarded as a
communication similar to the communication that takes place in the course of
litigation, for example. The argument of the AGC and the CRA that it is normal
not to contact the clients of notaries or lawyers where requirements are issued
is unfounded. [50]                         
Apart from this argument, which we reject, the
AGC and the CRA have made no submission to explain why it would not be possible
to notify a client that a requirement has been sent to his or her legal
adviser. In cases in which a requirement is sent by email, it is certainly
possible and, more importantly, easy for the letter sent to the notary or
lawyer to be copied to the client. Indeed, the evidence in this case shows that
there were some rare occasions on which CRA officials did notify the clients of
notaries to whom they had sent requirements. If it was possible to do this in
some cases, we find it difficult to understand why the CRA was not required to
do so in all cases. [51]                         
In any event, as Bich J.A. correctly
pointed out, the occasional service of requirements on clients in addition to
notaries and lawyers does not amount to a true notification system. Because the
ITA  does not make it mandatory to notify the clients of legal advisers
that a requirement has been sent, such service remains optional even where it
is effected voluntarily. The constitutionality of the requirement scheme cannot
be based on a presumption that the state will always behave honourably. The
absence of any formal obligation to notify the clients in respect of whom
requirements are sent to notaries and lawyers is therefore a critical
constitutional defect, as the Court indicated in both Lavallee and FLS. [52]                         
We wish to be clear, however, that in our
opinion, the fact that the CRA need not seek judicial authorization before
sending a requirement does not constitute a constitutional defect in the
current scheme. Although the Court asserted in FLS that “the
judicial pre-authorization requirement is, in itself, an important protection
against improper search and seizure of privileged material”,
it did not rule out “the possibility that Parliament could devise a
constitutionally compliant inspection regime without a judicial
pre-authorization requirement” (para. 56). In the instant
case, if the client is given notice of the requirement, the risk of privileged
information being disclosed without his or her consent when the requirement is
sent would be greatly reduced. (2)         
Burden Imposed on Legal Advisers [53]                         
The absence of notice to clients whose
information and documents are sought by means of a requirement brings to light
another significant defect in the scheme having regard to information protected
by professional secrecy that is in the possession of a notary or a lawyer. This
defect has to do with the role that notaries and lawyers are expected to play
in safeguarding their clients’ right to professional secrecy and the fact that
they ultimately bear alone the burden of safeguarding that right when a requirement
is issued. [55]                         
However, as we mentioned above, there may be
many reasons why lawyers or, in the case at bar, notaries might fail to claim
protection for their clients’ right to professional secrecy in court. Since the
legal adviser is not the alter ego of the client, he or she will
not necessarily always make the same choices the client would (Lavallee,
at paras. 39-40). There may be situations in which a notary or a lawyer is
simply negligent and forgets to verify whether any of the information requested
by the Minister is protected by professional secrecy. There may be other
situations in which a notary or a lawyer forgets to notify a client that a
requirement has been received before complying with it. Aside from a case of
simple negligence that takes the form of a failure to notify a client, it is
also possible for a notary or a lawyer to honestly but wrongly believe that the
information sought by the Minister is not protected by professional secrecy and
can therefore be disclosed. In addition, a requirement could be issued to a
notary or a lawyer who, although no longer the client’s legal adviser, still
has documents concerning the client. [56]                         
Finally, the possibility of being prosecuted
(under s. 238  of the ITA ) for failing to provide the CRA with the
information it seeks could influence the choice made by a notary or a lawyer to
comply or not to comply with a requirement. The threat of prosecution in fact
creates a conflict of interests between legal advisers and their clients,
pitting the duty of confidentiality owed by legal advisers to their clients
against their statutory duty of disclosure to the tax authorities (Lavallee,
at para. 40). In this regard, it is, contrary to the AGC’s argument,
irrelevant that none of the notaries who received requirements have so far been
prosecuted for refusing to provide the information or documents being sought.
The mere possibility of being so prosecuted under the ITA  places those
legal advisers in an intolerable situation. For the purposes of determining
whether the seizure is unreasonable within the meaning of s. 8  and
analyzing the scheme’s constitutional defects in relation to notaries and
lawyers and the protected information they have in their possession, this is
sufficient. [57]                         
Because the client is not given notice of the
requirement, the notary or lawyer can take any of the possible courses of action
discussed above without the client’s knowledge and without a court being asked
to determine whether professional secrecy applies to the particular situation.
This is all the more problematic given that, regardless of the reason why a
notary or a lawyer fails to notify his or her client that a requirement has
been received, there is no way for a court to remedy that failure after the
fact. If a legal adviser provides the CRA with the information or documents it
seeks, the ITA  gives the client no opportunity to remedy the improper
disclosure. The client cannot go to court following the disclosure in order to
withdraw certain privileged information or documents from the CRA. Once
professional secrecy is lost, there is no way to recover it. This confirms that
the requirement scheme is unreasonable, since it increases the risk of improper
disclosure of confidential information protected by professional secrecy. (3)         
Disclosure Is Not Absolutely Necessary [59]                         
We agree that the problem in this case is not as
acute as in Lavallee or FLS, which involved physical searches of
law offices. The mere service of a requirement to disclose certain information
or documents is not on the same scale. Nevertheless, we find that it is not
absolutely necessary here to rely on notaries or lawyers rather than on
alternative sources in order to obtain the information or documents being
sought. For example, where the Minister seeks information about specific
transactions in which the client took part, the information would be available
from alternative sources, such as financial institutions, that do not have as
onerous an obligation to safeguard its confidentiality. In this regard, there
is no evidence that the Minister even tried, albeit unsuccessfully, to obtain
the information in question by alternative means before issuing a requirement to a legal adviser. [60]                         
No one disputes the fact that the requirement
scheme serves legitimate purposes, namely the collection of amounts owed to the
CRA and tax audits. Nor does anyone dispute the fact that it is important to
prevent firms of notaries or lawyers from becoming tax havens. However, such
firms must not be turned into archives for the tax authorities either (FLS,
at para. 75). The fact that the requirement scheme has an important
purpose does not mean that it can be used to sidestep the protection afforded
by s. 8  of the Charter . The authorities’ failure to even attempt to
obtain the information or documents they seek from alternative sources
indicates that the manner in which the seizure is conducted is unreasonable, as
it does not minimally impair the right to professional secrecy. [61]                         
If the client were given notice of the
requirement and afforded an opportunity to independently safeguard his or her
right to professional secrecy before the information was disclosed, the fact
that the requirement is not sent as a last resort would not be fatal to the
scheme. The risk of information protected by professional secrecy being
revealed would then be minimized by the fact that the client would have an
opportunity to challenge its disclosure. That is not the case here, however,
and this further problem adds to the ones already identified. (4)         
Possibility of Mitigating the Scheme’s Defects [62]                         
Finally, these constitutional defects in the ITA ’s
requirement scheme are all the more unacceptable given that they could easily
be mitigated and remedied by way of measures that are compatible with the state’s
obligations relating to the protection of professional secrecy. [64]                         
Revenu Québec thus agreed, inter alia,
as regards formal demands for information sent to notaries under s. 39 of
the AMR or s. 57.1 of the AFPS, to comply with a directive
issued on May 3, 2005 by the Direction générale de la législation et des
enquêtes (now the Direction générale de la législation, des enquêtes et du
registraire des entreprises) (“directive”). Revenu Québec also agreed to take
into account the other limits imposed by the transaction, recognizing for
example that, prima facie, certain documents are protected by
professional secrecy and cannot be the subject of a formal demand. [65]                         
The directive concerns the minimization of state
impairments of the professional secrecy of lawyers and notaries. It states
that, before issuing a formal demand, Revenu Québec must try to obtain the
documents or information from various public records or by requesting them from
the taxpayer, another party to a contract, a financial institution, an
accountant or other third parties that have prepared the documents. If
Revenu Québec determines that only a lawyer or a notary has the documents or
information it is seeking, the Minister of Revenue may then ask the taxpayer
for permission to obtain the documents or information from the taxpayer’s legal
adviser by way of a consent in writing to release the adviser from professional
secrecy. The directive further provides that Revenu Québec can consider sending
a formal demand to a lawyer or a notary only if the other steps are
unsuccessful and there is no other way to obtain the information or documents. [66]                         
The directive also states that, where Revenu
Québec is of the opinion that professional secrecy does not apply to the
information or documents being sought, a judgment may be obtained from the
Court of Québec or the Superior Court, as provided for in the particular
statute. Where the Minister of Revenue indicates that it is absolutely
necessary to obtain the information for the purposes of administering the AMR
or the AFPS, the judge must determine whether the Minister is entitled
to have access to the information or documents in question. [67]                         
The transaction further provides that any formal
demand issued to a notary by Revenu Québec must specify the information or
documents covered by the demand. It must explain why Revenu Québec is of the
opinion that the information or documents in question are not protected by
professional secrecy, and it must ask the notary to find out whether the client
agrees to waive professional secrecy. Finally, Revenu Québec agrees not to
include any statement to the effect that a notary who fails to comply with a
formal demand could face prosecution that could result in a fine or a term of
imprisonment. Revenu Québec also agrees not to prosecute a notary who invokes
professional secrecy in good faith. [68]                         
The agreement between the Chambre and the Quebec
authorities is helpful to our analysis, since it shows that there are ways to
minimize the risk that a requirement scheme will impair professional secrecy.
In its current form, the ITA ’s requirement scheme is problematic insofar
as it is applied to a notary or a lawyer. It will be for Parliament, if it so
chooses, to adopt measures specifying how the CRA can obtain information or
documents from a taxpayer’s legal adviser without jeopardizing professional
secrecy. Currently, in our view, the impairment permitted by the requirement
scheme set out in ss. 231.2(1)  and 231.7  of the ITA  is not
consistent with the principle of minimization (Maranda, at paras.
14-20). C.           
Constitutional Defects in the Exception in
Section 232(1)  of the ITA [69]                         
The Court of Appeal held that the accounting
records exception also infringes the rights guaranteed by s. 8  of the Charter .
We agree with this conclusion, too. (1)          
Accounting Records and Protected Information [72]                         
It is well established that the accounting
records of notaries and lawyers are inherently capable of containing
information that is protected by professional secrecy. In Descôteaux,
the Court quoted the following passage from John Henry Wigmore (Evidence in
Trials at Common Law (McNaughton rev. 1961), vol. 8, § 2292): “Where legal advice of any kind is sought from a professional
legal adviser in his capacity as such, the communications relating to that purpose,
made in confidence by the client, are at his instance permanently protected
from disclosure . . .” (pp. 872-73). In Foster Wheeler, the Court
observed that “[i]t would be inaccurate to reduce the content of the obligation
of confidentiality to opinions, advice or counsel given by lawyers to their
clients” (para. 38). In Maranda, noting the importance of the
information that can be extracted from particulars as seemingly neutral as the
amount of the fees paid by a client, the Court concluded that “the fact
consisting of the amount of the fees must be regarded, in itself, as
information that is . . . protected” (para. 33). The Court
thus acknowledged that, even where accounting information includes no
description of work, it may in itself, if disclosed, reveal confidential and
privileged information. [73]                         
Whether a document or the information it
contains is privileged depends not on the type of document it is but, rather,
on its content and on what it might reveal about the relationship and
communications between a client and his or her notary or lawyer. If lawyers’
fees can reveal privileged information, it is difficult to see why this could
not also be the case for accounting records. Such records will not always
contain privileged information, of course, but the fact remains that they may
contain some, so their disclosure could involve a breach of professional
secrecy. This is sufficient for the purposes of our analysis. [76]                         
Moreover, this lack of precision of the
expression “accounting record of a lawyer” in terms of the documents
practitioners must keep, the format they must be kept in and the level of
detail they must contain creates a risk that different legal advisers will
include different information in their accounting records. The risk that a
client’s privileged information might be exposed as a result of the exception
may therefore vary greatly. (2)          
Constitutional Analysis [78]                         
In our view, for the exception at issue in this
case, the answer must be yes. The exception is broad and undefined, as it
permits the seizure of any accounting record of a notary or a lawyer. As a
result of s. 231.7  of the ITA , the effect of the exception is stark.
Once a court finds that a document is an accounting record, it must order that
the document be disclosed regardless of whether it would be considered
privileged in the absence of the exception. In other words, for all practical
purposes, the exception removes from the court’s jurisdiction the determination
of whether accounting records in respect of which a requirement has been issued
are privileged. [79]                         
At the hearing in this Court, the AGC and the
CRA, no doubt aware of this problem, argued for the first time that judges
nonetheless have some “residual discretion” in such cases. They argued that a
judge considering a ministerial application for disclosure can exercise this
“discretion” to exclude privileged documents from the seizure of accounting records
of a notary or a lawyer. We reject this argument. It conflicts with the actual
wording of the accounting records exception and with the meaning of
s. 231.7 . Neither of those provisions mentions such a “residual
discretion”. The definition of “solicitor-client privilege” in s. 232(1) 
results, rather, in a complete abrogation of professional secrecy in respect of
one class of documents, namely the accounting records of notaries and lawyers. [80]                         
To determine whether an abrogation of
professional secrecy in the context of a seizure is constitutional, a court
must consider what characterizes professional secrecy as a substantive right.
More specifically, the third factor of the substantive rule from Descôteaux
is of decisive importance in such a case. According to Lamer J., when
a law authorizes someone to do something that might interfere with the right to
confidentiality that results from professional secrecy, “the decision to do so
and the choice of means of exercising that authority should be determined with
a view to not interfering with it except to the extent absolutely necessary
in order to achieve the ends sought by the enabling legislation”
(p. 875 (emphasis added)). [81]                         
Thus, a legislative provision cannot, by
abrogating professional secrecy, authorize the state to gain access to
information that is normally protected, where the abrogation is not absolutely
necessary to achieve the purposes of the legislation. If the provision does so,
the seizure will be unreasonable and contrary to s. 8  of the Charter .
This rule prevents the state from giving itself, with a clear intention to
create a statutory exception to professional secrecy, the authority to gain
untrammelled access to documents that are normally privileged even though the
state’s operations are facilitated only minimally by access to the information. [82]                         
This is consistent with the emphasis frequently
placed by the Court on ensuring that professional secrecy always remains as
close to absolute as possible (McClure, at para. 35). Limits on
professional secrecy must take into account the duty recognized by the Court to
minimize impairments (Maranda, at para. 14; Goodis, at
para. 24). This Court’s decisions have narrowly circumscribed the
situations in which and the reasons for which professional secrecy may be set
aside without the client’s consent. In every case, professional secrecy will be
set aside only if the court is of the view that it is absolutely necessary to
do so, and only for a very specific purpose. Even then, the exceptions must be
precisely defined. [85]                         
It is true that in the companion case, Thompson,
the Minister argues that, when a requirement is sent to a lawyer whose own tax
liability is the subject of an assessment, access to clients’ names may be
necessary in order for the amounts owed by the lawyer to be collected and for
the Minister to fulfil the Minister’s duties under the ITA .
Nevertheless, we note that, in the absence of a definition of “accounting
record of a lawyer” in the ITA , it is impossible to distinguish an
accounting record that contains only a client’s name and the amount the client
owes the lawyer from one that contains much more information about the nature
of the activities a lawyer has engaged in for a client under a mandate for
professional services. When the Minister requests access to a lawyer’s
accounting records by means of a requirement, all such records must be
disclosed, even if they contain information that will not help the CRA collect
the amounts it is owed. [86]                         
In closing, we would add that a conclusion that
the exception is valid could have unfortunate consequences that transcend this
appeal. The ITA sets only a vague limit on what the CRA can do in
requesting access to information by means of a requirement: the information
must be necessary “for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement
of this Act” (s. 231.2(1) ). There appear to be no restrictions on sharing
the information with government agencies and other public players as long as
the CRA does so for a purpose related to the administration or enforcement of
the ITA . D.          
Section 1  Analysis [88]                         
Section 1  of the Charter  “guarantees
the rights and freedoms set out in [the Charter ]”. It provides that this
guarantee is “subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can
be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society”. [89]                         
In order to justify the infringement of rights
guaranteed by s. 8  of the Charter , the appellants must show that
the impugned provisions of the ITA  have a pressing and substantial
objective and that the means chosen are proportional to that objective. A law
is proportionate if (1) the means adopted are rationally connected to the
objective; (2) it is minimally impairing of the rights in question; and
(3) there is proportionality between the deleterious and salutary effects
of the law (Carter v. Canada (Attorney General), 2015 SCC 5, [2015]
1 S.C.R. 331, at para. 94). In Lavallee, the Court wrote that “if,
as here, the violation of s. 8  is found to consist of an unjustifiable
impairment of the privacy interest protected by that section, everything else
aside, it is difficult to conceive that the infringement could survive the minimal
impairment part of the Oakes test” (para. 46). [90]                         
In the instant case, it is clear that the ITA 
has a pressing and substantial objective, namely the collection of taxes.
Moreover, there is a logical and direct connection between the collection of
taxes and the requirement scheme. Requirements enable the CRA to obtain
information about taxpayers so that it can ensure that the information they
have provided it is accurate. [91]                         
However, the requirement scheme in relation to
notaries and lawyers fails at the minimal impairment stage of the justification
analysis. For the reasons given above, the statutory provisions in question —
ss. 231.2(1)  and 231.7  and the accounting records exception set out in
s. 232(1)  of the ITA  — do not minimally impair the right to
professional secrecy. As a result, they cannot be saved under s. 1 . VI.       
Remedy and Conclusion [92]                         
We conclude that the requirement scheme in the ITA 
infringes s. 8  of the Charter  and must be declared to be
unconstitutional insofar as it applies to notaries and lawyers in Quebec. The
appropriate remedy in this case will be to “read down” the statutory provisions
at issue, as the Court did in FLS, so as to exclude notaries and lawyers
from the scope of their operation (para. 63). Since the Court has already
found that the requirement scheme is generally constitutional insofar as
requirements are sent to taxpayers (McKinlay Transport), it is neither
necessary nor appropriate to find that the entire scheme is invalid. We
consider it more appropriate simply to prohibit its being applied to notaries
and lawyers in their capacity as legal advisers. [93]                         
We would therefore declare s. 231.2(1)  of
the ITA , which authorizes the Minister to send requirements, and s.
231.7  of the ITA , which authorizes the Minister to apply to a court to
follow up on a requirement, to be unconstitutional, and inapplicable to
notaries and lawyers in their capacity as legal advisers. [95]                         
Finally, in our view, it is not appropriate to
establish a list of documents that are prima facie protected by
professional secrecy. Whether a document is protected by professional secrecy
depends not on the type of document it is but, rather, on its content and on
what it might reveal about the relationship of and communications between a
client and his or her legal adviser. [96]                         
The appeal is therefore dismissed with costs.
The constitutional questions set out in para. 24 of our reasons are
answered as follows: 1.                 
No answer is required. 2.                 
No answer is required. 4.                 
No. APPENDIX   Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th
Supp .) Requirement to provide documents or information  231.2 (1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Act, the Minister may, subject to subsection (2), for any
purpose related to the administration or enforcement of this Act (including the
collection of any amount payable under this Act by any person), of a listed
international agreement or, for greater certainty, of a tax treaty with another
country, by notice served personally or by registered or certified mail,
require that any person provide, within such reasonable time as is stipulated
in the notice,  (a) any information or additional
information, including a return of income or a supplementary return; or  (b) any document.  Unnamed persons  (2) The Minister shall not impose on any
person (in this section referred to as a “third party”) a requirement under
subsection 231.2(1)  to provide information or any document relating to one or
more unnamed persons unless the Minister first obtains the authorization of a
judge under subsection 231.2(3).  Judicial authorization  (3) A judge of the Federal Court may, on
application by the Minister and subject to any conditions that the judge
considers appropriate, authorize the Minister to impose on a third party a
requirement under subsection (1) relating to an unnamed person or more than one
unnamed person (in this section referred to as the “group”) if the judge is
satisfied by information on oath that  (a) the person or group is
ascertainable; and  (b) the requirement is made to verify
compliance by the person or persons in the group with any duty or obligation
under this Act.  (c) and (d) [Repealed, 1996, c. 21,
s. 58(1)]  (4) to (6) [Repealed, 2013, c. 33,
s. 21]  Compliance
order  231.7 (1) On summary application by the
Minister, a judge may, notwithstanding subsection 238(2), order a person to
provide any access, assistance, information or document sought by the Minister
under section 231.1  or 231.2  if the judge is satisfied that  (a) the person was required under
section 231.1  or 231.2  to provide the access, assistance, information or
document and did not do so; and  (b) in the case of information or a
document, the information or document is not protected from disclosure by
solicitor-client privilege (within the meaning of subsection 232(1) ).  Notice required  (2) An application under subsection (1)
must not be heard before the end of five clear days from the day the notice of
application is served on the person against whom the order is sought.  Judge may impose conditions  (3) A judge making an order under
subsection (1) may impose any conditions in respect of the order that the judge
considers appropriate.  Contempt of court  (4) If a person fails or refuses to
comply with an order, a judge may find the person in contempt of court and the
person is subject to the processes and the punishments of the court to which
the judge is appointed.  Appeal  (5) An order by a judge under subsection
(1) may be appealed to a court having appellate jurisdiction over decisions of
the court to which the judge is appointed. An appeal does not suspend the
execution of the order unless it is so ordered by a judge of the court to which
the appeal is made.  Definitions  232 (1) In this section,      solicitor-client privilege means the
right, if any, that a person has in a superior court in the province where the
matter arises to refuse to disclose an oral or documentary communication on the
ground that the communication is one passing between the person and the person’s
lawyer in professional confidence, except that for the purposes of this section
an accounting record of a lawyer, including any supporting voucher or cheque,
shall be deemed not to be such a communication.  Offences and punishment  238 (1) Every person who has failed to
file or make a return as and when required by or under this Act or a regulation
or who has failed to comply with subsection 116(3), 127(3.1) or (3.2), 147.1(7)
or 153(1), any of sections 230 to 232, 244.7 and 267 or a regulation made under
subsection 147.1(18) or with an order made under subsection (2) is guilty of an
offence and, in addition to any penalty otherwise provided, is liable on
summary conviction to  (a) a fine of not less than $1,000 and
not more than $25,000; or  (b) both the fine described in paragraph
238(1) (a) and imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months.                      Appeal
dismissed with costs.                     Solicitor
for the appellants: Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa and Montréal.                     Solicitors for the respondent Chambre des notaires du
Québec: Lavery, de Billy, Montréal.                     Solicitors for the respondent Barreau du Québec: Shadley
Battista Costom, Montréal.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Advocates’ Society: Norton Rose Fulbright Canada,
Montréal.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Canadian Bar Association: Osler, Hoskin &
Harcourt, Montréal.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Federation of Law Societies of Canada: Torys,
Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association: Stockwoods, Toronto.   