Toronto College Park Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 183  Toronto College Park Limited                                                          Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Toronto College Park Ltd. v. Canada  File No.:  25559.  1997:  December 2; 1998:  February 12.  Present:  Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci, Major and
Bastarache JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal    Held:  The appeal should be allowed.    Cases Cited  Followed:  Canderel
Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 147, rev’g [1995] 2 F.C. 232; referred
to: Ikea Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 196; Cummings v. The
Queen, 81 D.T.C. 5207; M.N.R. v. Tower Investment Inc.,
[1972] F.C. 454.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, ss. 9(1), 18(1)(a), (9) [ad. 1980-81-82-83, c. 48, s. 9],  (a)
[idem], (b) [idem].  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal,
[1996] 3 F.C. 858, 96 D.T.C. 6407, [1996] 3 C.T.C. 94, 199 N.R. 147, [1996]
F.C.J. No. 893 (QL), allowing an appeal from a judgment of Simpson J. (1993),
94 D.T.C. 6172, [1994] 1 C.T.C. 194, 71 F.T.R. 30, [1993] F.C.J. No. 1275
(QL).  Appeal allowed.  Michael E. Barrack and Thomas
B. Akin, for the appellant.  J. S. Gill and Elizabeth
Chasson, for the respondent. The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Iacobucci J. -- This
appeal was heard together with those in Canderel Ltd. v. Canada, [1998]
1 S.C.R. 147, and Ikea Ltd. v. Canada, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 196, and raises
precisely the same issue as that in Canderel: for income taxation
purposes, may a tenant inducement payment (“TIP”) be deducted from the
taxpayer’s income entirely in the year made or incurred, or must it be
amortized over the term of the lease to which it relates?  Applying the
reasoning in Canderel to this case, I have concluded that it was open to
the taxpayer to deduct the entire payment immediately.  I.  Facts  2                                  
In 1983, Toronto College Park Ltd. (“TCPL”), a corporation engaged in
the business of development, sale, and rental of real estate, suffered start-up
rental losses in the amount of $4,853,000 in respect of a new commercial
building which it owned in Toronto.  The building was ready for occupancy but
no tenants had been secured.  Also in 1983, TCPL made twoTIPs: one in the
amount of $3,569,419, which was paid directly to Maclean Hunter Ltd. and
expressed to be for the purpose of leasehold improvements (although there was
no obligation on Maclean Hunter to use it for that purpose), and another in the
amount of $1,723,289, paid to contractors employed by the Ministry of
Government Services of Ontario (the “Ministry”), for the benefit of the
Ministry.  It was agreed by the parties that the payments were made in the
ordinary course of TCPL’s business and for the purpose of earning income. 
Certain other payments and financial concessions were made to these recipients
as well, including rent-free periods and lease pick-up costs, and TIPs were
also made to other, smaller tenants.  3                                  
TCPL deducted the entire cost of the TIPs from its 1983 business income,
but its tax return was reassessed to disallow the deduction on the basis that
the payments were capital in nature.  It was later conceded by the Minister of
National Revenue (the “Minister”) that the payments were indeed on income
account, but the Minister then took the position that they were not deductible
in the year paid and instead should have been deferred and amortized over the
life of the respective leases: in the case of Maclean Hunter, a 25-year
amortization, reflecting the agreed-upon 20-year lease plus a five-year renewal
period, and in the case of the Ministry, a period of 11 years and five months,
the entire term of its lease.  TCPL appealed the reassessment to the Federal
Court--Trial Division, arguing that it was entitled to deduct the payments in
full from its business income in the year in which they were made.  4                                  
The Federal Court--Trial Division allowed TCPL’s appeal, but this
decision was reversed by a unanimous panel of the Federal Court of Appeal.  5                                  
II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  Income Tax Act, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63 (now R.S.C.,
1985, c. 1 (5th Supp .)) 9. (1)   Subject to this Part, a taxpayer's
income for a taxation year from a business or property is his profit therefrom
for the year.  18. (1) In computing the income of a
taxpayer from a business or property no deduction shall be made in respect of  (a)  an outlay or
expense except to the extent that it was made or incurred by the taxpayer for
the purpose of gaining or producing income from the business or property;                                                                     .
. .  (9) Notwithstanding
any other provision of this Act,  (a) in computing a
taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from a business or property (other than
income from a business computed in accordance with the method authorized by
subsection 28(1)), no deduction shall be made in respect of an outlay or
expense to the extent that it can reasonably be regarded as having been made or
incurred  (i)     as consideration
for services to be rendered after the end of the year,  (ii)    as, on account or
in lieu of payment of, or in satisfaction of, interest, taxes ..., rent or
royalty in respect of a period after the end of the year, or  (iii)   as consideration
for insurance in respect of a period after the end of the year ...;  (b) such portion of
each outlay or expense made or incurred as would, but for paragraph (a),
have been deductible in computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year shall be
deductible in computing his income for the subsequent year to which it can
reasonably be considered to relate. . . .  III.  Judicial History  1.  Federal Court--Trial Division (1993), 71
F.T.R. 30  6                                  
Simpson J. began by reviewing the decision in Cummings v. The Queen,
81 D.T.C. 5207, where the Federal Court of Appeal decided that a lease pick-up
payment made by the taxpayer was made on income account and constituted a
“running expense” which was fully deductible in the year in which it was made. 
Also in that decision, Heald J.A. referred to certain TIPs as analogous to
lease pick-ups.  Simpson J. rejected the Minister’s contention that Cummings
was predicated on the impossibility of matching the payments there considered
with future lease revenues because the property in question had been sold, and
that the case should therefore serve as a precedent only in situations where
matching cannot occur, noting that nowhere in his reasons did Heald J.A. make
any reference to the impossibility of matching as a factor.  As for the
argument that Cummings should be restricted only to lease pick-up cases,
Simpson J. acknowledged that the comments regarding other types of TIPs were obiter
dicta, but identified three general propositions for which she took  Cummings
to stand: (1) TIPs may in some cases be classified as running expenses; (2)
running expenses may, in some cases, be deducted in the year of the expense;
and (3) the matching principle does not apply to running expenses.  7                                  
Thus, Simpson J. was of the opinion that the proper approach in this and
similar cases was first to determine whether the expense in question was a
running expense, which could not be allocated to a specific item of revenue. 
If so, then it must be decided whether the expense was on current account or
whether the benefit extended beyond the year of payment even though it could
not be matched.  If it so extended, then the taxpayer would have the option
either to deduct the expense from income in the year it was made, or to defer
the deduction if such deduction were in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles (“GAAP”) and would yield a truer income picture.  8                                  
In the circumstances of this case, Simpson J. found the TIPs to be
running expenses, as there was no evidence that the final rent charged included
specific amounts attributable to such payments.  Further, because their primary
objective, the inducement of tenants to rent space in the building, was
achieved in the year of the expenses, the TIPs were to be considered current
expenses.  Therefore, because she saw no obligation imposed either by the case
law or by the Income Tax Act (the “Act”) to defer the deduction of a
current running expense, Simpson J. allowed the complete deduction of the expense
in the 1983 taxation year.  9                                  
Although the parties had agreed that no argument would be directed at
which method of accounting provided a truer picture of income, Simpson J. found
that “the search for a truer picture is not relevant in the case of a running
expense which the taxpayer does not elect to defer”.  2.  Federal
Court of Appeal (Robertson J.A., for the court), [1996] 3 F.C. 858  10                              
Robertson J.A. began by noting that two years after the trial decision
in the instant case, the Federal Court of Appeal rendered its decision in Canada
v. Canderel Ltd., [1995] 2 F.C. 232. In that case, it was decided that TIPs
are not running expenses, as they relate to a particular source of
income and, therefore, can and must be matched to such income for tax
purposes.  He pointed out at para. 2 that in Canderel, the court
distinguished Cummings, supra, “on the basis that the
characterization therein of a lease-pick up payment as a running expense was obiter”.  11                              
The Minister argued that, applying the law as stated in Canderel,
TCPL was clearly not entitled to deduct the entire amount of the TIPs in the
year in which they were paid. In response to TCPL’s argument that Canderel
was wrongly decided because the effect of s. 18(9) of the Act (which requires
the amortization of certain prepaid expenses but not TIPs) was not considered,
Robertson J.A. began by considering TCPL’s understanding of the law as it stood
before Canderel.  TCPL had maintained that prior to this decision,
taxpayers were not, as a general rule, required to defer and amortize current
expenses, that the general rule was one of full deductibility in the year the
expense is incurred and made, and that this general rule was now codified in s.
18(9), which also enumerates specific exceptions thereto.  However, Robertson
J.A. rejected the submission that if amortization of TIPs were automatically
required under Canderel, s. 18(9) would become redundant.  Specifically,
he disputed the suggestion that the provision was intended to codify this
“general rule”, finding instead that it was a specific clarification by
Parliament of certain prepaid expenses which are required to be amortized.  12                              
Additionally, in the view of Robertson J.A. at para. 10:  . . . it does not follow that the promulgation of a judicial
exception to a rule has the effect of rendering the statutory exceptions
redundant.  At most, it could be said that Canderel had the effect of
adding another exception to the statutory list of expenses which require
amortization.  13                              
Robertson J.A. acknowledged that, if TCPL’s argument was premised on the
assumption that the prepaid expenses specified in s. 18(9) and the TIPs here at
issue fell into the same category, i.e., “non-running expenses”, then it could
be argued that Canderel therefore stood for the proposition that
expenses which can be matched must be amortized and, in this light, that
there would have been no need for s. 18(9) to list specific expenses which met
this criterion.  However, he did not accept that the expenses dealt with by the
statutory provision could be classified as non-running expenses.  Indeed, in
his view (at para. 11), “simply because an expense can be amortized does not
mean it can be matched” and the expenses enumerated in s. 18(9), prepaid rents
and prepaid service contracts, were good examples of non-matchable expenses
which could nonetheless be amortized.  Accordingly, he found that the decision
in Canderel did not render s. 18(9) meaningless.  14                              
As to the argument that the Minister failed to establish that the
deferral and amortization of the TIPs provided a truer picture of TCPL’s net
income than immediate deduction, a burden of proof which was said to arise from
the Minister’s initial characterization of the payments as capital expenses for
the purposes of the reassessment, Robertson J.A. observed that the analysis in Canderel
did not require a determination of which of the various acceptable options
under GAAP was most accurate.  Rather, it established that if an expense can be
matched with a specific source of revenue, then it must be amortized.  In that
case, the court held that TIPs could be so matched and, according to Desjardins
J.A. at p. 270, that “[t]he amortization method is the only method acceptable
for income tax purposes”.  This proposition was wholly unaffected by any expert
evidence as to which would be the preferable method of accounting under GAAP,
as the calculation of “profit” for income tax purposes is a question of law.  15                              
Finally, Robertson J.A. held that in amortizing the TIP paid to Maclean
Hunter over the period of its lease, the relevant period would be the initial
period of the lease, not including the renewal period.  Because the option to
renew was within the exclusive control of the tenant, it would be mere
speculation as to whether the renewal option would ever be exercised and
therefore the TIP should be matched with revenues only for the term during
which the tenant had an existing obligation to pay rent.  16                              
Therefore, the appeal was allowed and the matter remitted back to the
Minister for reconsideration and reassessment.  IV.  Issue  17                              
Was it open to the taxpayer to deduct the entire amount of the TIPs from
its taxable business income in 1983, or should the payments have been amortized
over the terms of the leases to which they related?  V.  Analysis  1.  General
Principles of Profit Computation 18                              
In Canderel, I set out an analysis of the general method to be followed
by taxpayers in computing their income for a particular taxation year.  I do
not propose to repeat that discussion here. For ease of reference, however, I
reproduce here the summary provided therein at para. 53 of the general
principles of profit computation:  (1)       The determination of profit is a
question of law.  (2)       The profit of a business for a taxation
year is to be determined by setting against the revenues from the business for
that year the expenses incurred in earning said income: M.N.R. v. Irwin,
supra, Associated Investors, supra.  (3)       In seeking to ascertain profit, the goal
is to obtain an accurate picture of the taxpayer’s profit for the given year.  (4)       In ascertaining profit, the taxpayer is
free to adopt any method which is not inconsistent with  (a)  the provisions of the Income Tax Act;  (b) established case law principles or “rules of law”; and  (c) well-accepted business principles.  (5)       Well-accepted business principles, which
include but are not limited to the formal codification found in GAAP, are not
rules of law but interpretive aids.  To the extent that they may influence the
calculation of income, they will do so only on a case-by-case basis, depending
on the facts of the taxpayer’s financial situation.  (6)       On reassessment, once the taxpayer has
shown that he has provided an accurate picture of income for the year, which is
consistent with the Act, the case law, and well-accepted business principles,
the onus shifts to the Minister to show either that the  figure provided does not
represent an accurate picture, or that another method of computation would
provide a more accurate picture.  [Emphasis in original.]  19                              
In Canderel, this Court set aside the Federal Court of Appeal’s
decision in Canderel because of its inappropriate treatment of the
matching principle of accounting as a rule of law.  As this Court made clear in
its reasons, it is for Parliament, not the courts, to make such rules of law. 
Therefore, the analytical framework employed by the Court of Appeal in the
instant case, to the extent that it applied the matching principle without
regard to its actual effect on the portrayal of the taxpayer’s income, was
clearly erroneous.  The crucial question in such a case where the method of profit
computation is at issue is whether the method adopted by the taxpayer yielded
an accurate picture of its profit for tax purposes.  If so, then the onus
shifts to the Minister to prove the propriety of the alternative method
contended for, as above.  20                              
In light of this analysis, then, I now turn to consider the particular
circumstances of the instant appeal.  2.  Application
of General Principles to this Case  21                              
As in Canderel, it is clear that the method of computation
adopted by TCPL in this case was not inconsistent with any express provision of
the Act, and was also in accordance with the treatment of TIPs in the case law:
see Cummings, supra; see also M.N.R. v. Tower
Investment Inc., [1972] F.C. 454 (T.D.).  22                              
As to the question of conformity with well-accepted business principles,
it is, in my opinion, determinative that the trial judge in the instant case
found that the primary purpose of the TIPs was to achieve a benefit which was
realized entirely in 1983: the inducement of prospective tenants to lease space
in the building.  This being the case, and I can find no reason, on the
evidence, to dispute this finding, the amortization of the payments over the
terms of the various leases would seem to make little sense.  The most that can
be said in favour of the matching principle is that in cases where expenses can
be related directly to specific items of future revenue, it may yield a more
accurate picture of income to offset the expenses against the future revenue,
notwithstanding that the actual expenditures were made or incurred in another
year.  This is not always the case, however, and the matching principle
certainly should not be applied in a case such as the present one, where no
linkage to future revenue has been found.  23                              
Indeed, this is even a stronger case for immediate deduction than Canderel,
where the trial judge found several different benefits yielded by the TIPs,
some of which were realized in the year of the expenditure and some over the
term of the lease.  Matching is simply not an issue when all benefits related
to an expenditure are realized in the year in which the expenditure is made.  24                              
In light of the decision of this Court in Canderel, I obviously
cannot agree with the Court of Appeal’s holding that the matching principle is
to be applied irrespective of accounting evidence or of the search for an
accurate picture of the taxpayer’s income.  With respect, the accuracy of the
income picture is the only issue to be considered, once it has been
established that the method used by the taxpayer to arrive at this picture is
consistent with the provisions of the Act, with the judicial interpretation
thereof, and with the well-accepted business principles, including but not
limited to GAAP, which are found to be applicable in the particular case. 
While accounting evidence is not determinative of the legal question of profit,
it is certainly relevant and may in many cases be highly persuasive.  The
approach taken by the Court of Appeal is, in my view, unsupported by any
previous authority other than its own decision in Canderel, which has
now been set aside.  25                              
I have not been persuaded by the Minister that the amortization of the
TIPs would present even as accurate a picture of income as the method adopted
by TCPL, let alone a more accurate picture.   Therefore, I conclude that
TCPL was entitled to deduct the payments entirely in 1983, the year in which
they were made.  26                              
In light of this conclusion, it is unnecessary to consider the question
of what the appropriate term of amortization would be.  However, I would
nonetheless indicate my agreement with the holding of Robertson J.A. in this
regard.  Because the renewal period was speculative and exercisable at the sole
option of the tenant, it would not be proper to include it as part of the
period over which the TIP was to be amortized.  Only the initial term of the
lease, to which both parties were contractually bound, should be taken into
account for the purposes of amortization.  VI.  Disposition  27                              
For the foregoing reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the
judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal, and restore the judgment of the
Federal Court--Trial Division.  The appellant shall have its costs throughout.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  McCarthy Tétrault, Toronto.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.    