 Canadian Marconi v. R., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 522  Canadian Marconi Company                                                            Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Respondent  indexed as: canadian marconi v. r.  File No.: 18959.  1986: May 21, 22; 1986: November 6.  Present: Dickson C.J. and Beetz, McIntyre, Chouinard and
Wilson JJ.   on appeal from the federal court of appeal                       Held: The appeal should
be allowed.                     In the case of a corporate taxpayer, case law has
established a rebuttable presumption that income received from or generated by
an activity done in pursuit of an object set out in the corporation's
constating documents is income from a business. This presumption should apply
because appellant had a specific "investment business" object.
Indeed, even if that object were not expressed, a broader form of the presumption
should apply. Appellant was incorporated to do business, and there was no
reason why any income it earned should not be considered as prima facie
income from a business.                     The question whether appellant's income was from
business or property is a matter of fact. In making this determination, the
relevant inquiry is not into the taxpayer's business strategy but rather into
whether the taxpayer was in fact in the investment business.                     "Canadian manufacturing and processing
profits", defined in s. 125.1, includes a portion of "all amounts,
each of which is the income of the corporation ... from an active business
..." as determined by regulation. Section 5200 of the Regulations defines
that portion as being a portion of the corporation's "adjusted business
income", which is the amount by which income from an active business
carried on in Canada exceeds the loss from an active business carried on in
Canada. "Active business" is nowhere restricted to a manufacturing or
processing business. If such restriction were intended, Parliament would have
to express itself clearly to that effect.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Act respecting Canadian Marconi
Company, S.C. 1935, c. 70, s. 3.  Act to incorporate the
Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company of Canada, Limited, S.C. 1903, c. 149.  Business Corporations Act,
1982, S.O. 1982, c. 4, s. 15.        Ontario Companies Act, R.S.O. 1897, c. 191.   Authors Cited                        L. Yves Fortier, Q.C.,
and Jules Charette, for the appellant.                     Ian MacGregor
and Gaston Jorré, for the respondent.                     The judgment of the Court was delivered by   1. The Facts      2. The Courts Below   3. The Issue    You cannot acquire gain by
means of a company except by carrying on some business or other, and I have no
doubt if any one formed a company or association for the purpose of acquiring
gain, he must form it for the purpose of carrying on a business by which gain
is to be obtained.                                                                      ...    9.                In Canada, the presumption was employed
by Duff J. (as he then was) in the case of Anderson Logging Co. v. The King,
[1925] S.C.R. 45. Duff J., in a passage often cited by subsequent authority,
said at p. 56:                     The
sole raison d'être of a public company is to have a business and to
carry it on. If the transaction in question belongs to a class of profit making
operations contemplated by the memorandum of association, prima facie,
at all events, the profit derived from it is a profit derived from the business
of the company.    ... may take or otherwise
acquire and hold shares, debentures or other securities of any other company
having objects altogether or in part similar to those of the Company, or
carrying on any business capable of being conducted so as, directly or
indirectly, to benefit the Company, and to sell or otherwise deal with the
same.  Thus, CMC had a specific "investment business" object and the
traditional rebuttable presumption, in my view, applies in favour of its
investment income's being characterized as income from a business. Indeed, even
if CMC's investment objects were not expressed, I believe that a broader form
of the presumption should apply. In a general sense CMC was incorporated to
earn income by doing business. There is no reason why any income earned by it
should not be considered as prima facie income from a business so long
as it is recognized that the presumption is a rebuttable one. This approach has
commended itself to courts even where no express object was contained in the
constating documents: see, for example, Supreme Theatres Ltd. v. The Queen,
81 D.T.C. 5136 (F.C.T.D.), and Fontaine Watch Co. v. Minister of National
Revenue, supra.    (1) the funds were derived from the sale of the broadcasting division
and were set aside for the purchase of new capital assets;  (2) the considerable activity involved in purchasing the investments
were "a necessary consequence of the need to hold investments in liquid
form, in the form of paper that could be quickly converted into cash"; and  (3) few employees were involved and not a great deal of staff time was
expended.  13.              I shall deal with the first two together
since they are both premised on the relevance of the taxpayer's business
strategy. The assertion is, as I understand it, that the taxpayer's business
strategy was to hold these funds as a temporary investment and that any
investment activity was necessarily a result of that business strategy. But is
the taxpayer's business strategy relevant to the issue before us? It seems to
me that it is not.  14.              The commercial reality in this case is
that the taxpayer, perhaps unwillingly and contrary to its business strategy,
has been compelled to enter the investment business rather than the electronic
manufacturing or broadcasting business. The fact that the taxpayer might prefer
or hope to be in the manufacturing business and not the investment business
does not, however, appear to me to be relevant. The relevant inquiry is whether
in fact he is in the investment business.    I would respectfully adopt the reasoning of Locke J. and Spence J.
in these two cases.   17.              It seems to me, therefore, that two of the
"overriding considerations" cited by the Court of Appeal are not
relevant considerations in law. The third, while relevant, is not of sufficient
weight to offset the effect of the presumption and the large scale investment
activity of CMC during the years in question.   ... the courts require
that, in order to adversely affect a citizen's right, whether as a taxpayer or
otherwise, the Legislature must do so expressly. Truncation of such rights may
be legislatively unintended or even accidental, but the courts must look for
express language in the statute before concluding that these rights have been
reduced.  I would adopt and apply this same principle of construction to this
case.  4. Disposition   Appeal allowed with costs                     Solicitors for the appellant: Ogilvy, Renault,
Montréal.                     Solicitor for the respondent: Frank Iacobucci,
Ottawa.   