Supreme Court of Canada Fee et al. v. Bradshaw et al., [1982] 1 S.C.R. 609 Date: 1982-05-10 Harvey Fee and
Affiliated Offices Ltd. Appellants; and M.J. Bradshaw, H.O.
Merret, R.W. Arbuckle, H.E. Garland, S.F. Hobart, J.S. Hodgson and Bud Cullen Respondents. File No.: 15179. 1982: March 2; 1982: May 10. Present: Laskin C.J. and Dickson, Beetz,
Estey, Mclntyre, Chouinard and Lamer JJ. ON APPEAL FROM THE FEDERAL COURT OF APPEAL Injunction—Income tax—Offences—Injunction to
prohibit filing Minister’s certificate as evidence—Jurisdiction of Federal
Court Trial Division—Injunction denied—No remedy under s. 18 of Federal
Court Act—Federal Court Act, R.S.C 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10, ss. 2, 18—Income
Tax Act, 1970-71-72 (Can.), c. 63, s. 244(4). Appellants filed in the Trial Division of the
Federal Court an application for an injunction to prohibit respondents from
filing as evidence at the trial of appellants in the Court of Sessions of the
Peace the certificate of the Minister of National Revenue provided for by
s. 244(4) of the Income Tax Act. Appellants argued that the date
given in the certificate as that on which evidence sufficient to justify the
prosecution came to the Minister’s knowledge was inaccurate. The application
was dismissed, as was the appeal by appellants to the Federal Court of Appeal. Held: The
appeal should be dismissed. The jurisdiction of the Trial Division of the
Federal Court under s. 18 of the Federal Court Act extends to “any
federal board, commission or other tribunal”. The filing of a certificate
stating the date on which evidence came to the Minister’s knowledge does not
constitute, either in the fact of filing the certificate or in the statement
which it contains, an administrative decision or the exercise of a
discretionary power by the Minister [Page 610] so as to make the definition of the words
“board, commission or other tribunal” in s. 2 of the Act applicable to
him. The application for an injunction is accordingly dismissed, as in the case
at bar there is no remedy under s. 18. Sharp v. Wakefield, [1891] A.C. 173; Roncarelli v. Duplessis, [1959] S.C.R. 121; City
of Hamilton v. Hamilton Harbour Commissioners (1972), 27 D.L.R. (3d) 385; B.
v. Department of Manpower and Immigration, [1975] F.C. 602, referred to. APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court
of Appeal affirming a judgment of the Trial Division, 76 DTC 6279, denying an
injunction. Appeal dismissed. Pierre Fournier and Gérald Dugré, for the
appellants. Jacques Ouellet, Q.C., for the
respondents. English version of the judgment of the Court
delivered by CHOUINARD J.—Appellants’ action was dismissed by
the Trial Division of the Federal Court and the Federal Court of Appeal; they
are asking this Court to issue an injunction [TRANSLATION] “against respondents
to prohibit the filing in the Court of Sessions of the Peace in the matter
between appellants and Her Majesty of any certificate, or alleged certificate,
of the Minister pursuant to s. 244(4) of the Income Tax Act”, 1970-71-72
(Can.), c. 63. Respondents are the Minister of National Revenue
at the time, Mr. Bud Cullen, and employees in his department. No
distinction between them is necessary for the purposes of this appeal. Section 244(4) of the Income Tax Act (supra)
reads: (4) An information or complaint under the
provisions of the Criminal Code relating to summary convictions, in
respect of an offence under this Act, may be laid or made on or before a day 5
years from the time when the matter of the information or complaint arose or
within one year from the day on which evidence, sufficient in the opinion of
the Minister to justify a prosecution for the offence, came to his knowledge,
and the Minister’s certificate as to the day on which such evidence came to his
knowledge is conclusive evidence thereof. [Page 611] This section provides in cases of a
proceeding on summary conviction for two possible periods of prescription,
namely five years from the time when the matter of the information or complaint
arose, or one year from the day on which evidence sufficient to justify a
prosecution came to the Minister’s knowledge. There is no such prescription in
the case of a prosecution on indictment. In the case at bar, however, since the
proceeding was by summary conviction, the section is of great importance
to appellants. The acts charged go back in one case to 1968 and in the other
case fall between 1963 and 1971, whereas the informations are dated November 3,
1975. The first information, which comprises two counts against appellant Fee,
reads: 1. On or about April 30, 1968, made a false
or deceptive statement in his return of income for the 1967 taxation year
pursuant to the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952, ch. 148, by omitting to
declare income in the said return for a sum of $55,170.37 for the said taxation
year, committing an offence contrary to the provisions of Section 239(1)(a) of
the Income Tax Act; 2. On or about April 30, 1968, did wilfully
evade the payment of taxes imposed by the Income Tax Act, R.S.C. 1952,
ch. 148, for the 1967 taxation year, by omitting to declare income in his
return of the said, taxation year in the sum of $55,170.37, thereby evading the
payment of taxes of an amount of $16,731.78, committing an offence contrary to
Section 239(1)(d) of the Income Tax Act. The second information applicable to the two appellants
is worded as follows: Between May 1st, 1963 and June 25, 1971,
did wilfully evade the payment of taxes imposed by the Income Tax Act, R.S.C.
1952, ch. 148, for the taxation years 1964 to 1971 inclusively, by
omitting to declare in the returns of income of Affiliated Offices Ltd., for
the said taxation years, a total income of $132,071.00, thereby evading the
payment of taxes in the amount of $46,665.00, committing an offence contrary to
Section 239(1)(d) of the Income Tax Act. It will be seen that if the five-year
prescription applies, the first information is clearly prescribed and the
second is prescribed for acts prior to November 3, 1970. This is where the
certificate [Page 612] that the evidence came to the Minister’s
knowledge on May 6, 1975 becomes important, as it excludes all prescription in
both cases. According to appellants the date of May 6, 1975
is incorrect and the evidence came to the Minister’s knowledge about two years
before this date, and in fact much earlier if the knowledge of his employees
can be attributed to the Minister. Assuming that the certificate cannot be
challenged in the Court of Sessions of the Peace, since under s. 244(4) it
“is conclusive evidence thereof”, and further assuming that there can be no
recourse to the Federal Court of Appeal under s. 28 of the Federal
Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10, because it does not concern
“a decision or order, other than a decision or order of an administrative
nature not required by law to be made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis”,
appellants applied to the Trial Division of the Federal Court for an injunction
as stated above to prohibit respondents from filing the certificate in the
Court of Sessions of the Peace. Marceau J. of the Trial Division of the Federal
Court dismissed the application of appellants as follows, and I quote: Apart from the question of whether, on the
one hand, an injunction against the Minister is possible in the circumstances,
and on the other hand, whether an order of the kind desired would achieve the
intended purpose, I am of the opinion that this Court does not now have the
power to verify the truth of the facts attested to in the certificate, any more
than the Court of Sessions of the Peace will have at the time when it is
produced. Moreover, if it were possible to challenge the contents of such a
certificate, such a challenge should be made in the Court of Sessions of the
Peace, because its sole aim would be to make use of a defence against the
charge, namely that of prescription. The application for an injunction is
accordingly dismissed with costs. The appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal was
dismissed for the following reason: Even if it is assumed that the Trial
Division had the power to review the accuracy of the certificate of the Minister
in this case, we are of the view that the [Page 613] appellant’s application had nevertheless to
be dismissed since it is clear, in our opinion, that section 244(4) of the
Income Tax Act refers to the personal knowledge of the Minister and not to the
knowledge of the officers of his department[1]. In this Court appellants raised a number of
arguments which were conveniently summarized by counsel for the respondents as
follows: [TRANSLATION] (1) Do the provisions of s. 244(4) of
the Income Tax Act that “the Minister’s certificate as to the day on which such
evidence came to his knowledge is conclusive evidence thereof” have the effect
of divesting the courts of the power to hear evidence to the contrary, and if
necessary, to rule that the date stated therein is incorrect? (2) In the event that the Court decides
that the words in question do have the effect of divesting the courts of the
aforementioned power, does it follow that the section in question is
incompatible with the provisions of ss. 1(b) or 2(e) of the Canadian Bill of
Rights? (3) In the event that the Court finds that
s. 244(4) does not have the effect of divesting an accused person of the
right to dispute the accuracy of the facts stated in the Minister’s
certificate, is any such challenge exclusively a matter for the Court having
jurisdiction over the charges laid against the accused? (4) In the event that this is not the case,
does s. 18 of the Federal Court Act give that Court the necessary
jurisdiction to issue the type of injunction desired by appellants? In my opinion, before considering any other
argument the Court must dispose of No. 4, which is concerned with the very
existence in the case at bar of the remedy sought, as this will be conclusive
in the event of a negative answer. In this regard I [Page 614] am in agreement with the observations of counsel
for the appellants in his submission: [TRANSLATION] Section I—The first
question that arises is as to the jurisdiction of the Trial Division of the
Federal Court, even assuming that appellants were correct in maintaining that
the certificate (Exhibit P-2) constitutes a fraud and an abuse of power, and
that s. 244(4) either does not apply in view of the 1960 Canadian Bill of
Rights, or must be interpreted as limiting the scope of the words “conclusive
evidence” to the trial level court in which appellants are charged, namely to
the Court of Sessions of the Peace. Section 18 of the Federal Court Act reads: 18. The
Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction (a) to issue an injunction,
writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition, writ of mandamus or writ
of quo warranto, or grant declaratory relief, against any federal board,
commission or other tribunal; and (b) to hear and determine any
application or other proceeding for relief in the nature of relief contemplated
by paragraph (a), including any proceeding brought against the
Attorney General of Canada, to obtain relief against a federal board,
commission or other tribunal. The words “federal board, commission or other
tribunal” are defined in s. 2 of the said Act: “federal board, commission or other
tribunal” means any body or any person or persons having, exercising or
purporting to exercise jurisdiction or powers conferred by or under an Act of
the Parliament of Canada, other than any such body constituted or established
by or under a law of a province or any such person or persons appointed under
or in accordance with a law of a province or under section 96 of The
British North America Act, 1867; Appellants based two arguments on s. 18. Their first argument is as follows: [TRANSLATION] First, that by giving the
Trial Division of the Federal Court the superintending and reforming power over
federal agencies which traditionally belonged to the superior courts of the
various provinces, the federal Parliament has placed before the Federal Court [Page 615] the precedents relating to abuse of power,
even where a discretionary power is concerned,… In support of this first argument, appellants
cited the following passage from Mr. René Dussault in his Traité de
droit administratif canadien et québécois, 1974, vol. II, at pp. 1414 and
1415: [TRANSLATION] When a public officer or
agency in exercising discretionary powers acts arbitrarily, unfairly or with
discrimination toward a person or particular group of persons, or when the
action in question appears to be manifestly unreasonable, the courts do not
hesitate to intervene to rectify such abuses. … …the criteria for intervening are closely
bound up with the concept of ultra vires. Though not synonymous they are
nonetheless generally used in concert by the courts to demonstrate that there
was in a particular case a serious abuse of discretion which makes the act or
decision of the agency ultra vires. Appellants further cited with regard to the
exercise of a discretionary power the following dictum of Lord Halsbury,
in Sharp v. Wakefield, [1891] A.C. 173, at p. 179: It is to be, not arbitrary, vague and
fanciful, but legal and regular. And it must be exercised within the limit, to
which an honest man, competent to the discharge of his office ought to confine
himself. Appellants further referred to Roncarelli v.
Duplessis, [1959] S.C.R. 121, and the article by Stuart Thorn, Q.C., “Abuse
of Power by the Department of National Revenue and the Role of an Independent
Judicial System in its Regulation and Control”, in Special Lectures of the
Law Society of Upper Canada, 1979, at p. 531. The second argument is as follows: [TRANSLATION] …as the jurisdiction given to
the Federal Court of Appeal under s. 28(1) is in substance, though not in
name, the same jurisdiction formerly exercised by the superior court through
the prerogative writ, but circumscribed by the inclusion of the words “other
than a decision or order of an administrative nature not required by law to be
made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis”, s. 18 must be given a wider
meaning, to include review of administrative decisions which are not of a
judicial or quasi-judicial nature. [Page 616] They cited in support the following passage from
Professor Henri Brun in an article titled “La Mort de la “Discrétion
Administrative””, (1974), 52 Can. Bar. Rev. 426, at p. 429: [TRANSLATION] Review of decisions of a
judicial nature is to be exclusively a matter for the Federal Court of Appeal.
It is to be provided using a new procedure, which is undoubtedly intended to
replace all the prerogative writs formerly used for this purpose. On the other
hand, review of decisions of an administrative nature is a matter for the Trial
Division of the Federal Court, as probably is also any review that operates ab
initio. This review is intended to apply through the traditional writs. Appellants further referred to the decision of
the Court of Appeal of Ontario in City of Hamilton v. Hamilton Harbour
Commissioners (1972), 27 D.L.R. (3d) 385, and the judgment of the Trial
Division of the Federal Court in B. v. Department of Manpower and
Immigration, [1975] F.C. 602. Is the decision before the Court an
administrative decision or the exercise of a discretionary power, to use the
expressions employed by appellants and by the writers cited?—for that is what
s. 18 is applicable to. The jurisdiction of the Trial Division of the
Federal Court under that section extends to “any federal board, commission
or other tribunal”, that is, to “any body or any person or persons having,
exercising or purporting to exercise jurisdiction or powers conferred by or
under an Act of the Parliament of Canada”. Only to the extent that he makes an
administrative decision or exercises a discretionary power could it be argued
that the Minister of National Revenue is included in the definition of the
words “board, commission or other tribunal” as a person having jurisdiction or
powers conferred by or under an Act of the Parliament of Canada, and
consequently, that he may be subject to the superintending and reforming power
of the Trial Division. What is the situation in the case at bar? In order to answer the question presented we must
look at the act of the Minister, which [Page 617] allegedly constituted an administrative decision
or the exercise of an administrative power by him. Is that act the statement
itself, contained in the certificate, as to the day when the evidence came to
the Minister’s knowledge, or is it the act of filing the certificate in the
Court of Sessions of the Peace? The statement by appellants in their submission
that [TRANSLATION] “the purpose …is to prevent the use of a forgery” leads me
to think that the second alternative is applicable. I shall nonetheless
consider both possibilities. With regard to the first alternative, the
statement as to the day on which the evidence came to the Minister’s knowledge
cannot in any way be likened, in my opinion, to an administrative decision or
the exercise of a discretionary power. The Minister is not taking a decision
and he is not exercising a discretionary power. So far as he is concerned he is
testifying as to a fact. He does not have to take any position favouring one
course of conduct over another. He does not have to exercise any discretion in
determining when evidence came to his knowledge. It is a fact. He cannot alter
it to suit himself. As counsel for the respondents observed, [TRANSLATION] “He
is simply stating a fact.” Turning to the second alternative, here again
the Minister’s act of filing a certificate in the Court of Sessions of the
Peace does not in my opinion constitute either a decision of an administrative
nature or the exercise of a discretionary power. For the Minister, it is the
use of a mode of proof which is specifically authorized by the Act. Instead of
requiring the Minister to testify in each case, the Act provides that the
Minister may file a certificate which takes the place of testimony by him, as
is true in many other areas. It is a rule of the administration of evidence
which does not entail any administrative decision or exercise of a
discretionary power by the Minister. The fact that the Act also provides that
the certificate is “conclusive evidence” of the day on which the evidence came
to the Minister’s knowledge does not in any way alter the nature of the
latter’s act or acts. [Page 618] The filing of a certificate stating the date on
which evidence came to the Minister’s knowledge does not constitute, either in
the fact of filing the certificate or in the statement which it contains, an
administrative decision or the exercise of a discretionary power by the
Minister so as to make the definition of the words “federal board, commission or
other tribunal” applicable to him. Without making any decision on the other points
raised, I am of the opinion that in the case at bar there is no remedy under
s. 18 of the Federal Court Act, and that for this reason the appeal
should be dismissed with costs. Appeal dismissed with costs. Solicitors for the appellants: Byers,
Casgrain, McNally, Dingle, Benn & Lefebvre, Montreal. Solicitors for the respondents: Gaspard
Côté and Jacques Ouellet, Montreal.  [1] Oral reasons from the Bench.  