Partagec Inc. v. Québec
(Communauté urbaine), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 57  Partagec Inc.                                                                                      Appellant  v.  Communauté urbaine de Québec and City of Québec                                                                            Respondents  and  Bureau de révision de l'évaluation foncière du Québec                                                                            Respondent  Indexed as:  Partagec Inc. v.
Québec (Communauté urbaine)  File No.:  23587.  1994:  May 25;
1994:  September 30.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
quebec                        Held:  The appeal should be
allowed.                     The analysis of the
issues made in Buanderie centrale de Montréal Inc. applies to the
present case.  In light of the principles governing the interpretation of tax
legislation, and having regard to the intent of the legislature as well as the
virtual identity of patrimony between the appellant and its member
establishments, the former should not be treated differently from the latter
for tax purposes.  The appellant can therefore take advantage of the tax
exemptions provided in ss. 204(14) and 236(1.1) A.M.T. for both of
the immovables it uses.  Cases Cited                     Followed:  Buanderie centrale de Montréal
Inc. v. Montreal (City), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 29.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited                         Jacques Tremblay and Pierre Delisle, Q.C.,
for the appellant.                     Daniel Tardif, for the respondents the Communauté
urbaine de Québec and the City of Québec.                     No one appeared for
the respondent the Bureau de révision de l'évaluation foncière du Québec.                     English version of
the judgment of the Court delivered by  //Gonthier J.//                       This appeal raises
questions identical to those which this Court had to consider in Buanderie
centrale de Montréal Inc. v. Montreal (City), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 29, decided
concurrently herewith.  In fact, the Buanderie centrale de Montréal Inc. ("Buanderie")
became the Montreal counterpart of Partagec, following the latter's success in
the Québec area, the creation of which marked the beginning of a period of
merger of hospital laundry and linen services.  Accordingly, I will not go into
any detail about the incorporation of Partagec and its subsequent operations,
which are more or less similar to what I described in the decision mentioned
above.                      From the start of
its operations, which date back to January 1, 1967, up to December 1986,
Partagec was exempt from real estate and business tax as a public establishment
pursuant to ss. 204(14) and 236(1.1) A.M.T.  During that period the
City of Québec and the Communauté urbaine de Québec received grants from the
provincial government proportionate to the taxes they might otherwise have
collected from Partagec.  This compensation was paid pursuant to s. 255 of
the same Act.                     On
December 19, 1986, however, following a notice received from the Ministère
des affaires municipales informing the City of Québec that the grants were
being terminated, the Communauté urbaine de Québec altered the real estate and
rental rolls and entered on them the immovable occupied by Partagec for its
laundry services in respect of the 1985, 1986 and 1987 fiscal years.  At the
same time certificates of amendment were issued in respect of the warehouse
occupied by Partagec for its group purchasing activities:  the immovable was then
entered on the rental roll for 1986 and 1987, the real estate taxes
being paid by the private undertaking which owned it.                       The analysis I made
of the points at issue in Buanderie centrale de Montréal Inc. v. Montreal
(City), decided concurrently herewith, applies to the present case and I
refer to it.  The factual distinctions which I mentioned earlier do not in my
view affect Partagec's legal status as regards municipal taxes.                     Accordingly, in
light of the principles governing the interpretation of tax legislation
formulated by this Court, and having regard to the intent of the legislature as
well as the virtual identity of patrimony between Partagec and its member
establishments, I conclude that the former should not be treated differently
from the latter for tax purposes.  I am therefore of the view that, for 1985,
1986 and 1987, Partagec can take advantage of ss. 204(14) and 236(1.1) A.M.T.
and benefit from exemptions regarding real estate and business tax for the
immovable used by it to provide laundry services.  The same conclusion applies
for business tax in 1986 and 1987 in respect of the immovable occupied by
Partagec for its common supply activities.                      The appeal is
allowed.  The judgment of the Court of Appeal is set aside and the judgment of
the Court of Québec, reversing the decision of the BREF, is restored, the whole
with costs before the BREF and in all courts.                     Appeal allowed with
costs.                      Solicitors for the
respondents the Communauté urbaine de Québec and the City of
Québec:  Alain, Tardif & Associés, Québec.  