  v.  Communauté urbaine de Québec and City of Québec             Respondents  and  Bureau de révision de l'évaluation foncière du Québec                                                                            Respondent  and  The Attorney General of Quebec                                                     Respondent   File No.:  23014.  1994:  May 25;
1994:  September 30.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
quebec                        Held:  The appeal should be
allowed.                     The principles that
should guide the courts in interpreting tax legislation are as follows: 
(1) The interpretation of tax legislation is subject to the ordinary rules
of interpretation; (2) A legislative provision should be given a strict or
liberal interpretation depending on the purpose underlying it, and that purpose
must be identified in light of the context of the statute, its objective and
the legislative intent; (3) This teleological approach will favour the
taxpayer or the tax department depending solely on the legislative provision in
question, and not on the existence of predetermined presumptions;
(4) Substance should be given precedence over form to the extent that this
is consistent with the wording and objective of the statute; (5) Only a
reasonable doubt, not resolved by the ordinary rules of interpretation, will be
settled by recourse to the residual presumption in favour of the taxpayer.   Cases Cited   Statutes and
Regulations Cited    Public Charities Act, R.S.Q. 1964, c. 216.    Authors Cited    Driedger,
Elmer A.  Construction of Statutes, 2nd ed.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1983.  Morgan,
Vivien.  "Stubart:  What the Courts Did Next" (1987), 35 Can. Tax
J. 155.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal, [1993] R.L. 68, 47 Q.A.C. 47, reversing
a judgment of the Provincial Court rendered on May 19, 1987, affirming a
decision of the Bureau de révision de l'évaluation foncière du Québec, [1985]
B.R.E.F. 130.  Appeal allowed.                     André Bois and André Lemay, for the
appellant.                     Estelle Alain, for the respondents the Communauté
urbaine de Québec and the City of Québec.                     No one appeared for
the respondent the Bureau de révision de l'évaluation foncière du Québec.                     Alain Tanguay, for the respondent the Attorney
General of Quebec.                     English version of
the judgment of the Court delivered by                         There are 456
people at La Champenoise, with an average age of 83.  The residents' annual
income varies between $6,000 and $9,000 and 80 percent of the people at the
establishment are women.  Of the total number of residents, 20 are physically
located in a single sector of the establishment known as the shelter section,
for which La Champenoise holds a permit issued pursuant to the A.H.S.S.S.
authorizing it to operate a private reception centre for 20 residents. 
The shelter section apartments are similar to those of other residents, except
that they have no kitchenette.  Part of the room and board of the residents of
this section is borne by the government, which pays a per diem
allowance.  The government also exercises a measure of control to ensure that
the 20 places are filled.  The remainder of the facilities receive no
government grant and are managed entirely by La Champenoise.  Its
administrators and managers work as volunteers.                     In addition to the
services of a resident priest, the chapel, an infirmary which is accessible 24
hours a day, the cafeteria and the social activities which La Champenoise
provides for all residents, it should also be noted that the premises in
general are physically designed to meet the special needs of the elderly. 
Thus, inter alia, there are ramps, there are no door sills, electrical
outlets are 24 inches from the ground and bathrooms are equipped with
support bars.                     The criteria for
admission to La Champenoise are a minimum age of 60, a low income and physical
and psychological autonomy.  The latter factor is not, however, a requirement
for staying on in the establishment, since it appears that elderly persons may
remain in the premises despite a subsequent deterioration in their health.   In
his testimony given in 1984 the director general of La Champenoise noted that
places which became vacant were offered to applicants who had made their
applications for admission in 1976:  there was a considerable waiting list of
1,800 persons.                     In 1982 an assessor
from the Communauté urbaine de Québec visited La Champenoise to determine the
proportion of the premises used as an apartment building and as a reception
centre.  He found that 89 percent of the total area of the property was
reserved for apartments and that the shelter section and the community services
took up 11 percent:  he gave La Champenoise a real estate tax exemption
for 1980 to 1984 only for this 11 percent.  La Champenoise filed a
complaint with the Bureau de révision de l'évaluation foncière du Québec
("BREF"), in which it claimed an exemption for all its facilities in
view of the nature of its mission.                     The real estate tax
debt to date amounts to over $4.5 million and it goes without saying that the
size of the amounts involved will have a determining effect on the viability of
La Champenoise and the security of its 456 elderly residents.   Bureau de révision de
l'évaluation foncière du Québec, [1985] B.R.E.F. 130                     According to the
respondents the City of Québec and the Communauté urbaine de Québec, holding a
permit to operate a reception centre is an essential condition for benefiting
from the tax exemption.  It follows that as La Champenoise only holds a permit
for 20 residents its entire facilities cannot be regarded as a reception
centre.  After reviewing the testimony and the applicable provisions of the A.H.S.S.S.,
Mr. Barbe, of the BREF, found that the activities of La Champenoise
are those of a reception centre and that it was not necessary for it to hold a
permit in order to be treated as such.  He accordingly exempted the appellant's
property from all real estate taxes.                      Aubé Prov. Ct. J.
concurred in the findings of the BREF.  He was of the view that the entire La
Champenoise property constitutes a reception centre within the meaning of
s. 1(k) A.H.S.S.S. and is used for the purposes provided by
the Act.  He took note of the parties' admission that the shelter section meets
the conditions for the exemption provided for in s. 204(14) A.M.T. 
He also noted the presence of s. 2 A.M.T., which allows an
assessment unit to be divided.  In light of these observations, he nevertheless
stated, at p. 12 of his reasons:    The BREF's decision was upheld.  Quebec Court of Appeal (1992), 47 Q.A.C. 47                     In the opinion of
Bisson C.J.Q., the outcome of the case depended on the answer to two
questions.  First, the nature of La Champenoise had to be determined.  After
examining certain definitions included in the A.H.S.S.S., including that
of a "reception centre", Bisson C.J.Q. finally concluded, at
p. 55, that [translation]
"[t]he legal and factual existence of the respondent [La Champenoise] is
far from establishing that it meets the definition of a reception centre,
except with respect to the shelter section".  He also noted that the
solution of the matter had to be based on more fundamental questions than
whether or not a permit was held, and so he did not consider it necessary to
rule on the point.                     The second question
was to determine whether the property was used for the purposes provided by the
A.H.S.S.S.  To decide whether the La Champenoise facilities were
used as a reception centre strictly speaking, Bisson C.J.Q. considered in
particular the criteria for admission to the establishment.  He noted that the
evidence presented as to the La Champenoise admission criteria indicated that
they did not meet the requirements of the definition of a reception centre.  In
the opinion of the Chief Justice, at p. 56, there had been an error in
characterizing the facts:                     [translation]  Where the error was made
was in making the availability of community services the test by which La
Champenoise was regarded as a reception centre.                      I
note that the evidence showed that in order to obtain an apartment at La
Champenoise residents had to be autonomous physically as well as mentally and
financially, though in the latter case with limited means.                     Finally, since the
issue is whether to apply an exemption to the principle of real estate
taxation, Bisson C.J.Q. was in favour of adopting a restrictive
interpretation.  With this in mind, he concluded at p. 56:                      I
therefore conclude that 89 percent of the surface area of the property
occupied by La Champenoise . . . was not used for the purpose provided in the [A.H.S.S.S.],
and that proportion of it could not be regarded as a reception centre.                     Bisson C.J.Q.
accordingly applied s. 2 A.M.T., which allows a unit of assessment
to be divided, and held that the exemption provided for in s. 204(14) of
that Act did not apply to 89 percent of the surface area of
La Champenoise.                      To determine
whether La Champenoise may benefit from the tax exemption provided for in
s. 204(14) A.M.T. for all its facilities, the Court must answer the
following two questions:  1.  What are the principles
that should guide the courts in interpreting tax legislation?  2.  In light of these
principles, can La Champenoise qualify as a reception centre within the meaning
of s. 12 A.H.S.S.S., referred to in s. 204(14) A.M.T.?                      At the relevant
times the A.M.T. provided the following:  2.  Unless otherwise indicated
by the context, any provision of this act which contemplates an immoveable
property, moveable property or unit of assessment is deemed to contemplate part
of such an immoveable property, moveable property or unit of assessment, if
only that part falls within the scope of the provision.  204.  The following are exempt
from all municipal or school real estate taxes:                                                                     .
. .                      The A.H.S.S.S.
provided:  1.  In this Act and the
regulations, unless the context indicates a different meaning, the following
expressions and words mean:                     (a)  "establishment": 
a local community service centre, a hospital centre, a social service centre or
a reception centre;                     (b)  "public
establishment":  an establishment contemplated in sections 10 and 11;                     (c)  "private
establishment":  an establishment contemplated in sections 12 and 13;                                                                     .
. .   3.  The Minister shall
exercise the powers that this Act confers upon him in order to:                     (a)  improve
the state of the health of the population, the state of the social environment
in which they live and the social conditions of individuals, families and
groups;                                                                     .
. .                     (c)  encourage
the population and the groups which compose it to participate in the founding,
administration and development of establishments so as to ensure their vital
growth and renewal;  9.  Every establishment is
public or private.  10.  The following are public
establishments:                     (a)  every
establishment constituted under this Act or resulting from an amalgamation or
conversion made under this Act;                         (a)  if
it is arranged to receive not more than 20 persons at one time; or                     (b)  if
it was already constituted on 1 January 1974 and if it operates without
recourse to sums of money derived from the consolidated revenue fund or if such
sums do not cover more than 80% of the net amounts it would receive for its
current operating expenses, if it were a public establishment;   A.  Rules
for interpreting tax legislation                     In this Court the
appellant argued that a provision creating a tax exemption should be
interpreted by looking at the spirit and purpose of the legislation.  In this
connection it is worth looking briefly at the development of the rules for
interpreting tax legislation in Canada and formulating certain principles. 
First, there is the traditional rule that tax legislation must be strictly
construed:  this applied both to provisions imposing a tax obligation and to
those creating tax exemptions.  The rule was based on the fact that, like penal
legislation, tax legislation imposes a burden on individuals and accordingly no
one should be made subject to it unless the wording of the Act so provides in a
clear and precise manner.  The effect of such an interpretation was to favour
the taxpayer in the case of provisions imposing a tax obligation, and the
courts placed on the tax department the burden of showing that the taxpayer
fell clearly within the letter of the law.  Conversely, a taxpayer claiming to
benefit from an exemption had "to establish that the competent legislative
authority, in clear and unequivocal language, [had] unquestionably granted him
the exemption claimed" (Fauteux C.J. in Ville de Montréal v. ILGWU
Center Inc., [1974] S.C.R. 59, at p. 65).  Any doubt was thus to be
resolved in favour of the tax department.  In view of this situation, it
followed from the strict construction rule that in cases of doubt a presumption
existed in the taxpayer's favour in taxing situations but against the taxpayer
in those involving exemptions.                     It should at once
be noted that there is a risk of confusion between the rule that a taxing
provision is to be strictly construed and the burden of proof resting upon the
parties in an action between the government and a taxpayer.  According to the
general rule which provides that the burden of proof lies with the plaintiff,
in any proceeding it is for the party claiming the benefit of a legislative
provision to show that he is entitled to rely on it.  The burden of proof thus
rests with the tax department in the case of a provision imposing a tax
obligation and with the taxpayer in the case of a provision creating a tax
exemption.  It will be noted that the presumptions mentioned earlier tend in
more or less the same direction.  This explains why these concepts have been at
times superimposed to the point of being confused with each other.  With
respect, they are nevertheless two very different concepts.  In any event, the
rule of strict construction relates only to the clarity of the wording
of the tax legislation:  regardless of who bears the burden of proof, that
person will have to persuade the court that the taxpayer is clearly
covered by the wording of the legislative provision which it is sought to
apply.                     In Canada it was Stubart
Investments Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 536, which opened the first
significant breach in the rule that tax legislation must be strictly
construed.  This Court there held, per Estey J., at p. 578,
that the rule of strict construction had to be bypassed in favour of
interpretation according to ordinary rules so as to give effect to the spirit
of the Act and the aim of Parliament:  . .
. the role of the tax statute in the community changed, as we have seen, and
the application of strict construction to it receded.  Courts today apply to
this statute the plain meaning rule, but in a substantive sense so that if a
taxpayer is within the spirit of the charge, he may be held liable.                      In
Stubart . . . the Court recognized that in the construction of taxation
statutes the law is not confined to a literal and virtually meaningless
interpretation of the Act where the words will support on a broader
construction a conclusion which is workable and in harmony with the evident
purposes of the Act in question.  Strict construction in the historic sense no
longer finds a place in the canons of interpretation applicable to taxation
statutes in an era such as the present, where taxation serves many purposes in
addition to the old and traditional object of raising the cost of government
from a somewhat unenthusiastic public.                      I
acknowledge, however, that just as there has been a recent trend away from
strict construction of taxation statutes . . . so too has the recent trend in
tax cases been towards attempting to ascertain the true commercial and practical
nature of the taxpayer's transactions.  There has been, in this country and
elsewhere, a movement away from tests based on the form of transactions and
towards tests based on what Lord Pearce has referred to as a "common sense
appreciation of all the guiding features" of the events in question . . .                     This
is, I believe, a laudable trend provided it is consistent with the text and
purposes of the taxation statute.  Assessment of taxpayers' transactions
with an eye to commercial and economic realities, rather than juristic
classification of form, may help to avoid the inequity of tax liability being
dependent upon the taxpayer's sophistication at manipulating a sequence of
events to achieve a patina of compliance with the apparent prerequisites for a
tax deduction.                     This
does not mean, however, that a deduction such as the interest deduction in
s. 20(1)(c)(i), which by its very text is made available to the
taxpayer in limited circumstances, is suddenly to lose all its strictures. 
[Emphasis added.]   There
has been one distinct change [after Stubart], however, in the resolution
of ambiguities.  In the past, resort was often made to the maxims that an
ambiguity in a taxing provision is resolved in the taxpayer's favour and that
an ambiguity in an exempting provision is resolved in the Crown's favour.  Now
an ambiguity is usually resolved openly by reference to legislative intent. 
[Emphasis added.]     . .
. where the taxing statute is not explicit, reasonable uncertainty or factual
ambiguity resulting from lack of explicitness in the statute should be resolved
in favour of the taxpayer.  This residual principle must be the more
readily applicable in this appeal where otherwise annually recurring
expenditures, completely connected to the daily business operation of the
taxpayer, afford the taxpayer no credit against tax either by way of capital
cost or depletion allowance with reference to a capital expenditure, or an
expense deduction against revenue.  [Emphasis added.]                     Earlier, at
p. 67, he said the following:  On
the other hand, if the interpretation of a taxation statute is unclear, and one
reasonable interpretation leads to a deduction to the credit of a taxpayer and
the other leaves the taxpayer with no relief from clearly bona fide
expenditures in the course of his business activities, the general rules of
interpretation of taxing statutes would direct the tribunal to the former
interpretation.                      If
the taxpayer receives the benefit of the doubt, such a "doubt" must
nevertheless be "reasonable".  A taxation statute should be
"reasonably clear".  This criterion is not satisfied if the usual
rules of interpretation have not already been applied in an attempt to clarify
the problem.  The meaning of the enactment must first be ascertained, and only
where this proves impossible can that which is more favourable to the taxpayer
be chosen.  The rules formulated in the preceding
pages, some of which were relied on recently in Symes v. Canada, [1993]
4 S.C.R. 695, may be summarized as follows:       B.Characterization of La Champenoise as a
reception centre used for the purposes provided in the Act                     Two reasons were
given by Bisson C.J.Q. for allowing the respondents' appeal:  first, the legal
and factual existence of La Champenoise does not indicate that all its
facilities can meet the definition of a reception centre; second, it is a
mistake to conclude, as the courts below did, that the availability of the
services offered means that the immovable is being used for the purposes
provided by the A.H.S.S.S., as required by s. 204(14) A.M.T.                     The first reason is
based principally on analysis of s. 1(k) A.H.S.S.S.  I
reproduce it again here for the sake of convenience:                       The fact that La
Champenoise requires its residents to be physically and psychologically
autonomous on admission is an entirely different matter, and that leads me to
discuss the second reason.  I note that Bisson C.J.Q. mentioned that the
availability of services should not be a basis for assessing the need of
residents and, indirectly, determining whether the La Champenoise property
was being used for the purposes provided in the A.H.S.S.S.  I share this
view.  With respect, however, I consider that the need of an elderly person
also cannot be determined by his or her autonomy.  It can certainly be
concluded from the definition of a reception centre that the autonomy of those
referred to in s. 1(k) may be affected in varying degrees.  That
does not mean we can conclude that an autonomous person is not in need of care
and protection, a fortiori if as in the case at bar the autonomy is only
determined at the stage of admission and will inevitably diminish thereafter. 
Nowhere is it stated that the individual's need must be immediate.  There is no
bar to its being foreseeable.                     With respect, the
autonomy of elderly persons at the time of their admission cannot be the
decisive test in determining the concept of need as provided for in s. 1(k)
A.H.S.S.S.  In the same way, it also cannot be used to determine whether
La Champenoise's immovable is being used for the purposes provided by the Act,
as prescribed in s. 204(14) A.M.T.  The outcome of the latter
analysis will depend entirely on the finding, whether satisfactory or
otherwise, that in fact the institution is designed and adapted for
accommodating the elderly with a real need, though that need may be variable in
degree or immediacy.                       These reasons are
in accord with the findings of fact made by Judge Larochelle of the
Provincial Court in a judgment allowing an application for an earlier
exemption, included in the case on appeal with supporting testimony.  It
states:                       The respondents
argued that the appellant could not have been established as a reception centre
on January 1, 1974 since at that time it was still covered by the Public
Charities Act, R.S.Q. 1964, c. 216.  With respect, that does not call
into question the implicit conclusion of the BREF, since there is nothing to
prevent La Champenoise from having in fact been able to meet the requirements
of both statutes.  This conclusion is all the more compelling when we consider
that historically the A.H.S.S.S. was adopted in order to update certain
older legislation, including the Public Charities Act, while preserving
the fundamental principles contained in that legislation.  From this
perspective, it necessarily follows that the test to be adopted in determining
whether the property is being used for the purposes provided in the Act must be
limited to an assessment of the reception centre de facto.                     Here we have these
positive findings by the BREF that the services provided by La Champenoise,
taken together with the needs of its residents, lead to the conclusion that it
must be classified in its entirety as a reception centre for the purposes of
the Act.  It was objected that the BREF had not applied s. 2 A.M.T.
and divided the unit of assessment.  With respect, it is clear from the reasons
of Mr. Barbe that that section was not overlooked.  This is especially
apparent in his decision when he notes, referring to the assessor's work, [translation] "[that the latter]
established the percentage of the exemption but not the principle of an exempt
part and a part subject to tax" (p. 134).  Though aware of the
existence of s. 2 A.M.T., the BREF nevertheless considered that La
Champenoise was operating facilities which as a whole met the two parts of the
definition of a reception centre.  Moreover, it was in the best position to
conclude, following a visit to the premises, that the undertaking was
indivisible, and this conclusion was concurred in by Judge Aubé of the
Provincial Court on appeal, as mentioned earlier.  The primary area of
expertise of this specialized tribunal is certainly not that of social
services:  I would note, however, that what was required here was to define a
reception centre for tax purposes.  That being so, there is no need to
question its findings.                        Formerly,
such persons found this type of lodging within an extended family unit.  Now,
this resource is less available and they must have access to different places.                     In
the Commission's opinion this is not the type of lodging contemplated by the
relocation power conferred on the Minister by s. 182 [A.H.S.S.S.]. 
That power, which is special and exceptional, is an incidental measure for the
purpose of penalizing a breach of the Act, namely the operation of an
establishment without a permit (s. 136).                     The
establishment is truly a facility whose activities must be so arranged
that relatively constant special care can be provided to the persons living
there who require it.  It is not a place the primary activity of which is to
lodge and maintain persons who may occasionally need certain care and for whom
it provides reassuring and beneficial surroundings.                     The
Minister's power of relocation should not be isolated but seen in its context. 
Otherwise it might be used to transfer one or more persons from locations where
activities of the kind described in s. 1(k) are carried on and
where care may be provided from time to time but which are not truly
facilities for this purpose.  Examples of this are families where an
elderly or handicapped person lives.  [Emphasis added; italics in original.]                     There is no doubt
that the factual background to that decision is completely different from the
case at bar; the same is true of the section of the Act relied on in support of
these arguments.  The first passage underlined in the extract nevertheless suggests
that the rental portion of La Champenoise might not be classified as a
reception centre.  That does not prevent me from coming to the opposite
conclusion.  The type of lodging referred to by the Commission is inconsistent
with the concept of an organized institution.  This follows from the last
phrase underlined above, when the Commission mentions facilities which are not
created for the purposes of providing the services described in
s. 1(k) A.H.S.S.S.  In the present case La Champenoise is an
organized institution which was specifically created for the purpose of
catering to the special needs of the elderly.                     Another argument
put forward by the respondents to show that La Champenoise cannot be
classified as a reception centre in its entirety relies on the reasons of
Bisson C.J.Q., when he noted that the composition of the board of directors and
the criteria for admission to La Champenoise are not in accordance with
the respective requirements of ss. 82 and 18.1 A.H.S.S.S.  With
respect, reading ss. 82 and 76 A.H.S.S.S. together with the heading
of the division covering them clearly shows that s. 82 applies only to
public establishments.  Clearly, therefore, it cannot be made to cover La
Champenoise.  As for s. 18.1 A.H.S.S.S., which obviously applies to
public and private establishments, it provides for the submission of admission
criteria to the Conseil régional de la santé et des services sociaux or the
Minister, as the case may be.  There is nothing to indicate, however, that
failure to observe this requirement will as such affect the status of an
establishment as a reception centre.                     The respondents
submitted, finally, that a reception centre is not exempt from real estate
taxes if it does not hold a permit required by Division VI of the A.H.S.S.S. 
As La Champenoise holds a permit for 20 residents, the tax exemption could
not be valid for its facilities in their entirety but should be limited to the
shelter section only.  In support of this argument the respondents relied on
s. 204(14) A.M.T., which does not define a reception centre as such
but rather proceeds by way of a reference to s. 12 A.H.S.S.S.  Such
a reference, they argued, is not limited to the definition of a reception
centre but also takes in the provisions of the Act governing the activities of
this type of establishment.  I shall again reproduce the paragraph for the sake
of convenience:  204.  The following are exempt
from all municipal or school real estate taxes:                                                                     .
. .   With respect, I cannot subscribe to
the respondents' arguments.  If the legislature had intended that the tax
exemption of a reception centre should be subject to the existence of a permit
issued by the proper authority, it would have said so expressly as it did for
day-care centres.  The same textual argument can be drawn from s. 204(15) A.M.T.
with respect to educational institutions.  Expressio unius est exclusio
alterius.  I accordingly share the findings of the BREF on this point.                      In light of the
rules of interpretation formulated in the first part of this analysis, it
appears that on the facts found by the BREF the facilities of La Champenoise
can be classified in their entirety as a reception centre within the meaning of
ss. 1(k) and 12(b) A.H.S.S.S.  Similarly, it appears
that its property as a whole is used for the purposes provided by that Act, as
stipulated by s. 204(14) A.M.T.  The decision of the BREF, a
specialized tribunal, discloses no error subject to review on appeal.  I would
accordingly restore the decision of the BREF that the La Champenoise
property should be declared exempt from real estate taxes in its entirety for
the 1980 to 1984 fiscal years inclusive.                      The appeal is
allowed.  The judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal is set aside and the
decision of the BREF is affirmed, the whole with costs before the BREF and in
all courts.                     Appeal allowed with
costs.                      Solicitors for the
respondents the Communauté urbaine de Québec and the City of
Québec:  Alain, Tardif & Associés, Québec.                     Solicitors for the
respondent the Attorney General of Quebec:  Rochette Boucher &
Gagnon, Québec.  