D’Amato v. Badger, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 1071  Felice D’Amato and Arbor Body Shop (1980) Ltd.                                                            Appellants  v.  Donald Herbert Badger and Russell Frazee                                                                                   Respondents  Indexed as:   D’Amato v. Badger  File No.:  24364.  1996:  April 25; 1996:  August 22.   on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia   The appellant D owned 50 percent of the appellant
company.  He was injured by an automobile owned by one of the respondents and
operated negligently by the other.  Liability was admitted.  Until the accident
occurred, D supervised and performed repairs.  As a result of the injuries he
suffered in the accident he could no longer perform the physical labour
required for autobody repair,  but continued to manage, supervise and prepare
estimates.  After the accident, D continued to receive the same salary from the
company of $55,000 per year.  Because D was unable to perform repair work, the
company hired replacement labour, and as a result suffered a loss of profits. 
The trial judge awarded $73,299 to the company for economic loss suffered as a
result of the accident and awarded $290,000 to D for loss of earning capacity. 
The Court of Appeal allowed the respondents’ appeal in part, disallowing the
company’s award for economic loss.   D personally was allowed to recover 50
percent of that loss under the alter ego principle.  The award for loss
of earning capacity was reduced to $50,000.  This appeal is to determine
whether the company is entitled to damages for pure economic loss in the
circumstances of this case and whether the Court of Appeal was correct to
reduce the trial judge’s award to D for loss of earning capacity.  Held: The appeal should be allowed in part.   The trial judge’s calculation of loss of earning
capacity should not be disturbed unless patently unreasonable or based on
incorrect legal principles.  It is obvious that the trial judge did not ignore
D’s involvement with the company when calculating loss of earning capacity.  He
was entitled to find, as he did, that D would have difficulty finding work as a
repairman because of his injuries and as an owner because of his lack of
English skills and education.  This finding of fact justified the trial judge’s
conclusion.  In suggesting its own “more realistic” approach to the assessment
of future earning capacity, the Court of Appeal merely disagreed with the trial
judge’s decision.  Since it failed to identify any palpable and overriding
error such as to permit its interference, the trial judge’s award for loss of
future earning capacity should be restored.  Cases Cited  Considered:  Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021; referred
to: Cattle v. Stockton Waterworks Co. (1875), L.R. 10 Q.B. 453; Weller
& Co. v. Foot and Mouth Disease Research Institute, [1966] 1 Q.B. 569; Murphy
v. Brentwood District Council, [1991] 1 A.C. 398; Anns v. Merton London
Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Winnipeg Condominium Corp. No. 36 v. Bird
Construction Co., [1995] 1 S.C.R. 85; Ultramares Corp. v. Touche,
174 N.E. 441 (1931); Rivtow Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron Works, [1974]
S.C.R. 1189; Caltex Oil (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. v. The Dredge “Willemstad”
(1976), 11 A.L.R. 227; Ross v. Caunters, [1979] 3 All E.R. 580; Andrews
v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229.  Authors Cited   Linden, Allen M.  Canadian Tort
Law, 5th ed.  Toronto: Butterworths, 1993.  APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (1994), 95 B.C.L.R. (2d) 46, [1994] 10 W.W.R. 141, 48 B.C.A.C. 220,
78 W.A.C. 220,  varying a judgment of the British Columbia Supreme Court
awarding damages to the appellants.  Appeal allowed in part.  James L. Barrett, for
the appellants.  D. A. Webster,
Q.C., and Donald J. Holubitsky, for the respondents.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Major J. -- On August 25,
1987, the appellant Felice D’Amato was injured by an automobile owned by the
respondent Badger and operated negligently by the respondent Frazee.  Liability
was admitted.  2                                  
This appeal relates to two awards made by the trial judge: an award of
$73,299 to the corporate appellant Arbor Body Shop (1980) Ltd. for pure
economic loss suffered as a result of the accident and an award of $290,000 to
D’Amato for loss of earning capacity.  3                                  
The British Columbia Court of Appeal allowed the appeal of Badger and
Frazee in part, disallowing Arbor’s award for economic loss:  (1994), 95
B.C.L.R. (2d) 46, [1994] 10 W.W.R. 141, 48 B.C.A.C. 220, 78 W.A.C. 220.  
D’Amato personally was allowed to recover 50 percent of that loss under the alter
ego principle.  The award for loss of earning capacity was reduced to
$50,000.  The appellants seek to restore the trial judge’s decision.  I.                 Facts  4                                  
The appellant D’Amato and his partner, Sam Nomura, each owned 50 percent
of Arbor, an autobody repair shop in Vancouver, British Columbia.  Until the
accident occurred, D’Amato supervised and performed repairs and Nomura
supervised and did the painting.  In the accident, D’Amato suffered injuries
and, as a result, could no longer perform the physical labour required for
autobody repair.  He continued to manage, supervise and prepare estimates. 
These activities were described by the trial judge as  a “minor contribution”.  5                                  
After the accident, D’Amato continued to receive the same salary from
Arbor of $55,000 per year.  Arbor paid D’Amato a total of $251,108 from the
date of the accident to the time of trial.  Because D’Amato was unable to
perform repair work, Arbor engaged replacement labour, and as a result suffered
loss of profits of $73,299.  II.                Judgments  A.                British
Columbia Supreme Court  6                                  
The trial judge held that Arbor’s claim for economic loss was not
advanced per quod servitium amisit, which was prohibited by statute in
British Columbia.  He found that recovery for corporate plaintiffs was not
restricted to where the company is merely the alter ego of the
individual plaintiff, the latter expression describing a person who, by
ownership or otherwise, is seen as indispensable to the company.  7                                  
The trial judge allowed Arbor’s claim under the principles of Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021,
stating that in that case, “[t]he majority of the Court concluded that in order
to recover in tort a plaintiff must prove a sufficient connection between the
conduct complained of and the loss alleged. . . .  The question is whether
there is sufficient proximity between the negligent act and the loss”.   The
trial judge found that because of the nature of the company’s operations and
the manner in which it earned income, there was sufficient proximity to recover
any proven loss.  He awarded the sum of $73,299, that being the loss to the
company as calculated by their expert.  8                                  
The trial judge made the following comments with regard to the loss of
D’Amato’s earning capacity:  When I consider the plaintiff’s earning capacity, I
cannot ignore the fact  he is almost 57 years of age and is unable to read or
write in English.  Indeed, his ability to do so in Italian is also extremely
limited. . . .  His entire work experience has consisted of heavy physical work
and he can no longer work in his trade where he was extremely proficient.                                                                     .
. .  The job opportunities open to D’Amato before the
accident were limited to work involving heavy physical labour.  Those
opportunities are no longer available to him.  His inability to do heavy
physical work makes him less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning
income in a competitive labour market.  9                                  
The trial judge concluded D’Amato could easily earn an income of $55,000
per annum employed in his trade and, allowing for the present value, he fixed
the loss of earning capacity at $385,550.  The trial judge considered that
D’Amato still had a management and supervisory role in the company which earned
income for the company, and therefore deducted 25 percent for contingencies,
leaving a total award under this head of damages of $290,000.  B.                British
Columbia Court of Appeal (1994), 95 B.C.L.R. (2d) 46  10                              
The British Columbia Court of Appeal, in varying the judgment, held that
the trial judge, in purporting to apply the proximity test enunciated by
McLachlin J. in Norsk, had failed to also consider whether the loss was
reasonably foreseeable.  11                              
In addition, the Court of Appeal held (at p. 57) that the trial judge
had failed to take into account the fact that D’Amato had been paid $55,000 per
annum by Arbor despite his inability to perform heavy physical labour, and that
a “more realistic basis” to assess loss of earning capacity would be to base it
on a percentage of Arbor’s loss, projected over the next seven years.  In the
result, Legg J.A. reduced D’Amato’s award to $50,000 for loss of earning
capacity.  III.               Analysis  12                              
There are two issues in this appeal.  First, whether Arbor is entitled
to damages for pure economic loss in the circumstances of this case.  Second,
whether the Court of Appeal was correct to reduce the trial judge’s award to
D’Amato for loss of earning capacity.  A.                Pure
Economic Loss  13                              
Pure economic loss  is  loss suffered by an individual that is not 
accompanied by physical injury or property damage.  In the present case, the
corporate appellant, Arbor, suffered neither property damage nor physical
injury.  14                              
Judicial history discloses that recovery for pure economic loss was
severely restricted.  See Cattle v. Stockton Waterworks Co. (1875), L.R.
10 Q.B. 453,  and Weller & Co. v. Foot and Mouth Disease Research
Institute, [1966] 1 Q.B. 569. More recently, the House of Lords in Murphy
v. Brentwood District Council, [1991] 1 A.C. 398, limited recovery for pure
economic loss to cases where physical damage or reliance on a negligent
misstatement was present.  15                              
While the House of Lords has seriously limited, if not removed, 
recovery for pure economic loss, the Canadian jurisprudence has not followed
such a severe path.  The principle for recovery under this head of damage in
Canada was stated in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C.
728 (H.L.), per Lord Wilberforce at pp. 751-52:  First one has to ask whether, as between the alleged wrongdoer and the
person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient relationship of proximity
or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable contemplation of the former,
carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage to the latter -- in
which case a prima facie duty of care arises.  Secondly, if the first question
is answered affirmatively, it is necessary to consider whether there are any
considerations which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of the
duty or the class of person to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach
of it may give rise....  16                              
Those principles continue to influence the law in Canada.  See Kamloops
(City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Norsk, supra; and Winnipeg
Condominium Corp. No. 36 v. Bird Construction Co., [1995] 1 S.C.R. 85.  17                              
Professor Linden, in Canadian Tort Law (5th ed. 1993), at pp.
382-83, lists four policy reasons for the reluctance to allow recovery for pure
economic loss.  First, economic interests have been seen as less worthy of
protection than bodily security and property.  18                              
The second, and perhaps main reason for limiting recovery is that
expressed by Cardozo C.J.,* in Ultramares Corp. v.
Touche, 174 N.E. 441 (N.Y. 1931), who feared “liability in an indeterminate
amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class” (p. 444).  A
negligent act or omission can have a ripple effect, causing economic loss to a
potentially wide circle of individuals.  Widgery J., in Weller, supra,
disallowed pure economic loss and opined that if auctioneers could recover for
damage to farmers’ cattle, so might butchers, transport workers, and dairy
workers.  This view reflects the  reluctance of courts to burden business and
other activity with the indeterminate expense of all potential economic losses.  19                              
Professor Linden’s third reason was that it may be more efficient to
place the burden of economic loss on the “victim”.  Such losses are often seen
as an ordinary business risk which can be expected and for which business
people make plans.  20                              
The fourth reason stated was that the restrictive approach discouraged a
multiplicity of lawsuits, in favour of channelling claims into one action.  21                              
The law in Canada concerning pure economic loss was expanded in Rivtow
Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron Works, [1974]  S.C.R. 1189.  There, one of
the defendants designed and manufactured cranes.  The plaintiff had bought one
of the cranes from a second defendant and used it on its log barge.  When
another one of the defendant’s cranes crashed, killing its operator, the
plaintiff withdrew its crane from service and later discovered latent defects. 
The plaintiff suffered loss of profits because of “down-time” as well as repair
costs.  It was determined that the defendants knew about the defects and failed
to warn the plaintiff.  22                              
A majority of this Court awarded the plaintiff damages for “down-time”
but not for repairs.  Ritchie J., for the majority, held that the loss of
profit was a direct and foreseeable result of the breach of the duty to warn.  
Concurring on this point, Laskin J. (later C.J.) added that this type of
recovery would not lead to the problem of indeterminacy identified by Cardozo
J. because the plaintiff’s use of the product was one contemplated by the defendant.  23                              
Rivtow  widened the opportunity for plaintiffs to recover for
pure economic loss.  Two tests for recovery were developed.  First, pure
economic loss was recoverable where the defendant had significant knowledge of
the risk.  The majority seemed influenced by the fact that the defendant
manufacturer knew of both the actual risk and the actual plaintiff.  The
“actual knowledge” test has been used in other jurisdictions.  See Caltex
Oil (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. v. The Dredge “Willemstad” (1976), 11 A.L.R. 227 
(H.C.); and Ross v. Caunters, [1979] 3 All E.R. 580.  The need for some
form of actual knowledge obviously eliminates the indeterminacy problem
identified above.  24                              
The second test emanating from Rivtow was the “direct and
foreseeable” test.  Both the majority and the dissent use similar language in
requiring that pure economic loss be a direct and foreseeable consequence of
the tortious act or omission.  This test was not as limiting as the “actual
knowledge” test.  25                              
Post-Rivtow, the decisions in Anns and Kamloops
confirmed that recovery of pure economic loss was available in circumstances
where a public authority was negligent in allowing faulty construction of
buildings.  26                              
The Norsk case reflects the current state of the law regarding
pure economic loss.  Norsk involved damage to a railway bridge by a
barge owned by the defendant.  The plaintiff railway did not own the bridge,
but used it pursuant to a contract with the owner, Public Works Canada.  As a
result of the damage, the bridge was closed and the plaintiff incurred
significant losses.  These losses were not covered by insurance, nor  was there
any provision for indemnification in the plaintiff’s contract with Public Works
Canada.  27                              
McLachlin J. (L’Heureux-Dubé and Cory JJ. concurring) allowed recovery
of the plaintiff’s pure economic loss.  While accepting the idea that not all
pure economic loss should be recoverable, she rejected the absolute bar
approach of the House of Lords in Murphy, stating that this approach
accepted injustice for the sake of doctrinal tidiness.  McLachlin J. preferred
an incremental approach, in which new categories of recoverable pure economic
loss are developed on a case-by-case basis.  28                              
Recognizing the dangers of unlimited liability for pure economic loss,
McLachlin J. held that  the factor of proximity would sufficiently limit
recovery of pure economic loss to avoid indeterminacy.  Her views are
summarized in the following passage, from  pp. 1152-53:  In summary, it is my view that the authorities
suggest that pure economic loss is prima facie recoverable where, in
addition to negligence and foreseeable loss, there is sufficient proximity
between the negligent act and the loss.  Proximity is the controlling
concept which avoids the spectre of unlimited liability.  Proximity may be
established by a variety of factors, depending on the nature of the case.  To
date, sufficient proximity has been found in the case of negligent
misstatements where there is an undertaking and correlative reliance (Hedley
Byrne); where there is a duty to warn (Rivtow); and where a statute
imposes a responsibility on a municipality toward the owners and occupiers of
land (Kamloops).  But the categories are not closed.  As more cases
are decided, we can expect further definition on what factors give rise to
liability for pure economic loss in particular categories of cases.  In
determining whether liability should be extended to a new situation, courts
will have regard to the factors traditionally relevant to proximity such as the
relationship between the parties, physical propinquity, assumed or imposed
obligations and close causal connection.  And they will insist on
sufficient special factors to avoid the imposition of indeterminate and
unreasonable liability.  The result will be a principled, yet flexible,
approach to tort liability for pure economic loss.  It will allow recovery
where recovery is justified, while excluding indeterminate and inappropriate
liability, and it will permit the coherent development of the law in accordance
with the approach initiated in England by Hedley Byrne and followed in
Canada in Rivtow, Kamloops and Hofstrand.   [Emphasis
added.]  29                              
McLachlin J. noted that the problem with the exclusionary rule, to which
England had returned, was that it saw physical closeness as the only indicator
of proximity.  She further noted that proximity, if found, would not guarantee
liability. The second Anns test, whether policy reasons existed to limit
recovery, might cause a court to reject recovery for pure economic loss for
reasons not taken into account in the proximity analysis.  30                              
La Forest J. (Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ. concurring) denied recovery of
CN’s pure economic loss.  Citing Feldthusen, “Economic Loss in the Supreme
Court of Canada: Yesterday and Tomorrow” (1990-91), 17 Can. Bus. L.J.
356, at pp. 357-58, La Forest J. identified the following five categories of
economic loss cases, each of which involved different policy considerations (at
p. 1049):  1.    The Independent Liability of Statutory Public Authorities; 2.    Negligent Misrepresentation; 3.    Negligent Performance of a Service; 4.    Negligent Supply of Shoddy Goods or Structures; 5.    Relational Economic Loss.  31                              
La Forest J. stated that the facts of Norsk placed it in the
fifth category, and restricted his judgment to determining the circumstances
under which damages for pure economic loss in that category would be awarded.  32                              
Like McLachlin J., La Forest J. rejected the absolute exclusionary rule
of Murphy.  However, in its place he proposed a limited exclusionary
rule to apply to contractual relational loss cases, unless good policy reasons
exist for granting recovery.  33                              
La Forest J. noted that in relational economic loss, unlike the other
categories, the defendant is already liable to another party, namely, the owner
of the damaged property.  To the extent that deterrence was sought to curtail
reckless conduct, it already existed, and an award for pure economic loss was
unnecessary for that purpose. 34                              
La Forest J. noted that excluding liability did not automatically mean
that the plaintiff went uncompensated.  The plaintiff arguably had a right of
recovery against the property owner, who in turn had an action against the
tortfeasor.  Further, it was impossible to guarantee perfect compensation of
all contractual relational economic loss, because torts create economic loss to
a wide circle of individuals, all of whom cannot be realistically compensated.  He
concluded that relational loss cases typically involve accidents, which
distinguished them from products liability cases like Rivtow and
negligent misrepresentation cases like Hedley Byrne.  35                              
La Forest J. proceeded to examine the question from the perspective of
allocation of loss.  He preferred an approach which limited the possibility of
recovery for relational economic loss to situations where the plaintiff could
both address the problem of indeterminacy and show that no other means of
protection was available.  36                              
La Forest J. held that a limited exclusionary rule was desirable because
it allowed the terms of the relevant contract to dictate who should bear the
risk of loss and placed incentives on all parties to minimize losses.  It
allowed one party to bear the cost of carrying insurance instead of both
parties.  Because the right of recovery would usually be evident on the face of
the contract, less litigation would ensue.  The rule eliminated the problem of
having more than one plaintiff chasing the modest resources of an impecunious
defendant.  37                              
Finally, and probably most important, La Forest J. saw the rule as
lending certainty to the law.  While his approach could exclude recovery by
people who had undeniably suffered loss as a result of an accident, La Forest
J. saw these unfortunate cases at the margin as the price paid for certainty.  38                              
Stevenson J. agreed with the result reached by McLachlin J., but
rejected her approach, as well as the approach of La Forest J.  Instead, he
held that since the defendant had actual knowledge of the plaintiff,  the
problem of indeterminacy was not present and that recovery for pure economic
loss should follow.  39                              
There were three theories regarding the issue of pure economic loss in Norsk,
each of which was rejected by a majority of the judges.  However, Norsk
did confirm that there is no absolute bar to recovery of pure economic loss in
Canada, and that the “known plaintiff” approach was rejected.  40                              
While the tests of La Forest and McLachlin JJ. in Norsk are
different, they will usually achieve the same result.  This is because in the
identified categories outlined by La Forest J. permitting pure economic
recovery, McLachlin J.’s tests of proximity and foreseeability will usually
also be met.  For the reasons which follow, this case is not one in which the
plaintiff would succeed on one test, but not on the other.  A choice between
the two will have to await the appropriate case.  41                              
The latest case from this Court assessing pure economic loss was Winnipeg
Condominium Corp.  That case dealt with whether a general contractor
responsible for the construction of a building could be held liable for
negligence to a subsequent purchaser of the building for the cost of repairing
defects in the building caused by negligent construction.  There was no privity
of contract between the plaintiff and the contractor.  La Forest J., writing
for a unanimous Court, distinguished the “relational economic loss case” of  Norsk,
stating that Winnipeg Condominium Corp. fell into the fourth category --
negligent supply of shoddy goods or services, and held the contractor liable.  42                              
La Forest J.’s judgment in the Winnipeg Condominium Corp. case
obviously was not intended to alter his reasons in Norsk.  However, at
least one of the differences which existed between the approaches in Norsk
has been resolved.  It is apparent that this Court now recognizes distinct
categories of pure economic loss.  The circumstances under which loss may be
allowed under the fifth category, “Relational Economic Loss”, was left,
presumably for a case where the issue arose.  43                              
The appellants in this appeal submitted that the circumstances of this
case  are such that the Winnipeg Condominium Corp. case was more
applicable than the Norsk case.  They argued that the circumstances
represent a new category of pure economic loss, and that therefore the only consideration
was the Anns test, as confirmed in Winnipeg Condominium Corp. 
This submission cannot succeed.  It is obvious that the facts of this case
place it in the fifth category mentioned in Norsk and Winnipeg
Condominium Corp., namely, relational economic loss.  Arbor’s pure economic
loss arises solely because of its relationship with D’Amato.  44                              
The Court of Appeal erred when they held that pure economic loss was not
recoverable in this case because the respondents were unaware of the existence
of Arbor.  They stated that because of this lack of specific knowledge, the
requisite proximity was lacking between the respondents and Arbor.  This is the
“known plaintiff ” approach of Stevenson J. in Norsk, which was rejected
in that case and is not the law in Canada.  45                              
The trial judge appeared to accept McLachlin J.’s approach in Norsk. 
However, he focused on proximity, without regard for the concept of
foreseeability.  McLachlin J.’s reasons in Norsk are specific that, in
addition to proximity, the loss in question also must be foreseeable. See Norsk,
at p. 1152.  In addition, the trial judge ignored the second half of the
two-stage Anns test, in failing to determine whether any factors existed
to limit recovery. See Norsk, at pp. 1154-55.  46                              
The errors in both courts open the issue of liability here.  As
previously noted, while the two approaches from Norsk differ in
principle, they will most often achieve the same result.  This is the case in
the present appeal, as, in my opinion, the appellant cannot succeed under
either of the two approaches in Norsk.  47                              
Arbor cannot succeed in its claim for pure economic loss under the La
Forest J. approach.   Contrary to the submission of the appellants, this is
a case of contractual relational economic loss. Arbor’s loss arises solely
because of the contractual relationship between the company and its
employee/shareholder D’Amato.  Second, there do not appear to be any good
policy reasons to depart from the exclusionary rule, if such a rule is to be
adopted.   La Forest J.’s analysis calls for a general exclusionary rule,
subject to any policy concerns which militate in favour of recovery of
relational economic loss.  If anything, policy reasons would tend to militate
against recovery for this type of loss.  If an injury to a key shareholder in a
small corporation was held to be sufficient to warrant recovery of pure
economic loss, then the indeterminate possibilities with larger corporations
are obvious.  48                              
A party may have better prospects of recovering pure economic loss under
the somewhat broader McLachlin J. approach.  However, even using that analysis,
Arbor cannot succeed.  McLachlin J.’s theory is based on the Anns
two-stage test.  Arbor must show that the loss was within the reasonable
contemplation of the respondents so as to raise a duty of care, and, in
addition, that there are no considerations which should limit the scope of that
duty, the class of persons to whom it is owed or the damages arising from a
breach of the duty.  There must also be sufficient proximity between the
negligent act and the damage to ground liability.  49                              
At page 1153 of Norsk, McLachlin J. lists several factors which
are relevant to proximity.  They are: the relationship between the parties;
physical propinquity; assumed or imposed obligations; and close causal
connection.  Of these factors, only the last has any relevance in this case. 
There was no relationship between the respondents and Arbor, nor was there
physical propinquity or assumed or imposed obligations.  The most that can be
said is that the negligence of the respondents caused Arbor’s loss.  This
connection is not direct.  In my opinion, there is insufficient proximity in
this case to warrant recovery of pure economic loss.   In my opinion the loss
was neither foreseeable nor sufficiently proximate to the act of negligence to
warrant recovery.  50                              
 Finally, even if one can say that defendants in the position of the
respondents should have reasonably contemplated persons in the position of
Arbor, the second stage of the Anns test, dealing with policy reasons to
limit recovery, would deny recovery to Arbor.  51                              
If a company is allowed to recover pure economic loss arising from the
loss of a key shareholder and employee, the problem of indeterminacy arises. 
An injury to one person obviously has a ripple effect, causing economic loss in
various forms to a large number of people, both individuals and corporations. 
To allow recovery in these circumstances would invite similar claims by
multi-membered plaintiffs.  It would remove the incentive for contracting
parties to negotiate on who will bear risk of loss, and for corporations to
plan for events such as this, through insurance or otherwise.  52                              
To conclude, Arbor is not entitled to damages for pure economic loss
under either of the tests in Norsk.  The appeal for recovery on this
ground is dismissed.  As a result of this conclusion the issue arose whether
the award of $36,650 by the Court of  Appeal under the alter ego
principle should stand.  The rationale for the alter ego doctrine is not
as strong as it once was, in light of recent developments in tort law. 
However, the respondents did not cross-appeal on this issue, so the Court of
Appeal’s award of $36,650 remains as is.  B.                Loss
of Future Earning Capacity  53                              
The trial judge awarded the appellant D’Amato $290,000 for loss of
earning capacity.  The Court of Appeal reduced that amount to $50,000.  Loss of
earning capacity is an award based on the recognition that a plaintiff’s
capacity to earn money was an asset which has been taken away.  See Andrews
v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229.  The calculation was
based on the level of earning which the plaintiff would likely have achieved
and the period that he would sustain it, subject to deductions made for
contingencies of life.  54                              
The trial judge made a simple calculation:  D’Amato was skilled enough
to have earned $55,000 per year as an autobody repairer, which over seven years
amounted to $385,000, followed by a 25 percent deduction for contingencies. 
The Court of Appeal considered the fact that D’Amato continued to receive
remuneration from Arbor to be significant and altered the trial judge’s
decision.  The Court of Appeal felt that the only loss in D’Amato’s earnings
was his share of the loss to Arbor, averaged over the  relevant time period. 
Implicit in the Court of Appeal’s decision was the assumption that Arbor would
remain a viable business over the next seven years.  55                              
Both judgments have frailties.  The trial judge arguably took an overly
simplistic view of D’Amato’s loss when he related D’Amato’s loss of earning
capacity solely to his ability to work physically as an autobody repairman.  
D’Amato continued to earn much the same as he did prior to his accident,
because he continued to draw a salary from Arbor.  D’Amato’s ability to earn
was not based solely on his physical ability, but also on his ownership of a
viable and profitable company.  That being so,  the trial judge may have erred
in attributing D’Amato’s loss solely to his ability to do autobody work.  56                              
Notwithstanding this, the trial judge’s calculation should not be
disturbed  unless patently unreasonable or based on incorrect legal
principles.  It is clear the trial judge was aware of all of the evidence of
D’Amato’s income from Arbor.  The trial judge found as a fact that D’Amato had
lost a significant amount of his earning capacity owing to the respondents’
negligence.  It also was a finding of fact that D’Amato would continue to
contribute to Arbor, but at a greatly reduced rate.  Twenty-five percent was
deducted from the award by the trial judge because of D’Amato’s continued
contribution to Arbor.  It is obvious that the trial judge did not ignore
D’Amato’s involvement with Arbor when calculating loss of earning capacity.  57                              
The Court of Appeal’s view may be premised on an incorrect assumption --
that Arbor will continue in business throughout D’Amato’s working life.  There
was evidence to suggest that Arbor is in difficulty, owing to its loss of
profits subsequent to D’Amato’s injuries, and may have to be sold.  The Court
of Appeal judgment does not seem to account for this possibility.  It is apparent
that if Arbor were to be sold   D’Amato would have difficulty replacing his
income, unless the sale price enabled the owners to retire, and there was no
evidence to that effect.  The trial judge was entitled to find, as he did, that
D’Amato would have difficulty finding work as a repairman because of his
injuries and as an owner because of his lack of English skills and education. 
This finding of fact justified the trial judge’s conclusion.  58                              
The Court of Appeal interfered with the findings of the trial judge. 
While they did not point to any legal errors on the trial judge’s assessment of
earning capacity, they stated that the trial judge “failed to consider the
degree to which D’Amato’s overall earning capacity in the context of his
position at Arbor had been impaired by his inability to perform heavy physical
labour” (p. 57).  If the trial judge had ignored such evidence, an error in law
may have occurred, justifying intervention.  However, in my opinion, the trial
judge was aware of the basis for D’Amato’s continuing role with Arbor, and of
his income from it.  59                              
In suggesting its own “more realistic” approach, the Court of Appeal
merely disagreed with the trial judge’s decision.  In so doing the Court of
Appeal failed to identify any palpable and overriding error such as to permit
their interference.  The appeal on this ground is allowed.  IV.              Conclusion  60                              
In the result, the appeal is allowed in part:  (i)    The judgment of the Court of Appeal denying
recovery to Arbor for pure economic loss is upheld.  (ii)   The judgment of the Court of Appeal
awarding D’Amato the sum of $36,650 is upheld.  (iii)The judgment of the Court of Appeal reversing
the trial judge’s award   of $290,000 for loss of future earning capacity is
set aside and the trial judge’s decision is restored.  (iv)  The appellants were substantially successful
in their appeal and are entitled to their costs throughout. Appeal allowed in part with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Giusti, Barrett &
Ellan, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the respondents:  Bull, Housser &
Tupper, Vancouver.   * See Erratum [1997] 2 S.C.R. iv  