Galaske v. O'Donnell, [1994] 1
S.C.R. 670  Karl Thomas Galaske, an infant suing
by his Guardian ad Litem, Elizabeth
Moser                                               Appellant  v.  Erich Stauffer, Florence Horvath,
Columcille O'Donnell and Bourgoin Contracting
Ltd.                                        Respondents  and between  Karl Thomas Galaske, an infant suing
by his Guardian ad Litem, Elizabeth
Moser                                               Appellant  v.  Erich Stauffer, Florence Horvath,
Columcille O'Donnell, Bourgoin Contracting Ltd. and Mala Galaske as Representative ad
Litem of the Estate of Peter Helmut Galaske,
Deceased                          Respondents  Indexed as:  Galaske v.
O'Donnell  File No.:  23109.  1993:  December 3;
1994:  April 14.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                      The appellant, who
was eight years old at the time, went with his father to visit the respondent
S, a family friend.  It was decided that they would go in the respondent's new
truck to visit his vegetable garden, which was about a mile and a half from the
residence.  The truck was fitted with seat belts for all the occupants of the
front seat.  The appellant sat in the middle between his father and the
respondent.  The respondent did not suggest that his passengers put on their
seat belts because he did not wish to take the "fathership" away from
his friend.  He readily conceded that if the young appellant had been in the
vehicle alone with him he would have insisted that he wear the seat belt.  He
further agreed that he was aware of the importance of seat belts as a safety
factor.  The route to the vegetable garden required the respondent to drive by
an intersection that he knew to be dangerous.  At that intersection, through no
fault of his own, his truck was struck by another vehicle.  The two passengers
were thrown from the vehicle as a result of the impact.  The father was killed
and the child received serious injuries rendering him paraplegic.  The evidence
was clear that if seat belts had been worn, no serious injuries would have been
suffered by either of the passengers.  The trial judge concluded that it was
not unreasonable for the respondent to expect that the appellant's father was
the appropriate person to exercise control over him and to ensure that he wore
a seat belt.  He therefore found that there was no duty of care owed by the respondent
to the appellant with respect to the use of the seat belt.  As a result the
respondent could not be found to have been negligent.  The Court of Appeal
upheld the judgment.                     Held (Sopinka and Major JJ.
dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed.                      The duty of a
driver to ensure that young passengers wear their seat belts is not negated by
the presence of a parent in the car.  The presence of a parent may mean that
the responsibility is shared but it cannot negate the duty owed by the driver
to the passenger under the age of 16.  The relationship between driver and
passenger is such that the driver's negligent actions or negligent failure to
act can lead to injuries to the passengers.  Further, it is well established
and clearly foreseeable that harm may well result from the failure to wear a
seat belt just as much as it may result from negligent driving.                     The trial judge and
the Court of Appeal were in error in failing to recognize that the duty of care
owed by the driver of the motor vehicle to young passengers continued to exist
despite the presence of a parent in the vehicle.  That is an error of law that
should be corrected by an appellate court.  The definition of the standard of
care is a mixed question of law and fact that will be for the trial judge to
determine.  The extent of the duty owed by the driver of a vehicle to a child
passenger when a parent is present will undoubtedly vary with the
circumstances.                     Per La Forest J.:  The
responsibility for ensuring that infant passengers use their seat belts must
always be borne at least in part by the driver.  Not only is the driver in
control of the vehicle; for purposes of distributing loss in the event of
accident, the driver is most often the insured.  Here the respondent owed a
duty of care to take some action concerning the appellant's use of a seat
belt.  The standard of care owed is what kind of action was reasonable under
all the circumstances, an issue that is for the trial judge to determine. 
However, the mere fact that the respondent thought about the situation and then
decided to do nothing is insufficient in law to meet that standard.                     Per McLachlin J.:  The trial judge
found no duty relationship between the respondent driver and the appellant, and
this was an error of law.  His express words "I find there was no duty of
care" are confirmed by the absence following this finding of the sort of
analysis of all the facts and circumstances which is typical of determination
of the standard of care.  The standard of care is for the trial judge to
determine on the evidence, and may vary from case to case.  While, in general,
insistence that passengers wear seat belts is a reasonable measure,
circumstances may arise where a trial judge might conclude otherwise.                     Per Sopinka and Major JJ. (dissenting): 
While the respondent owed the appellant a duty of care, the courts below found
such a duty and determined as a finding of fact that the standard of care
imposed by that duty had been met.  The trial judge stated that he found there
was no duty of care owed, but it is apparent in the context of the whole of his
oral reasons that this statement was intended to refer to the standard, and not
to the duty, of care.  The Court of Appeal, in confirming the trial judge's
decision, also referred to the duty of care while meaning the standard.  The
standard of care involves questions of law and fact, and the formulation and
application of the standard may be influenced by the presence of a statutory
obligation, as existed in this case.  Appellate courts must not interfere with
findings of fact, whether by judge or jury, if there was evidence capable of
supporting the decision, or unless there has been a palpable and overriding
error.  Here the trial judge reached his conclusion after a careful review of
the law and evidence.  As there is nothing in the record to suggest that he
committed a palpable and overriding error, his decision is not subject to
reversal on appeal.  Cases Cited  By Cory J.                     Referred to:  The Queen in right of Canada v.
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205; City of Kamloops v.
Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Anns v. Merton London Borough Council,
[1978] A.C. 728; Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; Hall
v. Hebert, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 159; Donoghue v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C.
562; Froom v. Butcher, [1975] 3 All E.R. 520; Jackson v. Millar,
[1972] 2 O.R. 197 (H.C.), rev'd [1973] 1 O.R. 399 (C.A.), rev'd [1976] 1 S.C.R.
225; Dodgson v. Topolinsky (1980), 125 D.L.R. (3d) 177; Pugliese v.
Macrillo Estate (1988), 67 O.R. (2d) 641; Thurmeier v. Bray (1990),
83 Sask. R. 183; Ohlheiser v. Cummings, [1979] 6 W.W.R. 282; Keller
v. Kautz (1982), 20 Sask. R. 420; Rinas v. City of Regina (1983), 26
Sask. R. 132; Berube v. Vanest, [1991] O.J. No. 1633 (QL); Horsman
v. Bulmer (1987), 42 C.C.L.T. 220; Schon v. Hodgins, [1988] O.J.
No. 743 (QL); Gervais v. Richard (1984), 48 O.R. (2d) 191; Stamp
v. The Queen in right of Ontario (1984), 47 O.R. (2d) 214; Beaver v.
Crowe (1974), 49 D.L.R. (3d) 114; Wallace v. Berrigan (1988), 47
D.L.R. (4th) 752; Holstein v. Berzolla, [1981] 4 W.W.R. 159; Ducharme
v. Davies (1981), 12 Sask. R. 137 (Q.B.), aff'd in part [1984] 1 W.W.R. 699
(Sask. C.A.); Shaw Estate v. Roemer (1982), 51 N.S.R. (2d) 229; Yuan
v. Farstad (1967), 62 W.W.R. 645; Earl v. Bourdon (1975), 65 D.L.R.
(3d) 646; Gagnon v. Beaulieu, [1977] 1 W.W.R. 702; Aujla v.
Christensen, [1992] B.C.J. No. 860 (QL); Pharness v. Wallace,
[1987] B.C.J. No. 2393 (QL), aff'd [1989] B.C.J. No. 2112 (QL); Bentzler
v. Braun, 149 N.W.2d 626 (1967); Mortensen v. Southern Pacific Co.,
53 Cal. Rptr. 851 (1966); Da Costa v. Da Costa, [1993] B.C.J.
No. 1485 (QL); Arnold v. Teno, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 287; McCallion v.
Dodd, [1966] N.Z.L.R. 710; Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow, [1974] S.C.R.
239; Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1 S.C.R. 1186.  By Major J.
(dissenting)                     Le Lievre v. Gould, [1893] 1 Q.B. 491; Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Vincent, [1979] 1 S.C.R. 364; DesBrisay v.
Canadian Government Merchant Marine Ltd., [1941] S.C.R. 230; The Queen
in right of Canada v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205; Stein
v. The Ship "Kathy K", [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802; Geffen v.
Goodman Estate, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 353; Benmax v. Austin Motor Co.,
[1955] A.C. 370; Warren v. Coombes (1979), 142 C.L.R. 531; Lewis v.
Todd, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 694; Migliore v. Gerard (1987), 42 D.L.R.
(4th) 619.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited  Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 288, s. 217(6).  Authors Cited  Fleming, John G.  The Law of Torts,
8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.  Linden,
Allen M.  Canadian Tort Law, 5th ed. Toronto:  Butterworths, 1993.  Todd,
Stephen M. D., ed.  The Law of Torts in New Zealand.  Sydney: 
Law Book Co., 1991.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (1992), 67 B.C.L.R. (2d) 190,
13 B.C.A.C. 143, 24 W.A.C. 143, affirming a decision of Harvey J.
dismissing the appellant's action against the respondents Stauffer and
Horvath.  Appeal allowed, Sopinka and Major JJ. dissenting.                     Romano F.
Giusti, for the
appellant.                     Avon M. Mersey and Michael J. Sobkin,
for the respondents Erich Stauffer and Florence Horvath.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     La
Forest J. -- I have had
the advantage of reading the reasons of my colleagues, Justice Cory, Justice
McLachlin and Justice Major, and I have reached the same conclusion as Cory J.                     The responsibility
for ensuring that infant passengers use their seat belts must always be borne
at least in part by the driver.  Not only is the driver in control of the
vehicle; for purposes of distributing loss in the event of accident, the driver
is most often the insured.  I would differentiate more sharply than Cory J.
does between the duty of care (a question of law) and the standard of care (a
question of mixed law and fact), though I confess that the distinction may at
times be elusive.  In the present case, the respondent driver owed a duty of
care to take some action concerning the appellant's use of a seat belt.  The
standard of care owed by the respondent is what kind of action was reasonable
under all the circumstances, an issue that is for the trial judge to
determine.  However, the mere fact that the respondent thought about the
situation and then decided to do nothing is, in my view, insufficient in law to
meet that standard.                     For these reasons,
I would dispose of the appeal in the manner proposed by Cory J.                     The judgment of
L'Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier and Cory JJ. was delivered by                     Cory
J. -- The issue raised on
this appeal is whether the general duty of care owed by the driver of a car to
his passengers includes a duty to take reasonable steps to ensure that a
passenger under 16 years of age wears a seat belt.  If it is found that such a
duty exists then it must be determined whether that duty is negated by the
presence of a parent of the child.  Factual Background                     On August 17, 1985,
Karl Galaske, then eight years of age, together with his father Peter came to
visit Erich Stauffer, a friend of the family of many years.                     It was decided that
Karl and his father would go in Erich Stauffer's new truck to visit his
vegetable garden, which was located a mile and a half from Stauffer's
residence.  The truck was fitted with seat belts for all the occupants of the
front seat.  Karl sat in the middle between his father and Erich Stauffer.                     Mr. Stauffer did
not suggest that his passengers put on their seat belts.  He omitted doing so
because, in his words, he did not wish to take the "fathership" away
from his friend Peter Galaske.  He readily conceded that if young Karl had been
in the vehicle alone with him he would have insisted that he wear the seat
belt.  It was only the presence of the father which prevented him from
requiring that the seat belt be worn.  He further agreed that he was aware of
the importance of seat belts as a safety factor.  This resulted, in part, from
instructions that he had received from the Ministry of Highways.  As well, he
had been stopped on no less than three occasions with regard to seat belts.  On
the first occasion, he had been warned by the police of the necessity of
wearing his seat belt.  On the second, he had received a ticket for failing to
wear his seat belt.  On the third, he was the driver of the car when his wife
received a ticket for failing to wear her seat belt.                     The decision not to
insist upon Karl wearing his seat belt had tragic results.  The route to the
vegetable garden required Stauffer to drive by an intersection that he knew to
be dangerous.  At that intersection, through no fault of his own, his truck was
struck by another vehicle, driven by the defendant O'Donnell.  The Galaske
father and son were thrown from the vehicle as a result of the impact.  Peter
Galaske was killed and Karl Galaske received serious injuries rendering him
paraplegic.  The Courts Below  The Trial Division                     The trial judge
held that the accident itself was caused solely by the negligence of the
defendant O'Donnell.  He then considered whether the respondent Stauffer could
be held responsible for the failure to ensure that Karl Galaske had worn his
seat belt.  The evidence was clear that if seat belts had been worn, no serious
injuries would have been suffered by either of the passengers.                     The trial judge
accepted the respondent's evidence that he was aware that seat belts should be
worn to reduce injuries.  However, the respondent was not aware of the specific
provisions of s. 217(6) of the British Columbia Motor Vehicle Act, 
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 288, which prohibits the driving of a motor vehicle unless
seat belts are worn by children under 16 years of age.  The trial judge
considered that the case of The Queen in right of Canada v. Saskatchewan
Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205, established the principle that a breach of
the provisions of s. 217(6) did not in itself give a right of recovery.  He
decided that the statutory formulation of the duty did not, in the
circumstances of this case, define a specific standard of reasonable conduct. 
Lastly, he determined that the liability of the driver should be determined in
light of the surrounding circumstances.  He concluded that it was not
unreasonable for Stauffer to expect that Karl's father was the appropriate person
to exercise control over him and to ensure that he wore a seat belt.  He
therefore found that there was no duty of care owed by the defendant Stauffer
to the infant plaintiff with respect to the use of the seat belt.  As a result
Stauffer could not be found to have been negligent.  The Court of Appeal (1992), 67 B.C.L.R. (2d) 190, 13
B.C.A.C. 143, 24 W.A.C. 143                     The Court of Appeal
agreed with the conclusions of the trial judge.  The majority noted that what
was of significance was the presence of the father in the vehicle and the
friendly and close relationship which existed between Stauffer and the father. 
This was sufficient to justify the conclusion that there was no liability
resting upon Stauffer.                     Locke J.A. agreed
with the conclusions of the majority but observed that the accident occurred in
1985 when seat belt legislation was not as prominent as it was at the time of
the appeal.  He stated that if the accident had happened at the time of the
appeal, his conclusion would have been different.  Analysis                     The issues that
arise in this case can, I think, be resolved upon an application of the classic
principles of tort law.                     Basically, a
defendant can only be found liable if it is established, first, that he owed a
duty of care to the plaintiff and, second, that he was in breach of that duty
and failed to exercise the standard of care of a reasonable person placed in
the same circumstances.  Let us first consider the concept of the duty of care.  The Existence of a Duty of Care,
Generally                     In City of
Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2, at pp. 10-11, Wilson J. 
paraphrased the two-stage test formulated in Anns v. Merton London Borough
Council, [1978] A.C. 728, for determining whether a duty of care existed. 
She did so in these words:  (1)is
there a sufficiently close relationship between the parties ... so that, in the
reasonable contemplation of the authority, carelessness on its part might cause
damage to that person?  If so,  (2)are
there any considerations which ought to negative or limit (a) the scope of the
duty and (b) the class of persons to whom it is owed or (c) the damages to
which a breach of it may give rise?  This approach has been quoted with
approval in Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228, and Hall
v. Hebert, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 159.  This is the basis upon which a
determination should be made as to whether there is a sufficiently close
relationship between the parties to establish that a prima facie duty of
care is owed by one party (the defendant) to another party (the plaintiff). 
The principle was set out in Donoghue v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562, at
p. 580, in these classic words:  You
must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably
foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour.  Who, then, in law is my
neighbour?  The answer seems to be -- persons who are so closely and directly
affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as
being so affected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which
are called in question.                     Is there then a
sufficiently close relationship between the driver of a motor vehicle and his
passengers to establish a prima facie duty of care?  I think that there
undoubtedly is such a relationship.  A driver owes a duty of care to his
passengers to take reasonable steps to prevent foreseeable injuries.  For
example, a driver must comply with the rules of the road; a driver must
exercise reasonable caution in the operation of a motor vehicle; a driver must
not operate a motor vehicle that is known to be mechanically defective, for
example without brakes or headlights or an adequate steering mechanism.  The
next question to be resolved is this: should that duty of care extend to
ensuring that passengers under 16 years of age wear their seat belts?  The General Duty Resting on All
Occupants of a Car to Wear Seat Belts                     It has long been
recognized that all occupants of a motor vehicle have a duty to wear their seat
belts.  In his excellent text Canadian Tort Law (5th ed. 1993), Justice
Linden carefully reviewed the cases involving the use of seat belts.  He
observed that Canadian courts have recognized that passengers and drivers have
a duty to ensure their own safety in a car by wearing seat belts.  A failure to
do so will result in an assessment of contributory negligence against that
person.  The author notes that where the seat belt defence was rejected, there
was no evidence that the failure to wear the seat belt caused or aggravated the
injury.  That is certainly not at issue in this case.                     The reasoning of
Lord Denning in Froom v. Butcher, [1975] 3 All E.R. 520, at pp. 525-27,
has often been cited in support of the need to wear seat belts.  There he
stated:                     The
sensible practice                     It
is compulsory for every motor car to be fitted with seat belts for the front
seats.  The regulations so provide.  They apply to every motor car registered
since 1st 1965.  In the regulations seat belts are called, in cumbrous
language, `body-restraining seat belts.'  A `seat belt' is defined as `a belt
intended to be worn by a person in a vehicle and designed to prevent or lessen
injury to its wearer in the event of an accident to the vehicle
. . .'                     Seeing
that it is compusory [sic] to fit seat belts, Parliament must have
thought it sensible to wear them.  But it did not make it compulsory for anyone
to wear a seat belt.  Everyone is free to wear it or not, as he pleases.  Free
in this sense, that if he does not wear it, he is free from any penalty by the
magistrates.  Free in the sense that everyone is free to run his head against a
brick wall, if he pleases.  He can do it if he likes without being punished by
the law.  But it is not a sensible thing to do.  If he does it, it is his own
fault; and he has only himself to thank for the consequences.                     Much
material has been put before us about the value of wearing a seat belt.  It
shows quite plainly that everyone in the front seats of a car should wear a
seat belt.  Not only on long trips, but also on short ones.  Not only in the
town, but also in the country.  Not only when there is fog, but also when it is
clear.  Not only by fast drivers, but also by slow ones.  Not only on
motorways, but also on side roads. . . .                                                                     . . .                     Quite
a lot of people, however, think differently about seat belts.  Some are like
Mr. Froom here.  They think that they would be less likely to be injured if
they were thrown clear than if they were strapped in.  They would be wrong.... 
In determining responsibility, the law eliminates the personal equation.  It
takes no notice of the views of the particular individual; or of others like
him.  It requires everyone to exercise all such precautions as a man of
ordinary prudence would observe....                                                                     . . .                     Other
people take the view that the risk of an accident is so remote that it is not
necessary to wear a seat belt on all occasions; but only when there are
circumstances which carry a high risk. . . . I cannot accept this
view either.  You never know when a risk may arise.  It often happens suddenly
and when least anticipated, when there is no time to fasten the seat belt. 
Besides, it is easy to forget when only done occasionally.  But, done
regularly, it becomes automatic.  Every time that a car goes out on the road
there is the risk of an accident.  Not that you yourself will be negligent. 
But that someone else will be.  That is a possibility which a prudent man
should, and will, guard against.  He should always, if he is wise, wear a seat
belt.                                                                     . . .                     Lastly,
there are many people who do not wear their seat belts, simply through
forgetfulness or inadvertence or thoughtlessness. . . . The case for
wearing seat belts is so strong that I do not think the law can admit
forgetfulness as an excuse.  These reasons are as sensible and
compelling in 1994 as they were in 1975, and should have been in 1985.                     The courts in this
country have consistently deducted from 5 to 25 percent from claims for damages
for personal injury on the grounds that the victims were contributorily
negligent for not wearing their seat belts.  This has been done whenever it has
been demonstrated that the injuries would have been reduced if the belts had in
fact been worn.                     The following cases
provide but a few examples of the application of this principle:  Jackson v.
Millar, [1972] 2 O.R. 197 (H.C.), rev'd on another point [1973] 1 O.R. 399
(C.A.), rev'd [1976] 1 S.C.R. 225; Dodgson v. Topolinsky (1980), 125
D.L.R. (3d) 177 (Ont. H.C.); Pugliese v. Macrillo Estate (1988), 67 O.R.
(2d) 641 (H.C.); Thurmeier v. Bray (1990), 83 Sask. R. 183 (Q.B.); Ohlheiser
v. Cummings, [1979] 6 W.W.R. 282 (Sask. Q.B.); Keller v. Kautz
(1982), 20 Sask. R. 420 (Q.B.); Rinas v. City of Regina (1983), 26 Sask.
R. 132 (Q.B.); Berube v. Vanest, [1991] O.J. No. 1633 (Ont. Ct. (Gen.
Div.)); Horsman v. Bulmer (1987), 42 C.C.L.T. 220 (N.B.C.A.); Schon
v. Hodgins, [1988] O.J. No. 743 (Dist. Ct.); Gervais v. Richard (1984),
48 O.R. (2d) 191 (H.C.); Stamp v. The Queen in right of Ontario (1984),
47 O.R. (2d) 214 (C.A.); Beaver v. Crowe (1974), 49 D.L.R. (3d) 114
(N.S.S.C.T.D.); Wallace v. Berrigan (1988), 47 D.L.R. (4th) 752
(N.S.S.C.A.D.); Holstein v. Berzolla, [1981] 4 W.W.R. 159 (Q.B.); Ducharme
v. Davies (1981), 12 Sask. R. 137 (Q.B.), aff'd in part [1984] 1 W.W.R. 699
(Sask. C.A.); Shaw Estate v. Roemer (1982), 51 N.S.R. (2d) 229
(N.S.S.C.A.D.).                     The same principle
has been applied in British Columbia, as the following cases demonstrate:  Yuan
v. Farstad (1967), 62 W.W.R. 645 (B.C.S.C.); Earl v. Bourdon (1975),
65 D.L.R. (3d) 646 (B.C.S.C.); Gagnon v. Beaulieu, [1977] 1 W.W.R. 702
(B.C.S.C.); Aujla v. Christensen, [1992] B.C.J. No. 860 (S.C.); Pharness
v. Wallace, [1987] B.C.J. No. 2393 (S.C.), aff'd [1989] B.C.J. No. 2112
(C.A.).                     The decision of
Munroe J. in Yuan appears to be one of the first Canadian decisions to
hold that occupants of a car have a duty to wear a seat belt.  That is to say,
there is a duty of care resting upon occupants of a motor vehicle to wear a
seat belt.  The accident in that case occurred in 1966 in a residential area of
the city of Vancouver.  The following prescient statements made by Munroe J. at
pp. 651-53, in my view, are a correct expression of the principles
applicable to the wearing of seat belts.                     It
is the submission of the defendants that the deceased, by his failure to use
his seat belt, failed to use reasonable care or to take proper precautions for
his own safety and thereby contributed to his own injuries.  If that is so, the
defence of contributory negligence must succeed:  See Nance v. B.C. Electric
Ry. (1951) 2 WWR (NS) 665, [1951] AC 601, 67 CRTC 340, reversing [1950] 1
WWR 797, 65 CRTC 237; Car & Gen. Insur. Corpn. v. Seymour [1956] SCR
322 affirming (sub nom. Seymour v. Maloney) 36 MPR, at 360; Prior v.
Kyle (1965) 52 WWR 1, varying (1964) 47 WWR 489 (B.C.C.A.).                     In
support of such submission the defendants called as witnesses Capt. E. T.
Corning, retired captain of the Seattle police force, and Dr. Peter Fisher, a
Seattle physician and surgeon and specialist in internal medicine.  Each of
these men has made a study of the effectiveness of seat belts in safeguarding
motorists from injuries.  Their qualifications and experience entitle them to
give opinion evidence.  Capt. Corning has investigated hundreds of automobile
accidents.  Based upon his experience and studies, he is firmly of opinion that
lap seat belts, when worn, do tend to lessen the severity of injuries in most
automobile accidents.  Based upon personal observations made at race tracks as
well as other studies made by him, Dr. Fisher is of opinion that a lap seat
belt will prevent ejection from a vehicle and will lessen the severity of any
steering wheel injury because it prevents body displacement.  . . .
Based upon the evidence of these two experts, which was uncontroverted, and
based upon the general knowledge of mankind, it is clear, and I find, that lap
seat belts are effective in reducing fatalities and minimizing injuries
resulting from automobile accidents.  I adopt the view of Frankfurter, J. who
once said, "there comes a point where this court should not be ignorant as
judges of what we know as men."                                                                     . . .  In
the face of such knowledge, and despite the apparent absence of any Canadian
precedents upon the matter, I am of opinion that a reasonable and prudent
driver of a motor vehicle in a city would and should make use of a seat belt
provided for his use.  I am not unmindful of the fact that in driving without
having his seat belt done up, the deceased was committing neither a crime nor
any breach of statute.  He was lawfully entitled to drive without using his
seat belt, but that is not determinative of the issue as to whether or not in
so doing he failed to take proper precautions for his safety and thus
contributed to his injuries.  If he did so fail the defendants are entitled to
be relieved of some degree of responsibility for the resulting injuries, as is
provided by the Contributory Negligence Act.                     Munroe J. further
supported his decision on the basis of American cases which found that a duty
to wear a seat belt could be based upon common-law standards of care.  He
referred to Bentzler v. Braun, 149 N.W.2d 626 (Wis. 1967) and to the
California District Court of Appeal in Mortensen v. Southern Pacific Co.,
53 Cal. Rptr. 851 (1966).                     These cases
demonstrate that since 1968 courts in Canada have properly recognized that the
exercise of reasonable care requires occupants of a motor vehicle to wear seat
belts.  This is true whether a vehicle is being driven on a highway or in the
city, over a long or a short distance.  The cases correctly reflect the
dictates of common sense.  Long before 1985, when this accident occurred, it
was a reasonable requirement that seat belts be worn.  The Duty Owed by a
Driver to Ensure That Passengers Under 16 Wear Seat Belts                     There is therefore
a duty of care owed by an occupant of a car to wear a seat belt.  This duty is
based upon the sensible recognition of the safety provided by seat belts and
the foreseeability of harm resulting from the failure to wear them.  What then
of children in a car?  Children under 16, although they may contest it, do
require guidance and direction from parents and older persons.  This has always
been recognized by society.  That guidance and protection must extend to
ensuring that those under 16 properly wear their seat belts.  To the question
of who should assume that duty, the answer must be that there may be two or
more people who bear that responsibility.  However one of those responsible must
always be the driver of the car.                     A driver taking
children as passengers must accept some responsibility for the safety of those
children.  The driving of a motor vehicle is neither a God-given nor a
constitutional right.  It is a licensed activity that is subject to a number of
conditions, including the demonstration of a minimum standard of skill and
knowledge pertaining to driving.  Obligations and responsibilities flow from
the right to drive.  Those responsibilities must include some regard for the safety
of young passengers.  Children, as a result of their immaturity, may be unable
to properly consider and provide for their own safety.  The driver must take
reasonable steps to see that young passengers wear their seat belts.  This is
so since it is foreseeable that harm can result from the failure to wear a seat
belt, and since frequently, a child will, for any number of reasons, fail to
secure the seat belt.                     The driver of a car
is in a position of control.  The control may not be quite as great as that of
the master of a vessel or the pilot of an aircraft.  Nevertheless it exists. 
Coexistent with the right to drive and control a car is the responsibility of
the driver to take reasonable steps to provide for the safety of passengers. 
Those reasonable steps must include not only the duty to drive carefully but
also to see that seat belts are worn by young passengers who may not be
responsible for ensuring their own safety.                     In my view, quite
apart from any statutory provisions, drivers must accept the responsibility of
taking all reasonable steps to ensure that passengers under 16 years of age are
in fact wearing their seat belts.  The general public knowledge of the vital
importance of seat belts as a safety factor requires a driver to ensure that young
people make use of them.  I would observe that this same conclusion was reached
by Paris J. in Da Costa v. Da Costa, [1993] B.C.J. No. 1485 (S.C.).  He
too concluded that there is a duty owed by a driver to ensure that children are
wearing their seat belts.  The statutory provisions pertaining to seat belts
must now be considered.  The Effect of the Motor Vehicle Act                     Section 217(6) of Motor
Vehicle Act reads as follows:                     217.     ...                    (6)  A
person shall not drive on a highway a motor vehicle in which there is a
passenger who has attained age 6 but is under age 16 and who occupies a seating
position for which a seat belt assembly is provided unless that passenger is
wearing the complete seat belt assembly in a properly adjusted and securely
fastened manner.                     In The Queen in
right of Canada v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, supra, the issue was
whether a breach of the Canada Grain Act , S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 7, by
delivery of infested grain out of a grain elevator conferred upon the Canadian
Wheat Board a civil right of action against the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool for
damages.  No allegation of negligence at common law was put forward.  The
notion of a nominate tort of statutory breach giving rise to recovery simply on
proof of breach of the statute was rejected.  So too was the argument that an
unexcused breach of a statute constituted negligence per se which would
lead to an automatic finding of liability.  The Court, in the clear and
convincing reasons delivered by Dickson J. (as he then was), took the position
that proof of a statutory breach which causes damages may be evidence of
negligence.  Further, it was held that the statutory formulation of the duty may,
but not necessarily will, afford a specific or useful standard of reasonable
conduct.                     It follows that the
statutory requirement pertaining to seat belts is subsumed in the general law
of negligence.  However, the statute can, I think, be taken as a public
indication that the failure of a driver to ensure that children in the vehicle
are wearing seat belts constitutes unreasonable conduct.  Further, it may be
taken as indicating that such a failure on the part of the driver demonstrates
conduct which falls below the standard required by the community and is thus
negligent.  In this case, the legislation is simply another factor which can be
taken into account by the Court in the course of determining whether the
failure to ensure children in the car are wearing seat belts constituted
negligent behaviour on the part of a driver.                     It is clear that
the breach of a statutory provision is not conclusive of liability.  Yet the
existence of the section does provide further support for finding that a duty
of care rests on the driver to take all reasonable steps to see that seat belts
are worn by children.  The statute reflects the public importance placed on
safety measures and a societal concern for promoting the safety of children. 
It is, as well, a public recognition that children often require the help and
supervision of adults, particularly in ensuring that when they are passengers
in a vehicle, they are made reasonably safe.  Is the Driver's Duty
of Care Negated by the Presence of a Parent?                     The duty of a
driver to ensure that young passengers wear their seat belts is well
established.  It then must be asked whether the presence of a parent in the car
negates this duty of care owed by the driver.  The trial judge and the Court of
Appeal took the position that the presence of the parent in the car removed or
terminated the duty of care owed by the driver.  In support of that position,
the respondent relies on the decisions of this Court in Arnold v. Teno,
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 287, at p. 311, and of the New Zealand Court of Appeal in McCallion
v. Dodd, [1966] N.Z.L.R. 710, at p. 721.  In my view, these decisions
simply indicate that there may be a joint responsibility or duty of care
resting upon both a parent and a third party.  The presence of a parent in the
car may mean that the responsibility is shared but it cannot negate the duty
owed by the driver to the passenger under the age of 16.                     The driver of a car
owes a duty of care to a child who is a passenger.  For example, the driver
must obey the rules of the road and drive carefully whether a parent is present
or not.  That duty of care is owed and continues to be owed by a driver to all
child passengers, irrespective of their parents' presence.  The relationship
between driver and passenger is such that the driver's negligent actions or
negligent failure to act can lead to injuries to the passengers.  Further, it
is well established and clearly foreseeable that harm may well result from the
failure to wear a seat belt just as much as it may result from negligent
driving.                     Again, as I have
said, the driver of a car is in a position of control.  The driver's control
remains even in the presence of a child passenger's parent.  The responsibility
of the driver to take reasonable steps to provide for the safety of passengers
flows, in part, from this control and it includes not only a duty to drive
carefully but also to take reasonable steps to ensure that seat belts are worn
by young passengers who may not be able to ensure their own safety.                     In my view, there
is a duty of care resting upon a driver of a motor vehicle to ensure that the
seat belts of young passengers are in place.  That duty exists whether or not a
parent of the child is in the car.  The presence of the parent does no more
than indicate that the duty of care or responsibility towards the child may be
shared by both the parent and the driver.                     It is true that the
conclusion I have reached is one of public policy which imposes a positive
duty.  That in itself is not novel.  The need to impose a positive duty on a
party was recognized by this Court in Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow, [1974]
S.C.R. 239, and in Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1
S.C.R. 1186.  This decision is no more than an attempt to provide reasonable
care for the safety of children.                     There will
undoubtedly be those who will decry the decision on the ground that it may lead
to an increase in vehicle insurance premiums.  The cold fiscal response to that
criticism is to observe that this same decision will result in a far greater
saving in health care premiums by reducing the cost of health care required for
seriously injured children who are victims of injuries which result from the
failure to wear a seat belt.  Yet far more important than any financial
benefits which may flow from the decision is the fostering of the safety of
children.  In this case, if seat belts had been worn, there can be no doubt that
the appellant could have led a fulfilling and useful life.  If the fixing of
responsibility on a driver to ensure that young passengers wear seat belts
saves one child from death or devastating injury then all society will have
benefited.                     The trial judge and
the Court of Appeal were in error in failing to recognize that the duty of care
owed by the driver of the motor vehicle to young passengers continued to exist
despite the presence of a parent in the vehicle.  That is an error of law that
can and should be corrected by an appellate court.  Standard of Care or
the Extent of the Duty Owed by the Driver                     The
definition of the standard of care is a mixed question of law and fact.  It
will usually be for the trial judge to determine, in light of the circumstances
of the case, what would constitute reasonable conduct on the part of the
legendary reasonable man placed in the same circumstances.  In some situations
a simple reminder may suffice while in others, for example when a very young
child is the passenger, the driver may have to put the seat belt on the child
himself.  In this case, however, the driver took no steps whatsoever to ensure
that the child passenger wore a seat belt.  It follows that the trial judge's
decision on the issue amounted to a finding that there was no duty at all
resting upon the driver.  This was an error of law.                     The extent of the
duty owed by the driver of a vehicle to a child passenger when a parent is
present will undoubtedly vary with the circumstances.  Although the duty will
always exist, the extent of it will vary infinitely.  For example, a 17 year
old driving a car with an eight year old and his father, who is an old friend
of the family, may well owe a much smaller duty of care to the child than the
father.  On the other hand, the driver of a motor vehicle who is driving home a
mother who is an employee and her child may have a significantly higher degree
of responsibility for the child.  The difference in degree of responsibility
will vary widely, depending on the circumstances of each case.  That degree of
responsibility will have to be determined in this case.  Disposition                     In the result, the
appeal is allowed.  The question of the degree of contributing negligence of
Stauffer should be remitted to the trial judge for determination at the same
time as the determination is made as to whether there was any negligence on the
part of the infant Karl Thomas Galaske or the late Peter Helmut Galaske or
both.  The appellant should have his costs in this Court and throughout.                     The reasons of
Sopinka and Major JJ. were delivered by                     Major
J. (dissenting) -- I have
read the reasons of my colleague Justice Cory and respectfully disagree with
his conclusion.  I agree that a duty of care was owed by the respondent Erich
Stauffer to the appellant Karl Galaske, but have concluded that the courts
below found such a duty and determined as a finding of fact that the standard
of care imposed by that duty had been met.  In fact, the respondent Stauffer
conceded that he owed a duty of care to the appellant Galaske, and, in my
opinion, the trial judge and Court of Appeal reached the same conclusion.                     The pivotal point
to this appeal, then, is whether the trial judge properly identified the duty
of care as a separate issue from the standard of care.  Both the trial judge
and Court of Appeal recognized the distinction between the duty of care as a
question of law and the standard of care as a finding of fact.                     The trial judge,
following his finding of a duty of care, properly instructed himself on the
standard of care and after reviewing the evidence, concluded, as a finding of
fact, that the respondent's actions were not negligent. He stated:                     The
remaining question for determination is whether the [respondent] Stauffer is
guilty of negligence which contributed to the cause of the damages suffered by
the infant [appellant].                     In
my view, if there is liability on the part of the [respondent] Stauffer for the
loss and damages suffered by the infant [appellant], such liability must be
based upon his failure to ensure that the infant [appellant] was wearing the
lap-type seatbelt with which the vehicle was provided before driving his
vehicle and categorizing such failure as negligence contributing to the cause
of such loss and damages.  and later:                     In
my view in the particular circumstances of this case, it was not unreasonable
for the [respondent], Stauffer to expect that the infant [appellant's] father
was the person to exercise control over the conduct of his son. I consider the
obligations of the [respondent] Stauffer and the infant [appellant's] father on
this occasion were accurately reflected by the words of the [respondent]
Stauffer when he said he did not want to take the fatherhood away from Peter,
referring to the [appellant's father]. On these facts, I find there was no duty
of care owed by the [respondent] Stauffer to the infant [appellant] with
respect to the use of the seatbelt and it cannot be said, therefore, that the
[respondent] Stauffer was guilty of contributory negligence.                     It is clear that
the trial judge found that a duty of care existed and that it had been met for
the reasons given by him.  That he found a duty of care is obvious from the
findings of fact that he relied on in concluding that the duty had been
discharged.                     I recognize that
the trial judge in the concluding sentence of the last quoted paragraph stated:
"On these facts, I find there was no duty of care owed by the [respondent]
Stauffer to the infant [appellant]".  While this would, at first blush, suggest
that he had concluded there was no duty of care, it is apparent in the context
of the whole of his oral reasons that this statement was intended to refer to
the standard, and not to the duty, of care.  To attach another meaning to it is
inconsistent with the tenor of his reasons.  It is an example of the ease by
which one element of an action in negligence (duty) can without care be
interchanged with language borrowed from another element (standard of care).                     It was necessary
for the trial judge to consider the issue of negligence only if he determined
as he did that the respondent owed a duty of care.  As Lord Esher M.R. stated
in Le Lievre v. Gould, [1893] 1 Q.B. 491, at p. 497, "[a] man is
entitled to be as negligent as he pleases towards the whole world if he owes no
duty to them".                     The Court of
Appeal, in confirming the trial judge's decision, also referred to the duty of
care while meaning the standard. I think the ambiguity in the meaning of that
phrase is clarified by its content. There was too much time spent by both of
the courts below on the standard of care to conclude they had neglected to find
that a duty of care existed. It is at most loose terminology.                     The standard of
care involves questions of law and fact. Professor Fleming in The Law of
Torts (8th ed. 1992), at p. 106 states:  It
is for the court to determine the existence of a duty relationship and to lay
down in general terms the standard of care by which to measure the defendant's
conduct; it is for the jury to translate the general into a particular standard
suitable for the case in hand and to decide whether that standard has been
attained.                     This
Court has affirmed that division of labour: Canadian National Railway Co. v.
Vincent, [1979] 1 S.C.R. 364.                     The judge, as a
matter of law, must determine, in general terms, the obligation imposed upon
the defendant. The standard imposed by the common law is that of the reasonable
person in like circumstances. Having established the standard of care in
general terms, it is then a finding of fact to determine, in the context of a
particular case, the obligation imposed on the defendant, and to determine
whether or not that obligation was met. See DesBrisay v. Canadian Government
Merchant Marine Ltd., [1941] S.C.R. 230, at p. 236.                     The formulation and
application of the standard of care may be influenced by the presence of a
statutory obligation as existed in this case. In The Queen in right of
Canada v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205, the relevance of a
statutory duty to an action in negligence was considered. Dickson J. (as he
then was) summarized the law (at pp. 227-28) as follows:  1.                Civil
consequences of breach of statute should be subsumed in the law of negligence.  2.                The
notion of a nominate tort of statutory breach giving a right to recovery merely
on proof of breach and damages should be rejected, as should the view that
unexcused breach constitutes negligence per se giving rise to absolute
liability.  3.                Proof
of statutory breach, causative of damages, may be evidence of negligence.  4.                The
statutory formulation of the duty may afford a specific, and useful, standard
of reasonable conduct.                     It has long been
accepted that appellate courts must not interfere with findings of fact,
whether by judge or jury, if there was evidence capable of supporting the
decision (Canadian National Railway Co. v. Vincent, supra), or unless
there has been a palpable and overriding error. See, e.g., Stein v. The Ship
"Kathy K", [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802, at pp. 806-8; Geffen v.
Goodman Estate, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 353, at pp. 388-89.                     The question arises
whether appellate courts should exhibit the same degree of deference to
findings of fact by a judge alone as they would to findings by a jury.  In
England, Australia and New Zealand, an appellate court, while accepting a trial
judge's general findings of fact, may nevertheless decide for itself whether or
not the defendant was negligent. See Fleming, supra, at p. 310. See also
Benmax v. Austin Motor Co., [1955] A.C. 370 (H.L.); Warren v. Coombes
(1979), 142 C.L.R. 531 (H.C.), and S. Todd, ed., The Law of Torts in
New Zealand (1991), at p. 280.                     This Court has been
more protective of the role of the trial judge.  In Lewis v. Todd,
[1980] 2 S.C.R. 694, at p. 701, Dickson J. held that the decision of a trial
judge should not be disturbed if he did not wrongly apply the standard of care,
misapprehend the evidence, or commit a palpable and overriding error.                     As already
mentioned, the trial judge found that the respondent Erich Stauffer owed a duty
of care to the appellant Karl Galaske but the trial judge also found that the
respondent was not in breach of the standard of care, and therefore not
negligent.                     The trial judge
thoroughly reviewed the evidence. He noted that the accident occurred in 1985,
when s. 217(6) of the British Columbia Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1979,
c. 288, prohibited a  person  from driving a motor vehicle unless child
passengers wore seat belts.    He also observed that the appellant's father,
Peter Galaske, was seated next to his son in the cab of the respondent's truck,
and he accepted the respondent's explanation as to why he refrained from
instructing the appellant to wear his seat belt.                     The trial judge
considered the decision in Migliore v. Gerard (1987), 42 D.L.R. (4th)
619 (H.C.), in which O'Brien J. found that a father, who had violated a
statutory requirement to ensure that his children wore seat belts, was not
negligently responsible for injuries sustained by his children during an
accident. In that case the decision was based in part on the fact that the use
of seat belts was less prevalent at the time of the accident in 1981 than at
the time of trial in 1987. In affirming the decision of the trial judge in the
present case, Locke J.A., of the British Columbia Court of Appeal, expressed a
similar view ((1992), 67 B.C.L.R. (2d) 190, at p. 196):                     All
allegations of negligence must be evaluated in their factual matrix. This accident
occurred in 1985. In the context of that time, when seat belt legislation was
not so much to the fore as today [in 1992], I cannot bring myself to differ
from the trial judge. But if the accident had happened today, my answer would
have been different.                     The trial judge
reviewed the decision of this Court in Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, supra,
and concluded that:  1.A
breach of the provisions of s. 217(6) does not, in itself, give a right of
recovery merely on proof of breach.  2.The
statutory formulation of the duty does not, in the circumstances of this 
matter, afford a specific standard of reasonable conduct.  3.Liability
of the defendant driver should be determined by consideration of the particular
circumstances --"the factors"-- and the standard of care expected of
the driver in such circumstances.                     An appellate court
need not agree or disagree with the conclusion reached by the trial judge on
the question of whether or not the respondent was negligently responsible for
the injuries suffered by the appellant. The trial judge reached his conclusion
after a careful review of the law and evidence. As there is nothing in the
record to suggest that he committed a palpable and overriding error, his 
decision is not subject to reversal on appeal.                     Accordingly, I
would dismiss the appeal with costs.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     McLachlin
J. -- Two different
interpretations of the trial judge's reasons are urged upon us.  The first
holds that the trial judge found no duty relationship between the defendant
driver and the child passenger.  The second holds that the trial judge found a
duty relationship, but found that the standard of care imposed by the
reasonable person test was met on the facts.                     The results vary,
depending on which of these two versions one accepts.  If the reasons are read
as holding that there was no duty relationship, I would find them to be in
error.  It seems to me that the driver of a vehicle is almost always in a
relationship of duty toward passengers.  That relationship is not altered by
the fact that another person -- in this case a parent -- may also be
responsible for a passenger.  On the other hand, if the reasons are read as
holding that a duty existed, but that the requisite standard of care was satisfied,
I would not interfere.  As Justice Major states, the question of the
appropriate standard of care is fact-driven, and appellate courts generally
will not interfere with the trial judge's conclusion unless the record does not
support it.                     I agree with Major
J.'s  statement of legal principle.  Were I able to conclude with him that the
trial judge found a duty of care and went on to find that the appropriate
standard was met, I would dismiss the appeal.  However, I cannot.  It seems to
me that the trial judge's express words -- "I find there was no duty of
care" -- dispose of the matter.  This is confirmed to my mind by the
absence following the finding of no duty of the sort of analysis of all the
facts and circumstances which is typical of determination of the standard of
care.   Having determined the case on the basis of the absence of a duty
relationship, the trial judge did not find it necessary to go on to analyze
whether the defendant adhered to the standard of the reasonable person in all
the circumstances, nor consider the question of contributory negligence. 
Whatever the trial judge may have said about standard of care earlier in his
reasons, the case seems to have been decided on the basis of the absence of a
duty of care.   On the view I take of the case, the matter must be remitted to
the trial court for consideration of these issues.                     I add this.  The
standard of care is for the trial judge to determine on the evidence.  It may
vary from case to case. It follows that it would be wrong to state as a
categorical proposition that a driver's failure to require a child to wear a
seat belt must always violate the standard required by the community, with the
result that such a driver would always be negligent.  While, in general,
insistence that passengers wear seat belts is a reasonable measure,
circumstances may arise where a trial judge might conclude otherwise.  The
availability of seat belts and the age of the child are factors which judges in
other cases have considered, to name only two.  Similarly the presence of a
parent who has care and control of the child may figure in the determination of
what was reasonable in all the circumstances of the case.                     I would allow the
appeal and remit the matter to the trial court for determination of whether the
defendant's conduct fell below that required of a reasonable person in all the
circumstances of the case, as well as the issue of contributory negligence.                     Appeal allowed with
costs, Sopinka and Major JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Giusti, Barrett & Ellan, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
respondents Erich Stauffer and Florence Horvath:  Russell &
DuMoulin, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
respondents Columcille O'Donnell and Bourgoin Contracting
Ltd.:  Heather Sadler Jenkins, Prince George, B.C.                     Solicitors
for the respondent Mala Galaske:  Messner & Foster, 100 Mile
House, B.C.  