                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Galambos v.
  Perez, 2009 SCC 48, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 247  Date:  20091023 Docket:  32586  Between: Michael
Z. Galambos and Michael Z. Galambos Law Corporation,
both carrying on business as “Galambos &
Company” and the said Galambos & Company Appellants and Estela
Perez Respondent  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Abella, Charron, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 88)   Cromwell J. (McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps,
  Fish, Abella, Charron and Rothstein JJ. concurring)   ______________________________ Galambos v. Perez, 2009 SCC 48, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 247  Michael Z.
Galambos and Michael Z. Galambos Law Corporation,
both carrying on business as “Galambos & Company” and the said Galambos & Company                                                         Appellants  v.  Estela Perez                                                                                                                     Respondent  Indexed as:  Galambos v. Perez  Neutral citation:  2009 SCC 48.  File No.:  32586.  2009:  April 15; 2009:  October 23.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel,
Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Charron, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal
for british columbia     Held:  The appeal should
be allowed and the trial judgment should be restored except that, if the
parties cannot agree, the question as to whether P is entitled to a judgment in
debt against the law firm and, if so, whether there is any impact on the costs
ordered at trial or on appeal to the Court of Appeal flowing from that
judgment, should be remanded to the Court of Appeal.  The Court of Appeal exceeded the limits of appellate
review and unduly extended the scope of fiduciary obligations.  Absent an error
of law or a palpable and overriding error of fact, of which there is none, the
trial judge’s findings of fact and conclusion that a fiduciary duty did not
exist must be upheld on appeal.  In this case, the Court of Appeal retried the
case on the basis of the written record and substituted its view of the facts
and their significance for that of the trial judge.  [3] [49] [53]      With respect to P’s contractual claims against the law
firm, out of an abundance of caution and if the parties cannot agree, the
question of whether a judgment in debt in P’s favour against the firm should
issue and, if so, its impact, if any, on the costs ordered at trial and on the
appeal to the Court of Appeal should be remanded to the Court of Appeal.  [46]  Cases Cited  Referred to:  Hodgkinson
v. Simms, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377; MacDonald Estate v. Martin, [1990] 3
S.C.R. 1235; Meadwell Enterprises Ltd. v. Clay and Co. (1983), 44
B.C.L.R. 188; R. v. Neil, 2002 SCC 70, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 631; Lac
Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona Resources Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574; Strother
v. 3464920 Canada Inc., 2007 SCC 24, [2007] 2 S.C.R. 177; Shafron v. KRG
Insurance Brokers (Western) Inc., 2009 SCC 6, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 157; Norberg
v. Wynrib, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 226; Mustaji v. Tjin (1995), 24 C.C.L.T.
(2d) 191, aff’d (1996), 25 B.C.L.R. (3d) 220; Guerin v. The Queen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 335; Frame v. Smith, [1987] 2 S.C.R. 99.  Statutes and Regulations Cited    Authors Cited  American Law Institute.  Restatement (Third) of
the Law Governing Lawyers.  St. Paul, Minn.:  American Law Institute
Publishers, 2000.  Finn, P. D.  Fiduciary Obligations.  Sydney: 
Law Book Co., 1977.  Grant, Stephen M., and Linda R. Rothstein.  Lawyers’
Professional Liability, 2nd ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1998.  Jackson & Powell on Professional Liability, 6th ed.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 2007.  Law Society of British Columbia.  Professional
Conduct Handbook.  The Society, 1993. Scott, Austin W.  “The Fiduciary Principle” (1949),
37 Cal. L. Rev. 539.  Smith, Lionel.  “Fiduciary Relationships — Arising in
Commercial Contexts — Investment Advisors:  Hodgkinson v. Simms”
(1995), 74 Can. Bar Rev. 714.  Weinrib, Ernest J.  “The Fiduciary
Obligation” (1975), 25 U.T.L.J. 1.  APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court of
Appeal (Rowles, Levine and Thackray JJ.A.), 2008 BCCA 91, 78 B.C.L.R.
(4th) 268, 253 B.C.A.C. 149, 425 W.A.C. 149, 291 D.L.R. (4th) 537, [2008] 7
W.W.R. 39, 55 C.C.L.T. (3d) 243, [2008] B.C.J. No. 309 (QL), 2008 CarswellBC
339, setting aside a decision of Rice J., 2006 BCSC 899, [2006] B.C.J.
No. 1396 (QL), 2006 CarswellBC 1523.  Appeal allowed.  George K. Macintosh,
Q.C., and Tim Dickson, for the appellants.  Robert D. Holmes
and John W. Bilawich, for the respondent.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  Cromwell J. —  I.       Introduction   [2]     
Ms. Perez’s claims failed at trial where the judge found that her
rights were those of a creditor and nothing more (2006 BCSC 899, [2006] B.C.J.
No. 1396 (QL)).  The Court of Appeal, however, set aside that decision (2008
BCCA 91, 78 B.C.L.R. (4th) 268).  It concluded that Ms. Perez was entitled to
equity’s protection because there were fiduciary duties owed to her by the
appellants which they had breached. The appellants now appeal to this Court. 
Although there are several issues, the main question is whether the Court of
Appeal was correct to find the appellants owed and breached fiduciary duties to
Ms. Perez.  [3]     
In my respectful view, the Court of Appeal exceeded the limits of
appellate review and unduly extended the scope of fiduciary obligations.  The
trial judge was right to dismiss Ms. Perez’s claims and the Court of Appeal
erred in law by reversing that decision.  II.      Issues   [5]     
I find it more convenient to address Ms. Perez’s submissions on
these points first and then turn to what I view as the heart of the appeal, the
appellants’ challenge to the Court of Appeal’s decision.  A brief overview of
the facts, claims and proceedings will set the stage.  III.    Overview of Facts, Claims and Proceedings  A.     Facts   [7]     
In January 2002 the firm experienced a cash flow problem.  To
resolve it, Ms. Perez obtained a personal loan and deposited $40,000 into the
firm’s account. The trial judge found that Mr. Galambos did not ask her to
advance this money and that he did not even know about the advance until
several days later (para. 61). It is common ground that Mr. Galambos instructed
Ms. Perez to reimburse herself with interest, an instruction she did not follow
other than by repaying herself  $15,000.  [8]     
During and after 2002, the firm’s financial situation
deteriorated. Ms. Perez made several more deposits of her own funds into the
firm’s account and covered some firm expenses with her personal credit card.
The trial judge found that Ms. Perez made several of the advances without
informing Mr. Galambos beforehand and that she extended the loans voluntarily,
much on her own initiative and without undue influence by Mr. Galambos (paras.
62-63). The trial judge described what happened this way:  As the [financial] decline continued, Mrs. Perez began to deposit more
monies of her own into the general account of the firm. On February 12 and 21,
2003, she deposited cheques for $10,000 and $22,000. She testified that she
would observe that the funds were needed and inform Mr. Galambos. According to
her, he would simply ask her to "do something". She would then,
without necessarily telling him first, deposit more funds of her own into the
firm’s account.  In addition to these deposits, Mrs. Perez frequently paid for the
firm’s supplies with her own credit card and then reimbursed herself for those
expenses. She even used her card to make certain personal purchases for Mr.
Galambos, such as two suits when she accompanied him once to Harry Rosen’s and
a down payment when she accompanied him once to sign a lease for a Mercedes.
Mr. Galambos was aware that this was her practice. He said she volunteered to
use her personal credit card in this way so that she could pick up frequent
flyer points as a perquisite.  All the while, throughout 2003 and early 2004, the
decline in the firm’s fortunes continued, and clearly so. The DOJ work, which
had made up most of the firm’s revenue, continued to drop. The firm laid off
staff. The bank overdraft was constantly at its limit and beyond. The plaintiff
kept advancing money, asserting several times in her testimony that she did so
in reliance on Mr. Galambos’s promises that the firm’s fortunes would improve
and that he would pay her back. According to Mrs. Perez, he told her that there
were one or two files soon to be completed with high contingency fees and that
he was on the verge of obtaining lucrative new legal work. He even took her to
meet the new client. By March 2004, the firm owed Mrs. Perez approximately
$200,000. [paras. 17-19]  [9]     
During the time she worked for the firm, it handled the preparation
and execution of new wills for Ms. Perez and her husband as well as two
mortgage transactions, with respect to at least one of which the firm also
acted for the lender.  The firm did not expect to be and was not paid for these
services.  B.      Claims  [10] 
Ms. Perez claimed that there was an ongoing solicitor-client
relationship between her and Mr. Galambos’s firm because free legal services
were part of her employment contract. She submitted that Mr. Galambos and the
firm breached an implied term of the retainer and their fiduciary duties to her
by failing to provide her with the legal advice she required in connection with
her loans to the firm and by acting for her while in a conflict of interest. 
She also asserted that Mr. Galambos and the firm were fiduciaries even apart
from the solicitor-client relationship and that they had breached their
obligations to her.  She made other claims in contract and negligence.  C.     Proceedings  [11] 
At trial, all of Ms. Perez’s claims were dismissed. The trial
judge, Rice J., found that there were no fiduciary duties in relation to the
cash advances. He rejected Ms. Perez’s contention that there was any ongoing,
general solicitor-client relationship; he found, contrary to her position, that
free legal services were not a term of her employment.  He concluded that the
retainers for the wills and mortgages were each distinct and limited to the
services requested and that the loans were outside the ambit of the limited
solicitor-client relationship which existed between the parties (paras. 24-40).
He also found that there was no fiduciary relationship apart from these
retainers since Ms. Perez was not vulnerable and had not relinquished any
decision-making power to Mr. Galambos (paras. 41-46). As for Ms. Perez’s negligence
claim, the trial judge concluded that Mr. Galambos had not been negligent in
his conduct of his business, that he owed no special duty to Ms. Perez in that
regard in any case, that she did not rely on Mr. Galambos’s expressions of hope
that things would turn around and that it would have been unreasonable for her
to do so, given her detailed knowledge of the firm’s finances.  Finally, the
judge firmly rejected Ms. Perez’s allegations of coercion and undue influence
by Mr. Galambos (paras. 54-55).  [12] 
Writing for the Court of Appeal, Rowles J.A. agreed with the
trial judge that it was not a term of Ms. Perez’s employment that the firm
would provide free legal services on all matters or act as her lawyer
generally.  Also in apparent agreement with the trial judge, the court doubted
that the limited solicitor-client relationships that did exist between Ms.
Perez and the firm provided a basis for finding any breach of the per se
fiduciary obligations arising from the relationship of solicitor and client. 
However, the court concluded that Mr. Galambos had breached an ad hoc
fiduciary duty which arose in all of the circumstances, even though Ms. Perez
did not specifically submit before the Court of Appeal that there was  a duty
arising that way.  The court held that there was a “power-dependency”
relationship between Ms. Perez and Mr. Galambos; it is not necessary for the
duty to arise that there be any mutual understanding that Mr. Galambos had
relinquished his self-interest in favour of hers; Ms. Perez was vulnerable; and
the  evidence “overwhelmingly” supported the conclusion that Mr. Galambos took
advantage of her trust (paras. 16 and 50-56). The Court of Appeal therefore
allowed the appeal and granted Ms. Perez judgment for $200,000.  IV.    Analysis  A.     Respondent’s Issues  [13] 
Ms. Perez submits that the appellants acted throughout as her
lawyers and that, in doing so, they acted negligently, in breach of contract
and in breach of a fiduciary duty flowing from that solicitor-client
relationship.  She also makes brief submissions with respect to her contract of
employment and her claim in debt against the now-defunct firm.  [14] 
Except in one aspect, I am not persuaded that these points have
merit. I will first address the submissions arising from the solicitor-client
relationship and then turn to the other claims.  1.    Claims Arising From the Solicitor-Client
Relationship  a.     Negligence  [15] 
At trial, Ms. Perez submitted that the appellants had a duty of
care towards her under negligence principles, both within the solicitor-client
relationship and apart from that relationship. In this Court, her submissions
about negligence are limited to breaches of duty within the solicitor-client
relationship.  [16] 
In June of 2002, a Galambos & Co. lawyer handled the
preparation and execution of new wills for Ms. Perez and her husband.  The firm
also handled mortgage transactions in January and September of 2003.  [17] 
The foundation of Ms. Perez’s negligence submission is that there
was a general and ongoing solicitor-client relationship between the appellants
and herself.  She maintains that this relationship existed throughout her
employment and covered all necessary legal work during that time including, of
course, the period during which she advanced funds to the firm.  Ms. Perez
submits that the appellants breached the duty of care which was inherent in
this solicitor-client relationship, saying that they were negligent by placing
themselves in a position of conflict of interest with her, failing to advise
her in connection with the cash advances and failing to require or suggest that
she seek independent legal advice before making the cash advances to the firm.  [18] 
In the particular and admittedly unusual facts of this case,
these submissions cannot be accepted. Given the strong findings of fact by the
trial judge, the particular nature of the appellants’ retainers and the nature
of the advances themselves, I see no reviewable error in Rice J.’s rejection of
these claims.  [19] 
The trial judge made three especially important factual findings 
which in my view cannot be disturbed on appeal.  [20] 
The first is that, contrary to Ms. Perez’s contentions, there was
no ongoing, general solicitor-client relationship.  While Ms. Perez claimed
that she had been promised free legal work as a condition of her employment,
the judge concluded that this was not a term of her employment and that the firm
had not undertaken to be her lawyer generally or to provide her with any
specific legal service (para. 27).  This was a finding of fact made by the
judge after consideration of conflicting evidence and no basis has been made
out for setting it aside.  It follows that an important factual element of Ms.
Perez’s claims does not exist.  [21] 
The judge’s second finding related to the legal work undertaken
by the firm on Ms. Perez’s behalf.  He found that each retainer was limited to
the specific services requested and was unrelated to the advances she made to
the firm.  While the judge did make a factual mistake in his discussion of this
issue as I shall describe, I see no proper basis to interfere with his
conclusions about the nature of the retainers.  [22] 
With respect to the wills, the trial judge noted that Ms. Perez
herself acknowledged that this legal work had nothing to do with the previous
or subsequent advances of funds that she made to the firm (para. 29).  [23] 
With respect to the mortgages, the judge found that these
retainers were unrelated to the cash advances and were limited to the
particular services requested.  He put it this way, at paras. 36-37:  On the whole, the evidence indicates that Mrs. Perez retained Galambos
& Company for three specific legal purposes: to obtain a new will and to
complete two mortgage transactions. Aside from those, Mrs. Perez’s only
relationship with the firm was as an employee and a creditor. There was, at the
time these services were performed, no commitment of the firm to provide Mrs.
Perez with any legal service in the future. There is no evidence that Mrs.
Perez consulted anyone in the firm for legal advice on any matter outside the
confines of the three specific transactions. In particular, there is no
evidence that she ever asked Mr. Galambos or another lawyer at the firm to
advise her about the loans or about her financial circumstances generally. On
the contrary, she made some advances on her own initiative without telling Mr.
Galambos beforehand.  In the circumstances, I find that each retainer was
separate, distinct, and limited to the specific services Mrs. Perez requested.
[Emphasis added.]  [24] 
The judge’s third finding was that Ms. Perez did not ask for or
receive advice about the advances, that she did not rely on anything Mr.
Galambos told her when she decided to make the advances and that, even if she
had so relied, that reliance would have been unreasonable in the particular
circumstances of the case (paras. 47-53).  [25] 
In light of these findings, Ms. Perez’s submissions about
negligence cannot succeed.  The solicitor-client relationship between Ms. Perez
and the appellants was very limited and there is no plausible suggestion that
the firm’s preparation of the wills and the mortgages breached the standard of
care owed to her.  As the trial judge put it,  “Mrs. Perez has no complaint
relating to any of the legal services or advice that the firm provided. Those
transactions did not leave her disadvantaged in any way” (para. 40).  [26] 
Was there a breach of any duty owed in relation to the cash
advances? Ms. Perez argues that it is illogical to say that the subject matters
of the legal services were distinct from the loans because drawing up a will
involves knowing the state of a client’s assets and liabilities and that “the
relation of the two mortgage transactions to the loans is obvious” (Factum, at
para. 66). She submits that the proceeds were used to provide the advances. 
However, the trial judge found as a fact that the mortgages had nothing to do
with her advances to the firm and rejected as inconclusive the only piece of
evidence which could have supported the theory that Mr. Galambos helped her
obtain one of the loans by attesting to her employment status (paras. 29 and
56-61). Ms. Perez has pointed to no proper basis for appellate interference
with these findings.  [27] 
That said, Ms. Perez correctly submits that the judge was wrong
to find that there was no solicitor-client relationship between her and the
firm at the time of any of her cash advances. The record discloses that Ms.
Perez did make some advances to the firm while there were open files for some
of the matters in which the firm acted for her. During these periods, Ms. Perez
advanced Galambos & Co.  amounts which are difficult to calculate precisely
from the record, but which were at least in the tens of thousands of dollars. 
The judge erred, therefore, in saying, at para. 37, that she was not a client
at any of the times when she made loans to the firm. However, this factual
mistake does not in my view invalidate the judge’s critical finding that the
retainers were distinct, limited and had no bearing on these advances.  [28] 
I would not wish to be thought as saying that the firm complied
with all of the applicable rules of professional conduct.  The fact that these
advances were made outside the confines of this particular solicitor-client
relationship does not circumvent the nearly absolute professional standard not
to borrow from  clients. As provided in rule 4 of Chapter 7 of the Law Society
of British Columbia Professional Conduct Handbook (1993): “Unless the
transaction is of a routine nature to and in the ordinary course of business of
the client, a lawyer must not borrow money or obtain credit from a client of
the lawyer’s firm, or obtain a benefit from any security or guarantee given by
such a client.”  [29] 
However, two points must be made with respect to this rule of
conduct. The first is that there is an important distinction between the rules
of professional conduct and the law of negligence.  Breach of one does not
necessarily involve breach of the other. Conduct may be negligent but not
breach rules of professional conduct, and breaching the rules of professional
conduct is not necessarily negligence. Codes of professional conduct, while
they are important statements of public policy with respect to the conduct of
lawyers, are designed to serve as a guide to lawyers and are typically enforced
in disciplinary proceedings.  They are of importance in determining the nature
and extent of duties flowing from a professional relationship: Hodgkinson v.
Simms, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377, at p. 425.  They are not, however, binding on
the courts and do not necessarily describe the applicable duty or standard of
care in negligence: see, e.g., MacDonald Estate v. Martin, [1990] 3
S.C.R. 1235, at pp. 1244-45; Meadwell Enterprises Ltd. v. Clay and Co. (1983),
44 B.C.L.R. 188 (S.C.); S. M. Grant and L. R. Rothstein, Lawyers’
Professional Liability (2nd ed. 1998), at pp. 8-10.  [30] 
The second point relates to the concerns underlying the rules of
conduct in relation to borrowing from clients. The rule is a specific
application of the general rules about conflict of interest. There is concern
that a lawyer’s legal skill and training, coupled with the relationship of
trust that arises between a solicitor and a client, creates the possibility of
overreaching by the lawyer. A further concern is that the lawyer is in a
position to arrange the form of the transaction and may therefore further his
or her own interests instead of those of the client: see Restatement (Third)
of the Law Governing Lawyers _
126 cmt. b (2000).  However, given the trial judge’s factual findings in this
unusual case, the concerns giving rise to the rule are not in play here.  [31] 
A situation of conflict of interest occurs when there is a
“substantial risk that the lawyer’s representation of the client would be
materially and adversely affected by the lawyer’s own interests or by the
lawyer’s duties to another current client, a former client, or a third person”:
Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 121, cited with
approval in R. v. Neil, 2002 SCC 70, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 631, at para. 31.
On this point, Rice J. effectively found that there was no risk that the firm’s
representation of Ms. Perez  in connection with the wills or mortgages could be
affected by the firm’s interest in receiving the cash advances from her. 
Similarly, the trial judge found no reliance and therefore certainly no
overreaching and no effort on the part of the lawyers to structure the advances
to their advantage.  As the trial judge found, at para. 62: “. . . although it
is truly strange, [Ms. Perez] appears to have extended the loans voluntarily
and much on her own initiative.”  He concluded that there was “no evidence of
undue influence, or unconscionability” (para. 63).  [32] 
I cannot fault the judge for reaching this conclusion on the
admittedly unusual facts which confronted him. These were routine legal
services, wholly unrelated, as the judge found, to the advances and they were
provided without fee to an employee.  The cash advances were unusual and far
removed from the sorts of loans from clients envisaged by the professional
conduct rule.  The advances were not requested by the firm or Mr. Galambos, 
they were sometimes made without Ms. Perez advising the firm that they had
been.  Ms. Perez, the bookkeeper and employee of the firm, did not obey her
employer’s instructions to repay the advances even when the firm’s finances
would have permitted it and she did not provide an accounting to the firm of
what it owed to her. This situation is as about as far removed as one can
imagine from the typical case of a lawyer improperly borrowing money from a
client. In short, there was no conflict between the firm’s duties to her in
connection with the wills and mortgages and the advances, and the firm did not
in any way trade upon its position as her lawyer to obtain them.  [33] 
I conclude that, given the limited nature of the retainers and
the unusual nature of the advances, the trial judge did not err in finding that
the appellants did not breach their duty of care arising from the
solicitor-client relationship between them and Ms. Perez.  There was no actual
conflict of interest between the firm’s duties to her in connection with the
limited retainers and its interest in receiving the advances.  Similarly, there
could not be in these unusual facts any reasonable apprehension of conflict. 
Given the very limited nature of those retainers and the manner in which the
advances were made — unsolicited and frequently without advance notice — there
was no duty on the firm under negligence principles to give Ms. Perez advice
about those advances or to insist that she obtain independent legal advice
about them.  b.    Contract for Legal Services  [34] 
The claim that the solicitor-client contract was breached is
essentially a differently labelled repetition of the claim in negligence, and
this contractual claim falls with it.  c.     Per se Fiduciary Duty  [35] 
Ms. Perez submits that the appellants breached the fiduciary
obligations owed by lawyers to clients.  In my view, this contention fails for
much the same reason as Ms. Perez’s claims in negligence.  [36] 
Certain categories of relationships are considered to give rise
to fiduciary obligations because of their inherent purpose or their presumed
factual or legal incidents: Lac Minerals Ltd. v. International Corona
Resources Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574, per La Forest J., at p. 646. 
These categories are sometimes called per se fiduciary relationships.  There
is no doubt that the solicitor-client relationship is an example.  It is
important to remember, however, that not every legal claim arising out of a per
se fiduciary relationship, such as that between a solicitor and client,
will give rise to a claim for a breach of fiduciary duty.  [37] 
A claim for breach of fiduciary duty may only be founded on
breaches of the specific obligations imposed because the relationship is one
characterized as fiduciary: Lac Minerals, at p. 647. This point is
important here because not all lawyers’ duties towards their clients are
fiduciary in nature.  Sopinka and McLachlin JJ. (as the latter then was)
underlined this in dissent (but not on this point) in Hodgkinson, at pp.
463-64, noting that while the solicitor-client relationship has fiduciary
aspects, many of the tasks undertaken in the course of the solicitor-client
relationship do not attract a fiduciary obligation. Binnie J. made the same
point in Strother v. 3464920 Canada Inc., 2007 SCC 24, [2007] 2 S.C.R.
177, at para. 34: “Not every breach of the contract of retainer is a breach of
a fiduciary duty.”  The point was also put nicely by Rupert M. Jackson and John
L. Powell, Jackson & Powell on Professional Liability (6th ed.
2007), at para. 2-130, when they said that any breach of any duty by a
fiduciary is not necessarily a breach of fiduciary duty.  [38] 
The launching pad for Ms. Perez’s submissions based on the
solicitor-client relationship is that there was a general solicitor-client
relationship between her and the firm for all necessary legal work during the
time that she advanced funds to the firm.  As noted earlier, the judge made a
finding against her on this point: he found, on conflicting evidence, that it
was not a term of Ms. Perez’s employment that the firm would provide her with
all necessary legal services and that the cash advances were not within the
terms of any of the specific and limited retainers which the firm undertook on
her behalf.  The Court of Appeal agreed.  It concluded that whatever fiduciary
obligations arose from the limited solicitor-client relationship, they did not
extend to the cash advances.  As the Court of Appeal put it:   [39] 
I am not persuaded that there is any basis to interfere with the
trial judge’s conclusion, endorsed by the Court of Appeal, that the retainers
were unrelated to the cash advances and that no obligation arose on the part of
Mr. Galambos and his firm to act solely in Ms. Perez’s interest in relation to
the advances. I conclude that the judge did not err in finding that there had
been no breach of the per se fiduciary obligations that arose from the
solicitor-client relationship.  d.    Conclusion on Solicitor-Client Issues  [40] 
In my view, the trial judge did not err by dismissing Ms. Perez’s
claims in negligence, contract and breach of fiduciary duty arising from the
solicitor-client relationship between her and the firm.  2.    Other Contractual Claims  [41] 
Two paragraphs of Ms. Perez’s factum are devoted to two other
contractual claims: the first relating to an alleged breach of employment
contract and the second to an alleged breach of a “covenant to repay” the
advances.  I will address each in turn.  a.     Employment Contract  [42] 
While Ms. Perez’s submissions on this point are not easy to
follow, the point appears to be that the firm breached an implied obligation
under Ms. Perez’s employment contract not to undermine the trust and confidence
of the employment relationship.  The question of whether there was an
obligation of trust and confidence arising in the particular circumstances of
the parties’ relationship will be addressed in the next section of my reasons. 
I do not discern in Ms. Perez’s submissions any other independent alleged
breach of the employment contract.  b.    Covenant to Repay  [43] 
Ms. Perez submits that she is entitled to, but did not receive, a
judgment in debt against the appellant law corporation.  While Mr. Galambos is
personally shielded from any action in debt under the Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Act , she submits that a judgment in debt should issue against
the firm, which, so far as may be ascertained from the record in this Court,
has not obtained the same protection.  [44] 
The fact of the debt is not disputed and it appears that the
Amended Statement of Claim includes language which may be broad enough to
include this claim (Appellants’ Record, p. 80, at para. 12). While the law
corporation, we are told, is defunct and without assets, Ms. Perez’s counsel
mentioned during oral argument that a judgment against the firm might have some
impact on the question of costs.  [45] 
This issue is mentioned in neither of the judgments below; the
trial judge’s order dismissed all claims and awarded scale 3 costs to April 24,
2006 and double scale 3 costs thereafter, and the Court of Appeal set aside
this order, gave Ms. Perez judgment for $200,000, prejudgment interest and
costs of the trial and the appeal.  It was, therefore, not necessary for it to
consider the debt claim or the trial judge’s costs award.   3.    Summary of Conclusions With Respect to the
Respondent’s Issues  [47] 
I conclude that Ms. Perez’s claims fail with respect to alleged
breaches within the solicitor-client relationship and her contract of employment. 
Subject to any agreement among the parties, I would remand to the Court of
Appeal the questions of whether she ought to have judgment in debt against the
Michael Z. Galambos Law Corporation and, if so, whether that judgment has any
impact on the disposition of costs in the courts below.  B.      Appellants’ Issues  [48] 
The appellants’ issues address the holding of the Court of
Appeal. As noted, it held, reversing the trial judge, that the particular
circumstances of the relationship between Ms. Perez and Mr. Galambos and his
firm gave rise to what may be called an ad hoc fiduciary duty. This
means that apart from the categories of relationships to which fiduciary
obligations are innate, such obligations may arise as a matter of fact out of the
specific circumstances of a particular relationship: see, e.g., Lac Minerals,
at p. 648; Hodgkinson, at p. 409.  The existence of the fiduciary
obligation is thus primarily a question of fact to be determined by examining
the specific facts and circumstances: Lac Minerals, at p. 648.  [49] 
This is an important point in relation to the standard of
appellate review.  Absent an error of law or a palpable and overriding error of
fact, the trial judge’s conclusion that a fiduciary duty did not exist must be
upheld on appeal: Shafron v. KRG Insurance Brokers (Western) Inc., 2009
SCC 6, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 157, at para. 13; Hodgkinson, at pp. 425-26. As
La Forest J. put it in Hodgkinson, at p. 426, this principle of
non-intervention on appeal “is not merely cautionary; it is a rule of  law. 
Failing a manifest error, an appellate court simply has no jurisdiction to
interfere with the findings and conclusions of fact of a trial judge.”  [50] 
The core of the Court of Appeal’s reasoning consists of three
points, two of which are expressly set out and the third of which is implied. 
The explicit points are, first, that a “power-dependency” relationship existed
between Ms. Perez and Mr. Galambos and second, that in such relationships,
fiduciary duties may arise simply on the basis of the reasonable expectations
of the weaker party and without any mutual understanding of both parties that
one must act in the interests of the other.  The third point arises by
implication because the court appears to have accepted the proposition, without
expressly stating it, that a fiduciary duty may arise even though the fiduciary
has no discretionary power to affect the other party’s legal or important
practical interests.  [51] 
The appellants challenge each of these points.  For reasons which
I will develop, I agree that the Court of Appeal erred in these three respects.  1.    Was There a Power-Dependency Relationship?  [52] 
The Court of Appeal found that the parties’ relationship in this
case was similar in nature to the “power-dependency” relationship found in Norberg
v. Wynrib, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 226.  By the term “power-dependency”
relationship, I understand the Court of Appeal to have meant that Mr. Galambos
had gained a position of overriding power or influence over Ms. Perez: see Hodgkinson,
at p. 411; Mustaji v. Tjin (1995), 24 C.C.L.T. (2d) 191 (B.C.S.C.),
aff’d (1996), 25 B.C.L.R. (3d) 220 (C.A.). As the Court of Appeal put it, at
para. 50: “As [Ms. Perez’s] employer, [Mr. Galambos] was in a position of power
and influence relative to [Ms. Perez].  It is clear from the circumstances that
[Ms. Perez] looked up to Mr. Galambos and expected that he would look out for
her best interests as a result of the nature of their relationship.”  [53] 
This conclusion is directly at odds with the clear findings of
fact at trial. In effect, the Court of Appeal retried the case on the basis of
the written record and substituted its view of the facts and their significance
for that of the trial judge.  This, respectfully, was not the court’s function
on appeal and it erred in law by doing so.  [54] 
The trial judge found that Ms. Perez was not vulnerable in terms
of her relationship with Mr. Galambos, that she had not relinquished her
decision-making power with respect to the loans to Mr. Galambos and that he had
no discretion over her interests that he was able to exercise unilaterally or
otherwise (paras. 45-46). He found (at paras. 45-46, 54 and 63) that:  -      Ms. Perez was well educated and well
experienced in dealing with successful, busy lawyers;  -      she was as knowledgeable and probably more
knowledgeable than Mr. Galambos about most aspects of the firm’s financial
affairs;  -      she was not, as a result of their relative
position or her respect for Mr. Galambos, vulnerable to him;  -      the evidence did not establish that Ms. Perez
relinquished her decision-making power with respect to the loans to Mr.
Galambos;  -      Mr. Galambos had no discretion over her
interests that he was able to exercise unilaterally or otherwise;  -      aside from the limited retainers for routine
legal services, their relationship was one of friendship between employer and
employee which gave rise to a creditor-debtor relationship;  -      there was never any suggestion that Ms.
Perez’s employment evaluations or prospects would be affected in any way by the
loans or by any refusal to make them; -      there was no evidence that Mr. Galambos made
any efforts to impose his will on Ms. Perez or to convince her to act against
her wishes, to appeal to her sympathy or to cultivate hero-worship or
subservience on her part.  [55] 
The trial judge specifically rejected Ms. Perez’s contention that
due to the power dynamics of their relationship she was simply unable to refuse
requests for loans.  There was no evidence accepted by the trial judge of any
express requests for loans, which makes it illogical to conclude that Ms. Perez
was unable to refuse requests when there were in fact none.  Moreover, the
trial judge was not persuaded on the balance of probabilities that Mr.
Galambos’s instructions to “do something” when advised of cash flow problems
were, or could reasonably have been understood by Ms. Perez as pressure on her to
loan her personal funds, a course she frequently took without any solicitation
or, in some instances, any knowledge on Mr. Galambos’s part (para. 54).  [56] 
The trial judge’s findings do not support the existence of the
parallel that the Court of Appeal found between this case and power-dependency
cases such as Norberg and Mustaji. Norberg involved an
aging physician extorting sex for drugs from a young woman addicted to
prescription drugs.  Mustaji involved a claim by a nanny brought to
Canada under the Foreign Domestic Movement Program.  There were findings of
fact that the defendants had taken over her affairs concerning her immigration
and employment in Canada, that they had the opportunity to exercise power or
discretion over her, were capable of using that power or discretion without her
knowledge or consent so as to affect her legal and practical interests and that
she was especially vulnerable to that exercise of discretion and control: see
reasons of Vickers J., at para. 27, and reasons of the Court of Appeal, at
para. 12.  The trial judge in the present case found nothing of this sort.  [57] 
The trial judge addressed Ms. Perez’s argument that she advanced
funds relying on and trusting Mr. Galambos’s assurances that the firm’s
finances would turn around and that there were some major files coming to him. 
As noted earlier, the trial judge found as facts that she did not rely on these
alleged statements, that she knew that the financial circumstances of the firm
were not improving, that the influx of new legal work was speculative and that
the potential for large amounts of contingency fees was exaggerated.  As the
judge put it, “both Mr. Galambos and [Ms.] Perez shared a hope for better times
to come and blinded themselves to the true situation” (para. 53).  Moreover,
the judge also found that even if Ms. Perez had in fact relied on Mr.
Galambos’s general statements to the effect that things would turn around, her
reliance was not reasonable.  As the judge put it, “[a] reasonable person in
[Ms. Perez’s] position would not have relied on [these statements], given
especially her personal knowledge of the state of Mr. Galambos’s financial
affairs.  She probably had more knowledge than he” (para. 52).  [58] 
The Court of Appeal, however, found that the judge’s finding of
fact that Ms. Perez was not vulnerable to Mr. Galambos was unreasonable. The
court based its reversal of the trial judge on this point on the facts that Mr.
Galambos had superior legal knowledge and experience, that he understood when
professional advice was needed with respect to his financial affairs, that Ms.
Perez looked up to and trusted him, that there was a power imbalance in their
relationship and that Ms. Perez’s conduct could not be explained on the basis
of simple friendship (paras. 50 and 64-65).  [59] 
Respectfully, the reasons of the Court of Appeal disclose no
basis for appellate intervention. The most that may be said is that  the
considerations identified by the Court of Appeal could plausibly sustain more
than one conclusion about Ms. Perez’s vulnerability.  The Court of Appeal
identified no finding of fact relevant to the judge’s conclusion on this point
that was both clearly wrong and determinative of the result. Rather, the Court
of Appeal simply drew different inferences from the evidence than the ones
drawn by the trial judge.  This was not a proper basis for appellate reversal
of his findings.  The Court of Appeal ought not to have interfered with the
judge’s finding that Ms. Perez was not vulnerable to Mr. Galambos.  [60] 
The Court of Appeal also found that the judge erred by concluding
that any reliance by Ms. Perez on Mr. Galambos’s statements that things would
turn around was unreasonable.  The court reasoned that Mr. Galambos was in the
best position to assess the prospects of the firm and that Ms. Perez had no
means of knowing whether the flow of work from the Department of Justice would
again increase.  On this basis, the court found the judge’s conclusion to be
“plainly wrong” (para. 61) and this error was part of the justification for
appellate intervention. However, there are two difficulties with the Court of
Appeal’s approach to this issue.  [61] 
First, the trial judge found as a fact that Ms. Perez did not
rely on these statements (para. 53) and the Court of Appeal did not directly
take issue with this finding. This makes hypothetical and irrelevant the
question of whether such reliance, had it occurred, would have been reasonable;
any error by the judge on this hypothetical question provides no basis for
interfering with his decision.  Second, even if an error on this point were
pertinent to the result, the reasons of the Court of Appeal disclose no clear
and determinative error in the judge’s holding to the effect that any reliance
would have been unreasonable.  Once again, the Court of Appeal in my respectful
view substituted its reading of the record for the trial judge’s findings. 
This was not its role.  [62] 
In summary, the trial judge’s findings of fact should not have
been disturbed on appeal and those findings do not support the Court of
Appeal’s conclusion that there was a “power-dependency” relationship between
Ms. Perez and Mr. Galambos.  2.    Mutual Understanding or Undertaking by the
Fiduciary  [63] 
The Court of Appeal held that, in the case of a
“power-dependency” relationship, a fiduciary duty may arise even in the absence
of a mutual understanding that one party would act only in the interests of the
other.  Respectfully, I do not agree.  [64] 
Relying on Hodgkinson, the trial judge held that in order
to find an ad hoc fiduciary duty, there must be a mutual understanding
between the fiduciary and the beneficiary that the fiduciary party has
relinquished his or her own self-interest and agreed to act solely on behalf of
the beneficiary (para. 43). The judge concluded that there was no such mutual
understanding here (para. 46).  The Court of Appeal, on the other hand, held
that as the relationship between Mr. Galambos and Ms. Perez was one of
“power-dependency”, there need not be a mutual understanding that one party has
relinquished his or her own self-interest and undertaken to act in the
interests of the other (para. 43).  According to the Court of Appeal, what is
required in the case of power-dependency relationships is proof of an
expectation on the part of the plaintiff, which is reasonable in all of the
circumstances, that the defendant would act in his or her best interests (para.
43).  It found Ms. Perez to have such a reasonable expectation (paras. 60-65).  [65] 
The appellants challenge this conclusion, submitting that one
party’s reasonable expectation is not sufficient and that there must be a
mutual understanding that the fiduciary has undertaken to act only in the
interests of the other party. Ms. Perez seeks to uphold the Court of Appeal’s
decision, arguing that equity is inherently flexible and that a reasonable
expectation is enough in a power-dependency relationship.  [66] 
In my view, while a mutual understanding may not always be
necessary (a point we need not decide here), it is fundamental to ad hoc fiduciary
duties that there be an undertaking by the fiduciary, which may be either
express or implied, that the fiduciary will act in the best interests of the
other party. In other words, while it may not be necessary for the beneficiary
in all cases to consent to this undertaking, it is clearly settled that the
undertaking itself is fundamental to the existence of an ad hoc
fiduciary relationship. To explain why I have reached this conclusion, I need
to go back to some basic principles of fiduciary law.  a.     Some Basic Principles  [67] 
An important focus of fiduciary law is the protection of one
party against abuse of power by another in certain types of relationships or in
particular circumstances.  However, to assert that the protection of the vulnerable
is the role of fiduciary law puts the matter too broadly.  The law seeks to
protect the vulnerable in many contexts and through many different doctrines.
As La Forest J. noted in Hodgkinson, at p. 406: “[W]hereas undue
influence focuses on the sufficiency of consent and unconscionability looks at
the reasonableness of a given transaction, the fiduciary principle monitors
the abuse of a loyalty reposed” (emphasis added).  This brief sentence
makes two important points which help sharpen the focus on the role of
fiduciary law.  [68] 
The first is that fiduciary law is more concerned with the
position of the parties that results from the relationship which gives
rise to the fiduciary duty than with the respective positions of the parties before
they enter into the relationship.  La Forest J. in Hodgkinson, at p.
406, made this clear by approving these words of Professor Ernest J. Weinrib:
“It cannot be the sine qua non of a fiduciary obligation that the
parties have disparate bargaining strength. . . . In contrast to notions of
conscionability, the fiduciary relation looks to the relative position of the
parties that results from the agreement rather than the relative position that
precedes the agreement” (“The Fiduciary Obligation” (1975), 25 U.T.L.J. 1,
at p. 6).  Thus, while vulnerability in the broad sense resulting from factors
external to the relationship is a relevant consideration, a more important one
is the extent to which vulnerability arises from the relationship: Hodgkinson,
at p. 406.  [69] 
The second is that a critical aspect of a fiduciary relationship
is an undertaking of loyalty: the fiduciary undertakes to act in the interests
of the other party.  This was put succinctly by McLachlin J. in Norberg,
at p. 273, when she said that “fiduciary relationships ... are always dependent
on the fiduciary’s undertaking to act in the beneficiary’s interests”.  See
also Hodgkinson, per La Forest J., at pp. 404-7.  [70] 
Underpinning all of this is the focus of fiduciary law on
relationships.  As Dickson J. (as he then was) put it in Guerin v. The Queen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, at p. 384: “It is the nature of the relationship . . .
that gives rise to the fiduciary duty. . . .”  The underlying purpose of
fiduciary law may be seen as protecting and reinforcing “the integrity of
social institutions and enterprises”, recognizing that “not all relationships
are characterized by a dynamic of mutual autonomy, and that the marketplace
cannot always set the rules”: Hodgkinson, at p. 422 (per La
Forest J.).  The particular relationships on which fiduciary law focusses are
those in which one party is given a discretionary power to affect the legal or
vital practical interests of the other: see, e.g., Frame v. Smith,
[1987] 2 S.C.R. 99, per Wilson J., at pp. 136-37; Norberg, per
McLachlin J., at p. 272; Weinrib, at p. 4, quoted with approval in Guerin,
at p. 384.  [71] 
I return to the Court of Appeal’s holding that a fiduciary duty
may arise in “power-dependency” relationships without any express or implied
undertaking by the fiduciary to act in the best interests of the other party. 
I respectfully disagree with this approach, for two reasons: “power-dependency”
relationships are not a special category of fiduciary relationships and the law
is, in my view, clear that fiduciary duties will only be imposed on those who
have expressly or impliedly undertaken them.  b.    Power-Dependency Relationships as a Special
Category  [72] 
As noted by the Court of Appeal, La Forest J. used the term
“power-dependency” relationships in Norberg and in Hodgkinson. 
In the latter case he wrote, at p. 411:   [73] 
It is clear from these comments that La Forest J. was describing
certain relationships which may also be fiduciary, but was not creating a
separate category of ad hoc fiduciary relationships.  In other words,
this concept borrowed from academic writing may be useful to describe certain
relationships, but it has not been and should not be used as a tool for
categorization. Fiduciary relationships, he explained, are “simply a species of
a broader family of relationships that may be termed ‘power-dependency’
relationships” (p. 411).  The law’s approach to the situation of vulnerable
people “gives rise to a variety of often overlapping duties” and “the precise
legal or equitable duties the law will enforce in any given relationship are
tailored to the legal and practical incidents of a particular relationship”
(pp. 412-13).  [74] 
In short, not all power-dependency relationships are fiduciary in
nature, and identifying a power-dependency relationship does not, on its own,
materially assist in deciding whether the relationship is fiduciary or not. It
follows, in my view, that there are not and should not be special rules for
recognition of fiduciary duties in the case of “power-dependency”
relationships.  I am therefore of the view that the Court of Appeal erred in
this respect.  c.     Mutual Understanding and Undertaking by the
Fiduciary  [75] 
The appellants fault the Court of Appeal for holding that
fiduciary duties may arise only on the basis of the reasonable expectations of
one party.  The appellants say that there must be a mutual understanding that
the fiduciary will act only in the interests of the other party.  While I agree
with the appellants that the Court of Appeal erred by basing a fiduciary
obligation on Ms. Perez’s reasonable expectation, it is not necessary in order
to resolve this appeal to go so far as to say that a mutual understanding is
necessary in all cases. It is sufficient to say here that what is required in
all cases is an undertaking by the fiduciary, express or implied, to act in
accordance with the duty of loyalty reposed on him or her.  [76] 
I note that in Hodgkinson, this Court considered competing
bases for the imposition of ad hoc fiduciary duties, opposing to a
certain extent mutual understanding and reasonable expectations of the alleged
beneficiary. While the seven judges sitting on the case were not fully
unanimous in this respect, they all agreed that ad hoc fiduciary
obligations may be imposed when there is a mutual understanding to this effect,
and, following the example of Dickson J. in Guerin, at p. 384, left the
door open to such an obligation arising from a unilateral undertaking by the
fiduciary (see on this point Professor Lionel Smith’s insightful comment on  Hodgkinson,
“Fiduciary Relationships — Arising in Commercial Contexts — Investment
Advisors: Hodgkinson v. Simms” (1995), 74 Can. Bar Rev. 714). 
Thus, what is required in all cases of ad hoc fiduciary obligations is
that there be an undertaking on the part of the fiduciary to exercise a
discretionary power in the interests of that other party.  To repeat what was
said by McLachlin J. in Norberg, “fiduciary relationships . . . are
always dependent on the fiduciary’s undertaking to act in the beneficiary’s
interests” (p. 273).  As Dickson J. put it in Guerin, fiduciary duties
may arise where “by statute, agreement, or perhaps by unilateral undertaking,
one party has an obligation to act for the benefit of another” (p. 384).  [77] 
The fiduciary’s undertaking may be the result of the exercise of
statutory powers, the express or implied terms of an agreement or, perhaps,
simply an undertaking to act in this way.  In cases of per se fiduciary
relationships, this undertaking will be found in the nature of the category of
relationship in issue.  The critical point is that in both per se and ad
hoc fiduciary relationships, there will be some undertaking on the part of
the fiduciary to act with loyalty.  [78] 
Commentators support this view.  In his seminal work, Fiduciary
Obligations (1977), Professor P. D. Finn writes at para. 15:  For a person to be a fiduciary he must first and
foremost have bound himself in some way to protect and/or to advance
the interests of another. This is perhaps the most obvious of the
characteristics of the fiduciary office for Equity will only oblige a person to
act in what he believes to be another’s interests if he himself has assumed a
position which requires him to act for or on behalf of that other in some
particular matter. [Emphasis added.]  To the same
effect, Professor Smith writes in his comment on Hodgkinson, at p. 717
(echoing Dickson J.’s comments in Guerin, at p. 384, and Austin W.
Scott, “The Fiduciary Principle” (1949), 37  Cal. L. Rev. 539, at p.
540):  The fiduciary must relinquish self-interest; that is an act which
the fiduciary does, not an act which is done to the fiduciary. This was put
slightly differently by Austin Scott, who said that “a fiduciary is a person
who undertakes to act in the interest of another person.” [Emphasis in
original.]  [79] 
This does not mean, however, that an express undertaking is
required.  Rather, the fiduciary’s undertaking may be implied in the particular
circumstances of the parties’ relationship. Relevant to the enquiry of whether
there is such an implied undertaking are considerations such as professional
norms, industry or other common practices and whether the alleged fiduciary
induced the other party into relying on the fiduciary’s loyalty.  [80] 
In my respectful view, the Court of Appeal’s analysis went wrong
on this point.  It found a fiduciary duty without finding an undertaking,
express or implied, on the part of Mr. Galambos that he would act in relation
to the loans only in Ms. Perez’s interests. The court’s reasoning is premised
on the fact that there was no such undertaking; otherwise, there would have
been no need to base the conclusion that a fiduciary duty existed on Ms.
Perez’s expectations alone.  [81] 
It is clear from the evidence that there was no explicit
undertaking that Mr. Galambos was to act in Ms. Perez’s best interest in
relation to the cash advances; she does not even allege as much. Moreover, it
would be inconsistent with the judge’s findings to conclude that any such
undertaking should be implied on the facts of this case. The trial judge found
that Mr. Galambos never explicitly requested a loan and that his requests that
Ms. Perez “do something” to solve the cashflow problem referred to contacting
the bank to extend the firm’s line of credit, which had been done several times
in the past (paras. 54-55).  Having never requested the advances, it is
difficult to see how there was any implied undertaking to act only in Ms.
Perez’s interests with respect to them. The judge also found that if Ms. Perez
formed any expectation that Mr. Galambos was to act as her fiduciary, it was
unreasonable. Rice J. found that if there was a disparity in knowledge of the
firm’s finances, it was Ms. Perez who was more knowledgeable (para. 52). In
such circumstances, any reasonable person would have understood that he or she
assumed the position of a precarious unsecured creditor, not that of a
protected beneficiary.  [82] 
In summary, my view is that the Court of Appeal erred in holding
that in the case of power-dependency relationships, a fiduciary duty may arise
absent some undertaking on the part of the fiduciary to act in the interests of
the other party.  The Court of Appeal did not suggest that there was any such
undertaking here and in any event, it would be inconsistent with the judge’s
factual findings to conclude that any such undertaking should be implied.  3.    Transfer of Discretionary Power  [83] 
It is fundamental to the existence of any fiduciary obligation
that the fiduciary has a discretionary power to affect the other party’s legal
or practical interests. In Guerin, Dickson J. spoke of this
discretionary power as “the hallmark of any fiduciary relationship” (p. 387)
and, while making no comment on whether it was broad enough to embrace all
fiduciary obligations, he endorsed Professor Weinrib’s description of a
fiduciary relationship as one in which “the principal’s interests can be
affected by, and are therefore dependent on, the manner in which the fiduciary
uses the discretion which has been delegated to him” (p. 384).  The influential
guidelines set out by Wilson J. in Frame, at p. 136, for identifying new
categories of fiduciary relationships included that the fiduciary have scope
for the exercise of some discretion or power, the exercise of which affects the
beneficiary’s legal or practical interests.  In Norberg, McLachlin J.
noted that a fiduciary must be entrusted with such power in order to perform
his or her functions (p. 275).  [84] 
The nature of this discretionary power to affect the
beneficiary’s legal or practical interests may, depending on the circumstances,
be quite broadly defined.  It may arise from power conferred by statute,
agreement, perhaps from a unilateral undertaking or, in particular situations
such as the professional advisory relationship addressed in Hodgkinson, 
by the beneficiary entrusting the fiduciary with information or seeking advice
in circumstances that confer a source of power: see, e.g., Lac Minerals and
Hodgkinson.  While what is sufficient to constitute power in the hands
of the fiduciary may be controversial in some cases, the requirement for the
existence of such power in the fiduciary’s hands is not.  The presence of this
sort of power will not necessarily on its own support the existence of an ad
hoc fiduciary duty; its absence, however, negates the existence of such a
duty.  [85] 
As noted, the trial judge held that the evidence did not
establish that Ms. Perez relinquished her decision-making power with respect to
the loans to Mr. Galambos or that there was any discretion over her interests
that he was able to exercise unilaterally or otherwise (para. 46).  The Court
of Appeal did not disagree with these conclusions and no basis for doing so has
been suggested.  [86] 
In my respectful view, the finding of the trial judge that Mr.
Galambos had no discretionary power over Ms. Perez’s interests that he was able
to exercise unilaterally or otherwise is fatal to her claim that there was an ad
hoc fiduciary duty on Mr. Galambos’s part to act solely in her interests in
relation to these cash advances.  4.    Conclusion With Respect to Appellants’
Issues  [87] 
I conclude that the Court of Appeal erred in finding that Mr.
Galambos and his firm had an ad hoc fiduciary obligation towards Ms.
Perez with respect to the cash advances.  V.     Disposition  [88] 
I would allow the appeal and restore the trial judgment, except
that, if the parties are not able to agree about whether Ms. Perez is entitled
to a judgment in debt against the law corporation and the costs consequences if
any flowing from it,  I would remand to the Court of Appeal the question of
whether Ms. Perez is entitled to a judgment in debt against the Michael Z.
Galambos Law Corporation and, if so, whether that judgment should have any
impact on the question of costs in the courts below.  Subject to any adjustment
resulting from an agreement between the parties or from the remand, the
appellants are entitled to their costs throughout if demanded.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Farris, Vaughan, Wills &
Murphy, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Holmes & King,
Vancouver.   