                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Miazga v.
  Kvello Estate, 2009 SCC 51, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 339  Date:  20091106 Docket:  32208  Between: Matthew Miazga Appellant and Estate
of Dennis Kvello (by his personal representative, Diane Kvello), Diane
Kvello, S.K.1, S.K.2, Kari Klassen, Richard Klassen, Pamela Sharpe, Estate
of Marie Klassen (by her personal representative, Peter Dale Klassen), John
Klassen, Myrna Klassen, Peter Dale Klassen and Anita Janine Klassen Respondents Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney General of
Quebec, Attorney General of Nova Scotia, Attorney General of New Brunswick, Attorney
General of Manitoba, Attorney General of British Columbia, Attorney General
for Saskatchewan, Attorney General of Alberta, Director of Criminal and Penal
Prosecutions of Quebec, Canadian Association of Crown Counsel, Association
in Defence of the Wrongly Convicted, Criminal Lawyers Association
(Ontario) and Canadian Civil Liberties Association Interveners  Coram: McLachlin
C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.   Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 102)   Charron J.
  (McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish and Abella JJ. concurring)  ______________________________ Miazga v. Kvello Estate, 2009 SCC 51, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 339  Matthew Miazga                                                                                                                Appellant  v.  Estate of
Dennis Kvello (by his personal representative, Diane Kvello),
Diane Kvello, S.K.1, S.K.2, Kari Klassen, Richard Klassen,
Pamela Sharpe, Estate of Marie Klassen (by her personal
representative, Peter Dale Klassen), John Klassen, Myrna Klassen, Peter Dale Klassen and Anita Janine Klassen                                Respondents  and  Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney
General of Quebec, Attorney General of Nova Scotia, Attorney
General of New Brunswick, Attorney General of Manitoba,
Attorney General of British Columbia, Attorney General for
Saskatchewan, Attorney General of Alberta, Director of
Criminal and Penal Prosecutions of Quebec, Canadian
Association of Crown Counsel, Association in Defence of
the Wrongly Convicted, Criminal Lawyers Association (Ontario) and Canadian Civil Liberties Association                                  Interveners  Indexed as:  Miazga v. Kvello Estate  Neutral citation:  2009 SCC 51.  File No.:  32208. 2008:  December 12; 2009:  November 6.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel,
Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal
for saskatchewan  Torts — Malicious prosecution — Crown prosecutors —
Malice requirement — Absence of reasonable and probable cause to initiate
prosecution — Provincial Crown attorney found liable for malicious prosecution
— Whether prosecutor’s lack of subjective belief in existence of reasonable and
probable cause to initiate prosecution sufficient to ground finding of malice —
Whether malice element requires proof of improper purpose.  Three children made allegations of sexual assault
against their biological parents, their mother’s boyfriend and the respondents,
who were the children’s foster parents and members of the foster parents’
extended family.  Charges were subsequently laid and M, a provincial Crown
attorney, prosecuted the case against the parents and the mother’s boyfriend. 
All three were convicted, and the convictions were upheld by the Court of
Appeal.  The Supreme Court of Canada overturned the convictions, but concluded
that the evidence of the children was sufficient to order new trials against
the parents.  Meanwhile, taking under advisement the trial judge’s comments
urging that the children not be made to endure another criminal proceeding, M
negotiated a plea bargain with one of the accused (who is not a respondent in
this case).  The charges against the respondents were stayed.  Some years
later, all three children recanted their allegations against the respondents. 
The respondents commenced a civil suit for malicious prosecution against a
number of individuals involved in the proceedings against them, including M.  M was found liable.  The trial judge held that there
were no objectively reasonable grounds upon which M could have believed that
the respondents were probably guilty of the offences alleged.  He held that M
could not have had a subjective belief in the existence of reasonable and
probable cause because of the unbelievable nature of the children’s allegations
against the respondents.  He concluded that the absence of reasonable and
probable cause raised a presumption of malice which, in the circumstances of
this case, was itself sufficient to ground a finding of malice.  In the event
he was wrong on this conclusion, the trial judge held that there were other
“indications of malice” to support the conclusion that M’s prosecution of the
respondents was animated by an improper purpose.  While the Court of Appeal was
unanimous in rejecting virtually all of the trial judge’s “indicators of
malice”, the majority nevertheless concluded that the trial judge’s finding
that M did not have a subjective belief in the probable guilt of the
respondents was sufficient to support the conclusion that he was actuated by
malice and dismissed the appeal.  Held:  The appeal should
be allowed and the action dismissed.  To succeed in an action for malicious prosecution, a
plaintiff must prove that the prosecution was:  (1) initiated by the defendant;
(2) terminated in favour of the plaintiff; (3) undertaken without reasonable
and probable cause; and (4) motivated by malice or a primary purpose other than
that of carrying the law into effect.  Only the last two elements are at issue
in this appeal.  [3]      Cases Cited  Referred to:  Nelles
v. Ontario, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 170; Proulx v. Quebec (Attorney General),
2001 SCC 66, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 9; Krieger v. Law Society of Alberta, 2002
SCC 65, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 372; R. v. R. (D.) (1995), 98 C.C.C. (3d) 353,
rev’d [1996] 2 S.C.R. 291; Heath v. Heape (1856), 1 H. & N. 478, 156
E.R. 1289; Hicks v. Faulkner (1878), 8 Q.B.D. 167, aff’d [1881-5] All
E.R. Rep. 187; Abrath v. North Eastern Railway Co. (1886), 11 App. Cas.
247; Joint v. Thompson (1867), 26 U.C.Q.B. 519; Prentiss v. Anderson
Logging Co. (1911), 16 B.C.R. 289; Jewhurst v. United Cigar Stores Ltd. (1919),
49 D.L.R. 649; Gabler v. Cymbaliski (1922), 15 Sask. L.R. 457; Love
v. Denny (1929), 64 O.L.R. 290; R. v. Regan, 2002 SCC 12, [2002] 1
S.C.R. 297; Boucher v. The Queen, [1955] S.C.R. 16; R. v. Power,
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 601; R. v. Jewitt, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 128; Danby v.
Beardsley (1880), 43 L.T. 603; Ramsay v. Saskatchewan, 2003 SKQB
163, 234 Sask. R. 172; Hainsworth v. Ontario (Attorney General), [2002]
O.J. No. 1390 (QL); Hunt v. Ontario, [2004] O.J. No. 5284
(QL); Ferri v. Root, 2007 ONCA 79, 279 D.L.R. (4th) 643; Wilson v.
Toronto (Metropolitan) Police Service, [2001] O.J. No. 2434 (QL); Glinski
v. McIver, [1962] 1 All E.R. 696; A v. State of New South Wales,
[2007] HCA 10, [2007] 3 L.R.C. 693; Marley v. Mitchell (1988), [2006]
N.Z.A.R. 181; Al’s Steak House & Tavern Inc. v. Deloitte & Touche (1999),
45 C.C.L.T. (2d) 98.  Statutes and Regulations Cited   Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 108(10).      Authors Cited  Archibald, Todd L.  “The Widening Net of
Liability for Police and Public Officials in the Investigation of Crimes”, in
Todd L. Archibald and Michael Cochrane, eds., Annual Review of Civil
Litigation, 2001.  Toronto:  Carswell, 2002, 1.  Clerk, John Frederic.  Clerk & Lindsell on
Torts, 19th ed.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 2006.  Fleming, John G.  The Law of Torts, 9th
ed.  Sydney:  LBC Information Services, 1998.  Ontario.  Report of the Attorney General’s
Advisory Committee on Charge Screening, Disclosure, and Resolution Discussions. 
Toronto:  The Committee, 1993.  Osborne, Philip H.  The Law of Torts, 3rd
ed.  Toronto:  Irwin Law, 2007.  Pearson, John.  “Proulx and Reasonable and
Probable Cause to Prosecute” (2002), 46 C.R. (5th) 156.  Sopinka, John.  “Malicious
Prosecution:  Invasion of Charter Interests:  Remedies:  Nelles v.
Ontario:  R. v. Jedynack:  R. v. Simpson”
(1995), 74 Can. Bar Rev. 366.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Saskatchewan Court of
Appeal (Vancise, Sherstobitoff and Lane JJ.A.), 2007 SKCA 57, 293 Sask. R.
187, 397 W.A.C. 187, 282 D.L.R. (4th) 1, [2007] 7 W.W.R. 577, 49 C.C.L.T. (3d)
194, [2007] S.J. No. 247 (QL), 2007 CarswellSask 237, upholding the
judgment of Baynton J., 2003 SKQB 559, 244 Sask. R. 1, 234 D.L.R. (4th)
612, [2004] 9 W.W.R. 647, [2003] S.J. No. 830 (QL), 2003 CarswellSask
898.  Appeal allowed.  Michael D. Tochor,
Q.C., and Gregory Fingas, for the appellant.  Edward Holgate,
for the respondents Estate of Dennis Kvello (by his personal representative,
Diane Kvello), Diane Kvello, S.K.1, S.K.2, Pamela Sharpe, Estate of Marie
Klassen (by her personal representative, Peter Dale Klassen), John Klassen,
Myrna Klassen, Peter Dale Klassen and Anita Janine Klassen.  Richard Klassen, on his
own behalf and on behalf of the respondent Kari Klassen.  Written submissions only by Robert Frater and Christopher
Mainella, for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada.  Written submissions only by Michele Smith,
Michael Fleishman and Jeremy Glick, for the intervener the
Attorney General of Ontario.  Sophie Cliche, Lizann
Demers and Rachel Boivin, for the interveners the Attorney
General of Quebec and the Director of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions of
Quebec.  James A. Gumpert,
Q.C., and Mark Scott, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Nova Scotia.  John J. Walsh,
Q.C., for the intervener the Attorney General of New Brunswick.  Eugene B. Szach,
for the intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba.    Written submissions only by Jerome A. Tholl,
for the intervener the Attorney General for Saskatchewan.  Written submissions only by Goran Tomljanovic,
Q.C., for the intervener the Attorney General of Alberta.  Paul J. J. Cavalluzzo
and Stephen J. Moreau, for the intervener the Canadian Association
of Crown Counsel.  Louis Sokolov and Colleen
Bauman, for the intervener the Association in Defence of the Wrongly
Convicted.  Sean Dewart, for
the intervener the Criminal Lawyers Association (Ontario).  Bradley E. Berg,
Allison A. Thornton and Shashu M. Clacken, for the
intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  Charron J. —  1.      Overview  [1]    
The respondents were charged with about 70 counts of sexual
assault against children in their care.  The charges were ultimately resolved
in their favour when, following their committal but before trial, the
appellant, Crown Attorney Miazga, entered a stay of proceedings.  The child
complainants, upon whose testimony the prosecution was based, subsequently
recanted their allegations.  The respondents then commenced this action for
malicious prosecution.  [2]    
There is no question that the respondents were the victims of a
clear miscarriage of justice which undoubtedly had a devastating effect on
their lives.  Especially in the absence of an acquittal, it is often difficult
for people wrongly accused of such crimes to fully regain their positions in
society and free themselves from the stigma and trauma of those false
allegations.  The fact that we now know that the children’s allegations of
sexual abuse were false, however, does not provide the answer to whether the
respondents’ action in malicious prosecution against the Crown prosecutor can
succeed.  [3]    
To succeed in an action for malicious prosecution, a plaintiff
must prove that the prosecution was:  (1) initiated by the defendant; (2)
terminated in favour of the plaintiff; (3) undertaken without reasonable and
probable cause; and (4) motivated by malice or a primary purpose other than
that of carrying the law into effect.  [4]    
The four-part test for malicious prosecution is of long standing
in the common law.  It evolved in the 18th and 19th centuries at a time when
prosecutions were conducted by private litigants and the Crown was wholly
immune from civil liability.  In Nelles v. Ontario, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 170,
this Court held that the Attorney General and Crown prosecutors no longer enjoy
absolute immunity from a suit for malicious prosecution and set out the
requisite standard for Crown liability under the pre-existing four-part test. 
The present appeal asks the Court to provide further guidance on the absence of
reasonable and probable cause and malice requirements, in light of the unique
role played by Crown prosecutors in our modern system of public prosecutions.  [5]    
That Crown attorneys may be held liable in private law does not
mean that well-established public law principles relating to Crown independence
and prosecutorial discretion can be ignored in a civil action for malicious
prosecution.  The stringent threshold for Crown liability established by this
Court in Nelles, and reiterated in Proulx v. Quebec (Attorney
General), 2001 SCC 66, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 9, made that clear, and the
principles at play bear repeating here.  [6]    
It is readily apparent from its constituent elements that the
tort of malicious prosecution targets the decision to initiate or continue with
a criminal prosecution.  When taken by a Crown prosecutor, this decision is one
of the “core elements” of prosecutorial discretion, thus lying “beyond the
legitimate reach of the court” under the constitutionally entrenched principle
of independence:  Krieger v. Law Society of Alberta, 2002 SCC 65, [2002]
3 S.C.R. 372, at paras. 32 and 46.  The principle of Crown independence means
that decisions taken by a Crown attorney pursuant to his or her prosecutorial
discretion are generally immune from judicial review under principles of public
law, subject only to the strict application of the doctrine of abuse of
process.  [7]    
Just as immunity from judicial review is subject to the doctrine
of abuse of process in public law, the Attorney General and Crown attorneys do
not enjoy absolute immunity from a suit for malicious prosecution in private
law.  A person accused of a criminal offence enjoys a private right of action
when a prosecutor acts maliciously in fraud of his or her prosecutorial duties
with the result that the accused suffers damage.  However, the civil tort of
malicious prosecution is not an after-the-fact judicial review of a Crown’s
exercise of prosecutorial discretion.  Under the strict standard established in
Nelles, malicious prosecution will only be made out where there is proof
that the prosecutor’s conduct was fuelled by “an improper purpose or motive, a
motive that involves an abuse or perversion of the system of criminal justice
for ends it was not designed to serve” (Nelles, at p. 199).  In other
words, it is only when a Crown prosecutor steps out of his or her role
as “minister of justice” that immunity is no longer justified.  [8]    
The high threshold for Crown liability was reiterated in Proulx,
where the Court stressed that malice in the form of improper purpose is the key
to proving malicious prosecution.  In the context of a case against a Crown
prosecutor, malice does not include recklessness, gross negligence or poor
judgment.  It is only where the conduct of the prosecutor constitutes an “abuse
of prosecutorial power”, or the perpetuation of a “fraud on the process of
criminal justice” that malice can be said to exist (paras. 44-45).  Having
regard to the defendant prosecutor’s mixed motives, the Court was satisfied
that Proulx was one of those “highly exceptional” cases in which Crown
immunity for prosecutorial misconduct should be lifted, and the defendant found
liable for malicious prosecution.  [9]    
The trial judge in this case held that there were no objectively
reasonable grounds upon which Miazga could have believed that the respondents
were probably guilty of the offences alleged against them.  He held that Miazga
could not have had a subjective belief in the existence of reasonable and
probable cause because of the unbelievable nature of the children’s allegations
against the respondents.  He concluded that the absence of reasonable and
probable cause raised a presumption of malice which, in the circumstances of
this case, was itself sufficient to ground a finding of malice.  In the event
he was wrong on this conclusion, the trial judge held that there were other
“indications of malice” to support the conclusion that Miazga’s prosecution of
the respondents was animated by an improper purpose.  He therefore found Miazga
liable for malicious prosecution (2003 SKQB 559, 244 Sask. R. 1).  [10]
The Saskatchewan Court of Appeal was unanimously of the view that
the trial judge’s “indications of malice” were based on erroneous assumptions,
errors in law, or were unsupported by the evidence.  However, Sherstobitoff
J.A., Lane J.A. concurring, dismissed the appeal on the basis that the trial
judge’s finding that Miazga did not have a subjective belief in the probable
guilt of the respondents was sufficient to support the conclusion that he was
actuated by malice (2007 SKCA 57, 293 Sask. R. 187).  [11]
Vancise J.A. disagreed with the majority’s conclusion.  In his
view, the absence of reasonable and probable grounds alone could not constitute
malice.  In order to be malicious, a prosecution must be fuelled by an improper
purpose, and no such improper purpose was identified in the pleadings or at
trial; nor was an improper purpose found by the trial judge.  Vancise J.A.
concluded that there existed no evidence indicative of an intentional effort by
Miazga to abuse or distort the Crown attorney’s proper role within the criminal
justice system.  In addition, he concluded that the trial judge’s finding that
Miazga did not believe there were reasonable and probable grounds to initiate
and continue the prosecution was based on a palpable and overriding error. 
Vancise J.A. would have allowed the appeal and dismissed the action.  [12]
I agree with Vancise J.A. that the trial judge’s finding of
liability is not supported by law or the evidence in this case.  In particular,
it is my view that there is no evidence to support a finding of malice or
improper purpose.  In light of the respondents’ failure to prove malice, it is not
necessary to determine whether there was a lack of reasonable and probable
grounds to proceed at the time Miazga initiated the prosecution more than 18
years ago.  Given that the children’s allegations are now known to have been
false, no useful purpose would be served by revisiting “the facts” as they
appeared at that time.  [13]
I would therefore allow the appeal and dismiss the action.  2.      Facts 2.1    The Allegations  [14]
In the spring of 1991, Miazga, a Crown prosecutor in Saskatchewan
with 12 years’ experience, was contacted by police officer Cpl. Brian Dueck
about an ongoing sexual assault investigation.  The case revolved around
disclosures of sexual abuse made by three children, the R. siblings, against
their foster parents, Anita and Dale Klassen, and members of the Klassens’
extended family, who are the respondents in this appeal.  The R. siblings also
made allegations of abuse against their biological parents, R. and R. (“R.
parents”), and their mother’s boyfriend, D.W., who are not parties in the
present appeal.  [15]
The R. children told police that their alleged abusers had
committed upon them, and had forced them to commit, various sexual acts.  The
allegations against each of the respondents by each of the R. children were
virtually identical in nature.  The children also detailed bizarre events
including the mutilation and ritualistic killing of animals, dismemberment of
babies and drinking of human blood.  The respondents in this case were not
implicated in the ritualistic allegations, which were made only in respect of
the R. children’s biological parents and D.W.  [16]
Dueck asked Miazga for his opinion as to whether charges should
be laid.  Miazga reviewed the allegations and Dueck’s file and ultimately
advised that if he believed the R. children’s allegations, Dueck should proceed
with the laying of charges.  [17]
By way of context, it is notable that the case against the
respondents arose  [18]
On July 6, 1991, Dueck swore an Information charging each of the
respondents with one count of sexual assault against each of the three R.
children.  The respondents were arrested five days later and remanded in
custody for six days.  At their first court appearance on July 18, 1991, Miazga
appeared for the Crown and consented to the release of all of the respondents.  [19]
Also on July 6, 1991, Dueck swore an Information against the R.
parents and D.W., charging them each with multiple counts of either sexual
assault or gross indecency against the R. children.  2.2    The Preliminary Hearings  [20]
The preliminary inquiry in the R. parents and D.W. case commenced
on November 21, 1991.  On the basis of the R. children’s evidence, all three
accused were committed for trial on all charges against them.  [21]
It became apparent in the course of the preliminary inquiry that
one of the R. children had lied to the court about keeping notes of the
alleged abuse.  At the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry, Miazga noted on
the record that, in light of the frailties he perceived in the children’s
evidence, particularly in respect of their credibility, he was grappling with
whether to proceed with the preliminary inquiry regarding the charges against
the respondents.  [22]
Miazga consulted with his superiors at Prosecutions Head Office,
and was instructed to continue with the prosecution if he believed the
essential aspects of the children’s stories.  [23]
The preliminary hearing in the case against the respondents
commenced on December 2, 1991, with Miazga as co-counsel.  All of the
respondents were committed for trial based on the allegations of the R.
siblings.  2.3    The Stay of Proceedings  [24]
Miazga prosecuted the case against the R. parents and D.W.  The
R. children gave testimony and the judge convicted the three accused on several
counts of sexual assault on December 18, 1992.  In her reasons for judgment,
the trial judge urged that the children not be made to endure another criminal
proceeding.  [25]
Taking the judge’s comments under advisement, and based on his
own view that the children’s credibility was becoming increasingly uncertain,
Miazga twice met with his Head Office to discuss the possibility of a plea
bargain.  He negotiated a plea bargain in which one of the accused, Peter
Klassen Sr. (father of the respondent, Peter Dale Klassen), who is not a
respondent in the present appeal, pled guilty to four charges of sexual assault. 
The charges against the respondents were stayed on February 10, 1993.  [26]
The convictions entered at trial against the R. parents and D.W.
were upheld by a majority of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, R. v. R. (D.)
(1995), 98 C.C.C. (3d) 353.  This Court overturned those convictions, [1996] 2
S.C.R. 291; however, the majority of the Court concluded that the evidence of
the R. siblings was sufficient to order new trials for two of the defendants.  2.4    The Malicious Prosecution Suit  [27]
Some years following the stay of proceedings, all three R.
children recanted their allegations against the respondents.  [28]
The respondents commenced a civil suit against a number of
individuals involved in the proceedings against them: the police officer Dueck,
the prosecutor Miazga, his co-counsel, the estate of Miazga’s superior at
Prosecutions Head Office, and the child therapist who treated the children and
testified in the criminal proceedings against the respondents.  The action
against Miazga’s co-counsel and the estate of his superior were non-suited at
trial.  Dueck, Miazga and the child therapist were found liable.  [29]
Dueck did not appeal the trial judgment.  The judgment against
the child therapist was set aside on appeal.  The Court of Appeal found the
trial judge’s conclusion that, but for the involvement of the child therapist
the charges would not have been laid and, if laid, would not have been
prosecuted, was “simply not supported by the evidence” and indeed was contrary
to the entire body of evidence bearing on her participation in the
investigation of the alleged offences (para. 42).  The court held further that
even if the trial judge’s findings of fact were correct, they were not
sufficient in law to make the child therapist liable for initiation of the
proceedings.  No appeal is taken from the dismissal of the action against the
child therapist.  It is only the action against Crown prosecutor Miazga that
concerns the Court in the present appeal.  3.      The Action Against Miazga: Judgments Below  3.1    Court of Queen’s Bench of Saskatchewan  [30]
At trial, Miazga did not take issue with the fact that he had
initiated the proceedings against the respondents within the meaning of the
case law under the first element of the four-part test for malicious prosecution. 
While there was some issue in respect of the second element of the tort in
light of the plea bargain with Peter Klassen Sr. (not a party to this
action), the trial judge held that the proceedings had terminated in favour of
the respondents.  No issue is taken on this point before this Court.  The trial
judge found that the third and fourth elements of the tort were satisfied based
on his conclusions that Miazga did not have reasonable and probable grounds to
proceed against the respondents and had acted maliciously in doing so.  The
judge’s findings on these latter two elements of the tort remain at issue.  [31]
As noted by the Court of Appeal (at para. 68), it is clear that
the trial judge “identified the credibility of the R. children and their
allegations as ‘the most critical issue of the case’”.  It is also apparent
that the trial judge’s conclusion on liability was based on his view that the
children’s allegations were so unbelievable as to be patently absurd, such that
no reasonable person would have believed the accusations against the
respondents without corroborating evidence.  The trial judge pointed to the
ritualistic and satanic aspects of the allegations, the rote manner in which
the children recalled the abuse, and the fact that, if the children’s stories
were accepted, 12 individual adults, many with young children of their own,
were routinely abusing the R. children in the same fashion in different houses,
while other adults were present.  The trial judge concluded that in light of
the nature of the complaints, and given that the children were known to be
untruthful, the allegations against the respondents were virtually
unbelievable.  [32]
On the third element of the test for malicious prosecution, the
trial judge concluded that Miazga did not have a subjective belief in the
probable guilt of each of the respondents respecting the offences charged
against them.  He noted (at para. 357) that “not one of the defendants ever
said that he or she had an honest belief in the probable guilt of the
plaintiffs”, testifying only that they “believed the children”.  Even if Miazga
had testified that he believed in the probable guilt of each of the respondents
on each of the charges, the trial judge held that he could not have accepted
such evidence as truthful because there were no objectively reasonable grounds
upon which Miazga could have concluded the respondents were probably guilty of
the crimes alleged, given the unbelievable nature of the R. children’s
allegations.  [33]
On the final element of the tort, the trial judge held that
Miazga acted maliciously in prosecuting the respondents.  He found (at para.
381) that, given the “extraordinary” circumstances of this case, Miazga’s
decision to proceed against the respondents without reasonable and probable
grounds constituted a strong presumption of malice or at least amounted to a
“strong indication of malice” (para. 382).  Further, the trial judge held that
there were “many other strong indications of malice” in addition to absence of
reasonable and probable grounds that could be inferred from Miazga’s conduct
(para. 382).  The trial judge attributed malice to Miazga on the basis of each
of the following facts:  A.                Pre-charge Advice to Dueck  ·                  Miazga’s failure to interview the
children or view the videotapes of their interviews with police before advising
Dueck that he should lay charges if he believed the children (para. 141);  ·                  Miazga’s failure to be even-handed
in his zeal to charge and prosecute the alleged abusers because persons other
than the parents of the R. children and the respondents were named in the
children’s allegations but were not charged (para. 390); and  ·                  Miazga’s general failure to
adequately investigate or objectively assess the case before advising Dueck
(paras. 141, 287, 294 and 384).  B.                Conduct During the Criminal
Proceedings  ·                  The particulars of the
respondents’ arrest, the decision to remand them in custody for six days and
the conditions under which they were held (para. 176);  ·                  Miazga’s use of expert witnesses
as “oath helpers”, who gave evidence that the R. children were dysfunctional
and had been sexually abused, and as a result, would be expected to have
inconsistencies in their allegations and testimony (paras. 271-72);  ·                  Miazga’s attempts to “shelter” the
children throughout the proceedings by objecting to the defence lawyer sitting
as an observer at the preliminary inquiry into the charges against the R.
parents and D.W., objecting to the cross-examination of the children on their
videotaped interviews and previous statements, and his questioning of the
expert witnesses (paras. 412-16); and  ·                  Miazga’s approach, conduct and
attitude throughout the trial, which led the trial judge to infer that he was determined
to secure committals or convictions no matter how unreliable the witnesses were
(para. 418).  C.                Miazga’s Evidence at Trial   3.2    Court of Appeal for Saskatchewan  [34]
Although divided in the outcome, the Court of Appeal was
unanimous in concluding that the trial judge had erred in attributing malice to
Miazga on the basis of the facts he deemed “other strong indications of
malice”, as described above.  The court found that the trial judge’s
conclusions in this regard were based on erroneous assumptions about the role
of the prosecutor, errors in law, or were unsupported by the evidence.  The
gist of the court’s reasoning is as follows.  [35]
 In respect of Miazga’s pre-charge actions, Sherstobitoff J.A.,
writing for himself and Lane J.A., concluded that the trial judge erred in
attributing malice to Miazga for any failure to properly investigate the
matter.  He recalled the separate functions of police and prosecutors (at paras.
104-14), noting that police ultimately bear sole responsibility for the
investigation of an offence and the decision as to whether and what charges
should be laid.  Save Miazga’s failure to interview the children himself before
giving Dueck advice to proceed if he believed the children’s allegations which,
in the majority’s view, was properly taken into account (at paras. 115-16), the
pre-charge conduct of the investigation had no bearing on the case against
Miazga.  Vancise J.A. agreed that “the trial judge demonstrated a lack of
understanding of the role of the police and the role of the prosecutor” (para.
212).  [36]
Regarding Miazga’s conduct during the criminal proceedings,
Sherstobitoff J.A. found (at para. 121) that the trial judge erred in
attributing malice to Miazga on the basis of the respondents’ remand in custody
at the time of their arrest, because there was no evidence that Miazga had
anything to do with the nature and circumstances of the arrest.  In fact, the
evidence showed that Miazga’s first involvement in the matter was to consent to
the respondents’ release at the show cause hearing.  As to Miazga’s conduct of
the trial, including his allegedly over-protective position on behalf of the
children and his handling of the expert witnesses, the court held that, even if
one agreed with the trial judge that Miazga was unduly aggressive, the
presiding judge retained control of the proceedings (Vancise J.A., at para.
237), and in any event, any such misconduct by a Crown prosecutor would be
equally consistent with poor judgment, negligence or recklessness as with
malice (Sherstobitoff J.A., at para. 130).  [37]
Finally, the court held (at paras. 127 and 242) that it was not
open to the trial judge to infer lack of remorse and thus malice from Miazga’s
failure to apologize for the prosecution of the respondents, because there was
simply nothing on the record regarding the presence or absence of remorse. 
Miazga was never asked about his feelings on the prosecution during the course
of the trial.  [38]
In summary, the Court of Appeal unanimously rejected virtually
all of the trial judge’s “indicators of malice”.  As Sherstobitoff J.A. noted,
the trial judge failed to explain why he considered these actions to be signs
of malice, given that most of them were equivocal in indicating Miazga’s
intentions, and could be consistent with poor judgment, negligence or
recklessness, none of which are actionable.  [39]
Nevertheless, the majority concluded that the appeal should be
dismissed.  According to Sherstobitoff J.A., the trial judge’s finding that
Miazga did not have a subjective belief in the probable guilt of the
respondents was a finding of fact that “tips the balance” against Miazga (para.
132).  Sherstobitoff J.A. concluded (at para. 135) that this finding was
reasonable, having regard to the whole of the evidence and “the trial judge’s
firm opinion, which permeates the entire judgment”, that it should have been
apparent to anyone that the R. children’s allegations were so bizarre as to be unbelievable,
and that the children were not sufficiently credible.  The majority held that
Miazga’s decision to proceed absent reasonable and probable grounds was itself
sufficient to make out the malice element of Nelles, explaining as
follows (at para. 141):  For a Crown prosecutor to proceed with a prosecution
without a belief in the credibility of his complainants, and without a belief
in the guilt of the accused amounts to the “willful and intentional effort on
the Crown’s part to abuse or distort its proper role within the criminal
justice system” as referred to in Proulx . . . and takes the case beyond
bad judgment, negligence or recklessness and into the realm of malice.  [40]
Vancise J.A., writing in dissent, disagreed.  He held (at para.
246) that the key to the tort of malicious prosecution is malice, defined in Nelles
and Proulx as “conduct fueled by an ‘improper purpose’”.  In his view,
the absence of reasonable and probable grounds alone could not constitute
malice in the form of improper purpose.  No improper purpose was identified in
the pleadings and, significantly, the trial judge made no express finding of a
specific improper purpose attributable to Miazga (para. 170).  As a result,
Vancise J.A. concluded that there existed no evidence indicative of an
intentional effort by Miazga to abuse or distort the Crown attorney’s proper
role within the criminal justice system (para. 245).  All of the so-called
indications of malice which the trial judge attributed to Miazga “were not
evidence of some improper purpose but rather indications of at best bad
judgment, negligence or recklessness” (para. 247).  [41]
In light of this conclusion, it was not necessary for Vancise
J.A. to deal with the issue of reasonable and probable grounds.  He
nevertheless concluded that the trial judge’s finding that Miazga did not have
an honest belief in the existence of reasonable and probable grounds was based
on the unbelievable nature of the R. children’s allegations and, as such,
amounted to a palpable and overriding error.  Vancise J.A. held that Dueck’s
belief in the children and the antecedent criminal proceedings against the R.
parents and D.W., where the testimony of the R. children was accepted as
credible, belied the trial judge’s premise that the allegations were so absurd
as to be totally unbelievable.  4.      Analysis  4.1    Historical Development of the Tort of
Malicious Prosecution  [42]
Malicious prosecution is an intentional tort designed to provide
redress for losses flowing
from an unjustified prosecution.  The four-part test for malicious prosecution
was born and evolved in England in the 18th and 19th centuries at a time when
prosecutions were conducted by private litigants and the Crown was immune from
civil liability.  Indeed, all of the early English and Canadian cases of
malicious prosecution involved disputes between private litigants:  see, e.g., Heath
v. Heape (1856), 1 H. & N. 478 (Ex.), 156 E.R. 1289; Hicks v.
Faulkner (1878), 8 Q.B.D. 167; Abrath v. North Eastern Railway Co.
(1886), 11 App. Cas. 247 (H.L.); Joint v. Thompson (1867), 26 U.C.Q.B.
519; Prentiss v. Anderson Logging Co. (1911), 16 B.C.R. 289 (C.A.); Jewhurst
v. United Cigar Stores Ltd. (1919), 49 D.L.R. 649 (Ont. S.C., App. Div.); Gabler
v. Cymbaliski (1922), 15 Sask. L.R. 457 (K.B.); Love v. Denny
(1929), 64 O.L.R. 290 (S.C., App. Div.).  [43]
Crown immunity at common law endured until the 1950s, when
Canadian  [44]
Given that the tort of malicious prosecution predates the
development of our contemporary system of public prosecutions, courts must take
care not to simply transpose the principles established in suits between
private parties to cases involving Crown defendants without necessary
modification.  While the elements of the four-part test for malicious
prosecution are identical no matter the parties, the contours of the tort in an
action against the Attorney General or his agents must be informed by the core
constitutional principles governing that office.  These principles animated
this Court’s decision in Nelles to adopt a very high threshold for the
tort of malicious prosecution in an action against a public prosecutor, and,
accordingly, it is useful to recall them here.  4.2    Crown Independence and the Tort of
Malicious Prosecution  [45]
An allegation of malicious prosecution against a Crown attorney
constitutes an after-the-fact attack on the propriety of the prosecutor’s decision
to initiate or continue criminal proceedings against the plaintiff.  The
decision to initiate or continue criminal proceedings lies at the core of
prosecutorial discretion, the nature and contents of which were described by
this Court in Krieger as follows (at paras. 43 and 46-47):  “Prosecutorial discretion” is a term of art.  It does not simply refer
to any discretionary decision made by a Crown prosecutor.  Prosecutorial
discretion refers to the use of those powers that constitute the core of the
Attorney General’s office and which are protected from the influence of
improper political and other vitiating factors by the principle of
independence.                                                                              .
. .   Significantly, what is common to the various
elements of prosecutorial discretion is that they involve the ultimate
decisions as to whether a prosecution should be brought, continued or ceased,
and what the prosecution ought to be for.  Put differently, prosecutorial
discretion refers to decisions regarding the nature and extent of the
prosecution and the Attorney General’s participation in it.  Decisions that
do not go to the nature and extent of the prosecution, i.e., the decisions that
govern a Crown prosecutor’s tactics or conduct before the court, do not fall
within the scope of prosecutorial discretion.  Rather, such decisions are
governed by the inherent jurisdiction of the court to control its own processes
once the Attorney General has elected to enter into that forum.  [Emphasis
added.]  [46]
The independence of the Attorney General is so fundamental to the
integrity and efficiency of the criminal justice system that it is
constitutionally entrenched.  The principle of independence requires that the
Attorney General act independently of  political pressures from government and
sets the Crown’s exercise of prosecutorial discretion beyond the reach of
judicial review, subject only to the doctrine of abuse of process.  The Court
explained in Krieger how the principle of independence finds form as a
constitutional value (at paras. 30-32):                                                                                .
. .   See also R.
v. Regan, 2002 SCC 12, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 297, at para. 166, per Binnie
J., dissenting on another issue.  [47]
In exercising their discretion to prosecute, Crown prosecutors
perform a function inherent in the office of the Attorney General that brings
the principle of independence into play.  Its fundamental importance lies, not
in protecting the interests of individual Crown attorneys, but in advancing the
public interest by enabling prosecutors to make discretionary decisions in
fulfilment of their professional obligations without fear of judicial or
political interference, thus fulfilling their quasi-judicial role as
“ministers of justice”:  Boucher v. The Queen, [1955] S.C.R. 16, at p.
25, per Locke J.  In R. v. Power, [1994] 1 S.C.R. 601, at
p. 616, L’Heureux-Dubé J. acknowledged the importance of limiting judicial
oversight of Crown decisions in furtherance of the public interest:   Thus, the public
good is clearly served by the maintenance of a sphere of unfettered discretion
within which Crown attorneys can properly pursue their professional goals.  [48]
That said, the general rule of judicial non-intervention in the
prosecutorial exercise is not
absolute.  In the public law context, this Court in R. v. Jewitt, [1985]
2 S.C.R. 128, unanimously affirmed the availability of the doctrine of abuse of
process in criminal proceedings, but (at p. 137) strictly limited judicial
discretion to stay proceedings as a result of abuse of process to the “clearest
of cases”.  In Power, L’Heureux-Dubé J. for a majority of this Court
described the high threshold that must be met to justify judicial interference
with a Crown attorney’s decision to prosecute an accused (at pp. 615-16):  I, therefore, conclude that, in criminal cases, courts have a residual
discretion to remedy an abuse of the court’s process but only in the “clearest
of cases”, which, in my view, amounts to conduct which shocks the conscience
of the community and is so detrimental to the proper administration of justice
that it warrants judicial intervention.  To conclude that the situation “is tainted to such a
degree” and that it amounts to one of the “clearest of cases”, as the abuse of
process has been characterized by the jurisprudence, requires overwhelming
evidence that the proceedings under scrutiny are unfair to the point that they
are contrary to the interest of justice. . . . Where there is conspicuous
evidence of improper motives or of bad faith or of an act so wrong that it
violates the conscience of the community, such that it would genuinely be
unfair and indecent to proceed, then, and only then, should courts intervene to
prevent an abuse of process which could bring the administration of justice
into disrepute.  Cases of this nature will be extremely rare.  [Emphasis
added.]  [49]
As stated earlier, the question of whether the Attorney General
and Crown attorneys enjoy absolute immunity from a suit for malicious
prosecution in the private law context was answered in the negative by this
Court in Nelles.  As the Court explained, the question was ultimately
one of policy.  The Court concluded that when a prosecutor acts maliciously, in
fraud of his or her professional duties, that prosecutor steps outside his or
her proper role as “minister of justice”, and as a result, immunity from civil
liability is no longer justified.  Where an accused is wrongly prosecuted as a
result of the prosecutor’s abusive actions, he or she may bring an action in
malicious prosecution.  Like the test for abuse of process, however, there is a
stringent standard that must be met before a finding of liability will be made,
in order to ensure that courts do not simply engage in the second-guessing of
decisions made pursuant to a Crown’s prosecutorial discretion.  [50]
In deciding that absolute immunity from civil liability
was not justified, the Court in Nelles made clear that the
principles underlying the case for immunity were still engaged and informed the
high threshold to be met in an action for malicious prosecution (at p. 199):  Further, it is important to note that what we are dealing with here is an
immunity from suit for malicious prosecution; we are not dealing with errors in
judgment or discretion or even professional negligence.  By contrast the tort
of malicious prosecution requires proof of an improper purpose or motive, a motive
that involves an abuse or perversion of the system of criminal justice for
ends it was not designed to serve and as such incorporates an abuse of the
office of the Attorney General and his agents the Crown Attorneys.  [Emphasis
added.]  In Proulx,
at para. 4, the Court reiterated the stringent test for malicious prosecution
established in Nelles:  Under our criminal justice system, prosecutors are
vested with extensive discretion and decision-making authority to carry out
their functions.  Given the importance of this role to the administration of
justice, courts should be very slow indeed to second-guess a prosecutor’s
judgment calls when assessing Crown liability for prosecutorial misconduct.  Nelles
. . . affirmed unequivocally the public interest in setting the
threshold for such liability very high, so as to deter all but the most serious
claims against the prosecuting authorities, and to ensure that Crown liability
is engaged in only the most exceptional circumstances.  [Emphasis added.]  [51]
Thus, the public law doctrine of abuse of process and the tort of
malicious  [52]
The respondents and some of the interveners in the present appeal
urge that the test for malicious prosecution be amended such that malice under
the fourth element may be inferred solely from a finding of lack of reasonable
and probable grounds under the third element.  They argue that to require
independent evidence of malice presents too high a barrier for any wrongly
prosecuted person to obtain a remedy against a Crown prosecutor.  In my view,
these arguments are ill-conceived and do not account for the careful balancing
established in Nelles and Proulx between the right of individual
citizens to be free from groundless criminal prosecutions and the public
interest in the effective and uninhibited prosecution of criminal wrongdoing: 
P. H. Osborne, The Law of Torts (3rd ed. 2007), at p. 245.  As this
Court made plain in Nelles, the “inherent difficulty” in proving a case
of malicious prosecution was an intentional choice by the Court, designed to
preserve this balance (p. 199).  4.3    The Elements of Malicious Prosecution:  A
Brief Overview  [53]
Under the first element of the test for malicious prosecution,
the plaintiff must prove that the prosecution at issue was initiated by the
defendant.  This element identifies the proper target of the suit, as it is
only those who were “actively instrumental” in setting the law in motion that
may be held accountable for any damage that results:  Danby v. Beardsley
(1880), 43 L.T. 603 (C.P.), at p. 604.  As against a Crown prosecutor, the
initiation requirement will be satisfied where the defendant Crown makes the
decision to commence or continue the prosecution of charges laid by police, or
adopts proceedings started by another prosecutor:  Clerk & Lindsell on
Torts (19th ed.  2006), at p. 979; J. G. Fleming, The Law of Torts
(9th ed. 1998), at p. 677.  [54]
The second element of the tort demands evidence that the
prosecution terminated in the plaintiff’s favour.  This requirement precludes a
collateral attack on a conviction properly rendered by a criminal court, and
thus avoids conflict between civil and criminal justice.  The favourable
termination requirement may be satisfied no matter the route by which the
proceedings conclude in the plaintiff’s favour, whether it be an acquittal, a
discharge at a preliminary hearing, a withdrawal, or a stay.  However, where
the termination does not result from an adjudication on the merits, for example,
in the case of a settlement or plea bargain, a live issue may arise whether the
termination of the proceedings was “in favour” of the plaintiff:  see, e.g., Ramsay
v. Saskatchewan, 2003 SKQB 163, 234 Sask. R. 172; Hainsworth v. Ontario
(Attorney General), [2002] O.J. No. 1390 (QL) (S.C.J.); Hunt v. Ontario,
[2004] O.J. No. 5284 (QL) (S.C.J.); Ferri v. Root, 2007 ONCA 79, 279
D.L.R. (4th) 643.  Whether the second element of malicious prosecution was
satisfied in the present case was a live issue at trial; however, the question
is not before the Court.  [55]
Of course, criminal proceedings may terminate in favour of an
accused for a number of reasons and an accused’s success in a criminal
proceeding does not mean the prosecution was improperly initiated.  The third
element which must be proven by a plaintiff — absence of reasonable and
probable cause to commence or continue the prosecution — further delineates the
scope of potential plaintiffs.  As a matter of policy, if reasonable and
probable cause existed at the time the prosecutor commenced or continued the
criminal proceeding in question, the proceeding must be taken to have been
properly instituted, regardless of the fact that it ultimately terminated in
favour of the accused.  I will say more about this later in these reasons.  [56]
Finally, the initiation of criminal proceedings in the absence of
reasonable and probable grounds does not itself suffice to ground a plaintiff’s
case for malicious prosecution, regardless of whether the defendant is a private
or public actor.  Malicious prosecution, as the label implies, is an
intentional tort that requires proof that the defendant’s conduct in setting
the criminal process in motion was fuelled by malice.  The malice requirement
is the key to striking the balance that the tort was designed to maintain: 
between society’s interest in the effective administration of criminal justice
and the need to compensate individuals who have been wrongly prosecuted for a
primary purpose other than that of carrying the law into effect.  I return to
the malice element in the course of the analysis below.  [57]
I now turn to a more detailed consideration of the issues live on
this appeal, starting with the absence of the reasonable and probable cause
element of the tort.  4.4    The Absence of Reasonable and Probable
Cause  [58]
The third element requires a plaintiff to prove an absence of
reasonable and probable cause for initiating the prosecution.  Since malicious
prosecution is an intentional tort that targets a prosecutor’s decision to
initiate criminal proceedings, this element is generally couched in terms of
the prosecutor’s belief in the existence of reasonable and probable
cause.  It is well established that the reasonable and probable cause inquiry
comprises both a subjective and an objective component, such that for grounds
to exist, “[t]here must be both actual belief on the part of the prosecutor and
that belief must be reasonable in the circumstances” (Nelles, at p.
193).  Although stated in the affirmative, the onus is clearly on the plaintiff
to prove the absence of reasonable and probable cause.  [59]
Two issues are raised in this appeal regarding the third element
of the tort in an action taken against a Crown prosecutor.  First, the parties
seek guidance in respect of the standard of belief which should inform the
prosecutor’s decision to initiate or continue a prosecution, as it appears that
there is some uncertainty on this issue.  Second, given that the reasonable and
probable cause inquiry in a public prosecution is not concerned with the
prosecutor’s personal views as to the accused’s guilt, but with his or her
professional assessment of the legal strength of the case, the question is
raised whether the third element of the tort should turn solely on the
existence or absence of objective grounds, leaving any inquiry into the
prosecutor’s subjective state of belief to the fourth element, the question of
malice.  I will deal first with the requisite standard of belief.  [60]
In Nelles, Lamer J. adopted (at p. 193) the definition of
reasonable and probable grounds from Hicks v. Faulkner, at p. 171, per
Hawkins J., aff’d [1881-5] All E.R. Rep. 187 (C.A.), stating as follows:  Reasonable and probable cause has been defined as “an honest belief in
the guilt of the accused based upon a full conviction, founded on
reasonable grounds, of the existence of a state of circumstances, which,
assuming them to be true, would reasonably lead any ordinarily prudent and
cautious man, placed in the position of the accuser, to the conclusion that the
person charged was probably guilty of the crime imputed”. . . . [Emphasis
added.]  This standard of
belief is commonly referred to as the “probable guilt” standard.  [61]
In Proulx, the Court elaborated on this standard, stating
the following (at para. 31):  To say that a prosecutor must be convinced beyond a
reasonable doubt of an accused person’s guilt before bringing charges is
obviously incorrect.  That is the ultimate question for the trier of fact, and
not the prosecutor, to decide.  However, in our opinion, the Crown must have
sufficient evidence to believe that guilt could properly be proved
beyond a reasonable doubt before reasonable and probable cause exists, and
criminal proceedings can be initiated.  A lower threshold for initiating
prosecutions would be incompatible with the prosecutor’s role as a public
officer charged with ensuring justice is respected and pursued.  [Underlining
added.]  [62]
In the wake of Proulx, some commentators queried whether
the Court’s elaboration of the “probable guilt” standard represented a shift
away from the threshold established in Nelles, towards a higher standard
akin to the “reasonable prospect of conviction” standard found in most Crown
policy manuals across Canada:  see, e.g., T. L. Archibald, “The
Widening Net of Liability for Police and Public Officials in the Investigation
of Crimes”, in T. L. Archibald and M. Cochrane, eds., Annual Review of Civil
Litigation, 2001 (2002), 1, at p. 9.  See also J. Pearson, “Proulx
and Reasonable and Probable Cause to Prosecute” (2002), 46 C.R. (5th) 156.  [63]
In my view, the distinction between the standards set out in Nelles
and Proulx ensues from the fact that the tort of malicious prosecution
predates the institution of public prosecutions.  As stated earlier, principles
established in suits between private parties cannot simply be transposed to
cases involving Crown defendants without necessary modification.  In Wilson
v. Toronto (Metropolitan) Police Service, [2001] O.J. No. 2434 (QL)
(S.C.J.), a decision preceding Proulx, Dambrot J. rightly noted that the
definition of reasonable and probable cause quoted in Nelles does not
reflect the proper role of a modern Crown attorney.  As he states, “when
Hawkins J. formulated this definition [in Hicks v. Faulkner],
he clearly did not have prosecuting counsel in mind” (para. 31).  Dambrot J.
expressed the view that, while the accuser’s personal belief in the
probable guilt of the accused may be an appropriate standard in a private suit,
it is not a suitable definition of the subjective element of reasonable and
probable cause in an action for malicious prosecution against Crown counsel
(para. 33).  Although Dambrot J.’s decision is not referred to in Proulx,
the Court’s elaboration of the standard in the latter reflects his concern in Wilson. 
As made plain in Proulx, the reasonable and probable cause inquiry is not
concerned with a prosecutor’s personal views as to the accused’s guilt, but
with his or her professional assessment of the legal strength of the
case.  Given the burden of proof in a criminal trial, belief in “probable”
guilt therefore means that the prosecutor believes, based on the existing state
of circumstances, that proof beyond a reasonable doubt could be made out in a
court of law.  [64]
As alluded to earlier, the standard found in most Crown policy
manuals across the country governing the exercise of prosecutorial discretion
to commence or continue a criminal proceeding is generally higher than the
reasonable and probable cause requirement under the third element of the test
for malicious prosecution.  In Crown policy manuals, the initiation or
continuation of a prosecution is generally not recommended unless there exists
a reasonable prospect of conviction and it is in the public interest to pursue
the criminal proceeding.  It is within the realm of prosecutorial discretion to
set appropriate standards and, as discussed above, the civil action is not a
vehicle for embarking upon a judicial review of its exercise in particular
cases.  Accordingly, there is nothing discordant about a lower standard
grounding civil liability.  [65]
That reasonable and probable cause concerns a Crown prosecutor’s
professional, not personal, opinion on the merits of the case in question is an
important aspect of the proper administration of justice.  This issue was
discussed at some length by the Honourable G. Arthur Martin, in Report of
the Attorney General’s Advisory Committee on Charge Screening, Disclosure, and
Resolution Discussions (1993) (“Martin Report”).  I will only highlight
some of the underlying concerns here.  [66]
To require that a Crown prosecutor’s decision to initiate a
prosecution be based on the prosecutor’s personal views about the guilt of the
accused would run counter to the impartial and quasi-judicial role of
the prosecutor:  Boucher.  The Martin Report, at p. 70, explained as
follows:  If only those cases were prosecuted in which Crown counsel firmly
believed in the guilt of the accused, the settled notion that “the purpose of a
criminal prosecution is not to obtain a conviction” may well be compromised in
practice by prosecutors who, having formed the opinion that the accused is
guilty, would therefore see it as their duty to obtain a conviction.  [67]
Conversely, where sufficient cause exists from a purely legal
standpoint, the Crown prosecutor who harbours personal doubt about the guilt of
the accused cannot substitute his or her own views for those of the judge or
jury in making the threshold decision to go forward with a prosecution.  The
Martin Report explains as follows, at pp. 71-72:  Crown counsel need not and ought not to be
substituting his or her own views for those of the trial judge or jury, who are
the community’s decision makers.  It cannot be forgotten that much of the
public’s confidence in the administration of justice is attributable to the
trial court process that ensures that justice is not only done, but is seen to
be done . . . . Granting Crown counsel the power to initiate or
discontinue prosecutions based on a subjective assessment of whether or not the
accused is guilty would, in some circumstances, be tantamount to replacing
these open, impartial, and community-based processes with the unexplained,
unreviewable decisions of prosecutorial officials who have no direct accountability
to the public.  [68]
The reasonable and probable cause requirement in the civil action
for malicious prosecution is intended to weed out those cases where there was a
basis for invoking the criminal process.  As Sopinka J. noted:  The rationale
of tort action for damages for malicious prosecution is that the court’s
process has been abused by wrongfully invoking the law on a criminal charge. 
The tort has been restricted, however, to ensure that criminals can be brought
to justice without making prosecutors fear an action for damages if a
prosecution fails.  (J. Sopinka, “Malicious Prosecution: Invasion of Charter
Interests: Remedies: Nelles v. Ontario: R. v. Jedynack:
R. v. Simpson” (1995), 74 Can. Bar Rev. 366, at p. 367)  [69]
This brings us to the question of whether the inquiry into the
prosecutor’s subjective state of belief properly belongs at the third stage of
the test where the action is taken against a Crown attorney.  For the reasons
that follow, I conclude that it does not. Again here, we must be careful not to
transpose principles developed in an era that predates the institution of
public prosecutions without making the necessary modifications.  The difficulty
that arises is the following.   [71]
That the plaintiff should succeed at the third stage upon showing
an absence of objective grounds, even though the prosecutor believed they
existed, is consistent with  the rationale underlying the third element of the
tort.  A pure subjective belief in a person’s guilt without any basis in actual
fact can hardly constitute sufficient justification for initiating a criminal
prosecution against the plaintiff.  That the plaintiff should also succeed at
the third stage upon showing that the prosecutor did not believe there was
reasonable and probable cause (even though, objectively, such cause did exist
at the time) is not so easily rationalized.  In the context of a public
prosecution, it requires further discussion.  [72]
 As we have seen, historically cases of malicious prosecution
involved disputes between private litigants.  In that context, a case can be
made that the absence of a subjective belief, regardless of the actual facts,
should satisfy the third element of the tort.  As one author aptly puts it, in
establishing the “absence of reasonable and probable cause operating on the
mind of the defendant”, “[s]ometimes a case may be made out, whatever the state
of facts may be, by means of evidence that the defendant did not believe in the
justice of his own prosecution, for if there is so, there is no reasonable and
probable cause for him”:  Clerk & Lindsell on Torts, at p.
981 (emphasis in original).  In the absence of the requisite subjective belief,
the private prosecutor, who is not charged with the execution of any public
duty, has no reason for invoking the criminal process against the plaintiff and
hence no defence left on the third element of the tort.  [73]
The prosecutor’s mere lack of subjective belief in sufficient cause,
where objective reasonable grounds do in fact exist, cannot provide the same
determinative answer on the third element in the context of a public
prosecution.  Unlike the situation in a purely private dispute, the public
interest is engaged in a public prosecution and the Crown attorney is
duty-bound to act solely in the public interest in making the decision whether
to initiate or continue a prosecution.  Consequently, where objective
reasonable grounds did in fact exist at the relevant time, it cannot be said
that the criminal process was wrongfully invoked.  Further, as discussed above,
the decision to initiate or continue the prosecution may not entirely accord
with the individual prosecutor’s personal views about a case as Crown counsel
must take care not to substitute his or her own views for that of the judge or
the jury.  Therefore, in the context of a public prosecution, the third element
of the test necessarily turns on an objective assessment of the existence of
sufficient cause.  As we shall see, the presence or absence of the prosecutor’s
subjective belief in sufficient cause is nonetheless a relevant factor on the
fourth element of the test, the inquiry into malice.  [74]
 The Court’s analysis in Nelles lends further support to
the conclusion that the third element of the tort turns on the objective
assessment of reasonable and probable cause.  Unlike the question of subjective
belief, which is a question of fact, the objective existence or absence of
grounds is a question of law to be decided by the judge:  Nelles, at p.
193.  As noted in Nelles (at p. 197), the fact that the absence of
reasonable and probable cause is a question of law means “that an action for
malicious prosecution can be struck before trial as a matter of substantive
inadequacy”, or on a motion for summary judgment.  These mechanisms are
important “to ensure that frivolous claims are not brought” (Nelles, at
p. 197).  In some provinces, the ultimate decision as to whether or not there
was reasonable and probable cause for instituting the prosecution is reserved
by statute for the trier of fact:  see, e.g., Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 108(10), and Jury Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988, c.
J-5, s. 3(5).  Nonetheless, in the absence of any express provision to the
contrary, the question whether there is a sufficient case to be put to the jury
will remain a matter to be determined by the judge as a matter of law, in
accordance with the respective roles of the judge and the jury.  Therefore,
factual inadequacy in a motion to strike a pleading or on a motion for summary
judgment can still form a basis for the pre-trial striking of the pleading or
the dismissal of the action, even where the ultimate determination of the issue
may be expressly reserved by statute to the jury.  See, e.g., Wilson, per
Dambrot J.  [75]
If the court concludes, on the basis of the circumstances known
to the prosecutor at the relevant time, that reasonable and probable cause
existed to commence or continue a criminal prosecution from an objective
standpoint, the criminal process was properly employed, and the inquiry need go
no further.  See, e.g., Al’s Steak House & Tavern Inc. v. Deloitte &
Touche (1999), 45 C.C.L.T. (2d) 98 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)), at paras.
11-13.  [76]
In carrying out the objective assessment, care must be taken in
retroactively reviewing the facts actually known to the prosecutor at the
relevant time — that is, when the decision to initiate or continue the
proceeding was made.  The reviewing court must be mindful that many aspects of
a case only come to light during the course of a trial: witnesses may not
testify in accordance with their earlier statements; weaknesses in the evidence
may be revealed during cross-examination; scientific evidence may be proved
faulty; or defence evidence may shed an entirely different light on the circumstances
as they were known at the time process was initiated.  [77]
If a judge determines that no objective grounds for the
prosecution existed at the relevant time, the court must next inquire into the
fourth element of the test for malicious prosecution:  malice.  4.5    Malice: A Primary Purpose Other Than
Carrying the Law Into Effect  [78]
The malice element of the test for malicious prosecution
considers a defendant prosecutor’s mental state in respect of the prosecution
at issue.  Malice is a question of fact, requiring evidence that the prosecutor
was impelled by an “improper purpose”.  In Nelles, Lamer J. explained
the meaning of “improper purpose” in this context (at pp. 193-94):  To succeed in an action for malicious prosecution against the Attorney
General or Crown Attorney, the plaintiff would have to prove both the absence
of reasonable and probable cause in commencing the prosecution, and
malice in the form of a deliberate and improper use of the office of the
Attorney General or Crown Attorney, a use inconsistent with the status of
“minister of justice”.  In my view this burden on the plaintiff amounts to a
requirement that the Attorney General or Crown Attorney perpetrated a fraud on
the process of criminal justice and in doing so has perverted or abused his
office and the process of criminal justice.  In fact, in some cases this would
seem to amount to criminal conduct.  [Emphasis in original.]  [79]
In order to prove malice, a plaintiff must, in accordance with Nelles,
bring  evidence that the defendant Crown was acting pursuant to an improper
purpose inconsistent with the office of the Crown attorney.  As we have seen,
in deciding whether to initiate or continue a prosecution, the prosecutor must assess
the legal strength of the case against the accused.  The prosecutor should
invoke the criminal process only where he or she believes, based on the
existing state of circumstances, that proof beyond a reasonable doubt could be
made out in a court of law.  It follows that, if the court concludes that the
prosecutor initiated or continued the prosecution based on an honest,
albeit mistaken, professional belief that reasonable and probable cause did in
fact exist, he or she will have acted for the proper purpose of carrying the
law into effect and the action must fail.  [80]
The inverse proposition, however, is not true.  The absence of a
subjective belief in sufficient grounds, while a relevant factor, does not
equate with malice.  It will not always be possible for a plaintiff to adduce
direct evidence of the prosecutor’s lack of belief.  As is often the case, a
state of mind may be inferred from other facts.  In appropriate circumstances,
for example when the existence of objective grounds is woefully inadequate, the
absence of a subjective belief in the existence of sufficient grounds may well
be inferred.  However, even if the plaintiff should succeed in proving that the
prosecutor did not have a subjective belief in the existence of reasonable
and probable cause, this does not suffice to prove malice, as the prosecutor’s
failure to fulfill his or her proper role may be the result of inexperience,
incompetence, negligence, or even gross negligence, none of which is
actionable:  Nelles, at p. 199; Proulx, at para. 35.  Malice
requires a plaintiff to prove that the prosecutor wilfully perverted or
abused the office of the Attorney General or the process of criminal justice. 
The third and fourth elements of the tort must not be conflated.  [81]
As discussed earlier, a demonstrable “improper purpose” is the
key to maintaining the balance struck in Nelles between the need to
ensure that the Attorney General and Crown prosecutors will not be hindered in
the proper execution of their important public duties and the need to provide a
remedy to individuals who have been wrongly and maliciously prosecuted.  By
requiring proof of an improper purpose, the malice element of the tort of
malicious prosecution ensures that liability will not be imposed in cases where
a prosecutor proceeds, absent reasonable and probable grounds, by reason of
incompetence, inexperience, poor judgment, lack of professionalism, laziness,
recklessness, honest mistake, negligence, or even gross negligence.  In Nelles,
Lamer J. stated, at pp. 196-97:  It should be noted that what is at issue here [in a suit for malicious
prosecution] is not the exercise of a prosecutor’s discretion within the proper
sphere of prosecutorial activity as defined by his role as a “minister of
justice”.  Rather, in cases of malicious prosecution we are dealing with allegations
of misuse and abuse of the criminal process and of the office of the Crown
Attorney.  We are not dealing with merely second-guessing a Crown Attorney’s
judgment in the prosecution of a case but rather with the deliberate and
malicious use of the office for ends that are improper and inconsistent with
the traditional prosecutorial function.  [Emphasis added.] [82]
The test was reiterated in Proulx (para. 35).  The
circumstances in Proulx provide an example of a prosecution motivated by
an improper purpose sufficient to ground liability for malicious prosecution. 
The circumstances can be briefly summarized as follows.  [83]
In Proulx, Crown counsel concluded in 1986 that there did
not exist sufficient evidence to prosecute Proulx for the murder, and the case
was closed.  Five years later, in the midst of a widely publicized defamation
action launched by Proulx against a radio station and a retired police officer
who had worked on his case, the prosecutor was advised by the defendants in the
defamation case of a potential new identification witness.  The prosecutor
added the retired police officer to the prosecution team notwithstanding that
he was a defendant in the defamation action, reopened the file and went ahead
with the prosecution of Proulx for murder.  The Crown attorney was aware of the
retired police officer’s involvement in the defamation action but allowed him
to gather evidence against Proulx without restriction.  Proulx was convicted. 
The conviction was reversed on appeal and an acquittal entered, with the court
strongly criticizing the lack of credible evidence.  Proulx then launched a
malicious prosecution action against the Crown attorney.  [84]
Writing for the majority, Iacobucci and Binnie JJ. began with the
proposition from Nelles that malice involves “serious allegations, which
relate to the misuse and abuse of the criminal process and the office of the
Crown Attorney” (para. 35).  They found that the evidence demonstrated the
improper mixing of public and private business and that the prosecutor had
knowingly manipulated evidence before the jury and prosecuted Proulx with “an
active effort to obtain a conviction at any price” (para. 41).  They therefore
concluded that the prosecutor lent his office to a defence strategy in a
defamation case, which was a perversion of the powers of the office of the
Crown and an abuse of his prosecutorial power, holding (at para. 43):  In our opinion, this juxtaposition of events shows the importance of
the prosecutor’s duty not to allow the criminal process to be used as a vehicle
to serve other ends, in this case the ends of Arthur and Tardif in
attempting to defend against the appellant’s defamation action.  The Crown made
the decision to prosecute with the full knowledge that prosecuting the
appellant would potentially assist the defendants in the defamation actions. 
This was thus more than a simple abdication of prosecutorial responsibilities
to the police or, in the case of Tardif, to a former police officer.  Rather, the
prosecutor lent his office to a defence strategy in the defamation suits
and, in so doing, was compromised by Tardif’s manipulation of the evidence and
the irregularities that took place during the 1991 investigation process. 
[Emphasis added.]   [86]
Evidence of the prosecutor’s lack of subjective belief in
reasonable and probable cause may assist in proving that the prosecution was
driven by an improper purpose.  However, for the reasons explained earlier,
malice cannot simply be inferred from a finding of absence of belief in
reasonable and probable cause alone, as the latter is equally consistent with
prosecutorial conduct that is not actionable.  Care must be taken not to
transpose principles derived in the context of private prosecutions, where an
inference of malice from absence of cause does not carry the same difficulties,
to cases involving Crown defendants.  I will explain.  [87]
As noted above, the tort of malicious prosecution was born in the
context of prosecutions between private parties, and the malice component of
the tort developed accordingly.  In many of the historical cases, the parties
in a malicious prosecution action had a pre-existing relationship, and the
surrounding circumstances were such that it was possible to infer an improper
motive from the groundlessness of the prosecution alone: see, e.g., Jewhurst
(prosecution initiated to collect a pre-existing debt); Gabler 
(prosecutor sought to take physical possession of an office); and Love
(prosecution commenced to procure the value or return of a cow).  As a result,
courts in early cases of malicious prosecution were prepared to infer malice
from a finding that the prosecution was initiated absent reasonable and
probable grounds.  Indeed, the circumstances of these cases easily gave rise to
the question: why else would a private person initiate a prosecution based
entirely on facts not believed to be true, or worse still, known to be false?  [88]
While it may have made sense in the context of historical private
prosecutions to infer malice from absence of reasonable and probable cause in
certain circumstances, a public prosecution presents a very different context. 
A finding of absence of reasonable and probable grounds on the objective
standard is entirely equivocal in terms of a Crown prosecutor’s purpose,
particularly given that reasonable prosecutors may differ on whether a certain
body of evidence rises to the requisite threshold.  Likewise, a conclusion that
a prosecutor lacked a subjective belief in sufficient cause but proceeded
anyways is equally consistent with non-actionable conduct as with an improper
purpose.  To permit an inference of malice from absence of reasonable and
probable grounds alone would nullify the very purpose of the malice requirement
in an action for malicious prosecution and risk subjecting Crown prosecutors to
liability when they err within the boundaries of their proper role as
“ministers of justice”.  [89]
In summary, the malice element of the test for malicious
prosecution will be made out when a court is satisfied, on a balance of
probabilities, that the defendant Crown prosecutor commenced or continued the
impugned prosecution with a purpose inconsistent with his or her role as a
“minister of justice”.  The plaintiff must demonstrate on the totality of the
evidence that the prosecutor deliberately intended to subvert or abuse the
office of the Attorney General or the process of criminal justice such that he
or she exceeded the boundaries of the office of the Attorney General.  While
the absence of a subjective belief in reasonable and probable cause is relevant
to the malice inquiry, it does not dispense with the requirement of proof of an
improper purpose.  [90]
I now turn to the facts of the present appeal.  5.      Application to This Case   [92]
The only question remaining is whether the majority of the Court
of Appeal was nonetheless correct in law in upholding the trial judge’s finding
that Miazga was liable for malicious prosecution.  As stated earlier, the
majority’s conclusion essentially hinged on the trial judge’s finding that
Miazga lacked a subjective belief in reasonable and probable cause. 
Accordingly, it is necessary to review the basis for this factual finding and
to determine whether, in law, it can support the conclusion of the majority of
the Court of Appeal.  [93]
The trial judge found that the prosecution lacked reasonable and
probable grounds from an objective standpoint, and that Miazga did not possess
a subjective belief in the existence of grounds when he decided to proceed
against the respondents.  The conclusions on both objective and subjective
components were premised on the trial judge’s view that the R. children’s
allegations were incredible, and that no prosecutor could possibly accept their
bizarre allegations, absent corroborating evidence, nor believe the children to
be credible witnesses (para. 362).  This premise was accepted by the majority
of the Court of Appeal (at para. 135), and was the basis of its decision to
uphold the trial judge’s finding on absence of reasonable and probable grounds.  [94]
In dissent, Vancise J.A. characterized the trial judge’s
conclusion that nobody could have reasonably believed the allegations made by
the R. children as a palpable and overriding error.  He noted that Dueck
obviously believed the children since he was told that if he believed the
children he should proceed to lay the charges and, in due course, he did. 
Further, several judges at both the trial and appellate levels accepted and
relied upon the same allegations by the R. children in convicting their
biological parents.  Finally, this was a case based on credibility which makes
it particularly difficult to establish an absence of reasonable and probable
cause.  While it may be easy in hindsight to say that the evidence of the
children lacked credibility, “[c]learly an experienced trial judge found the
evidence credible” (para. 259).  In the view of Vancise J.A., reliance on the
findings of those courts did not constitute improper “bootstrapping” of the
kind discussed in Proulx.  [95]
As indicated at the outset of these reasons, no useful purpose
would be served at the conclusion of this painful saga by revisiting the nature
of the allegations against the respondents and determining whether they met the
objective standard of reasonable and probable cause.  However, it is necessary
to deal with the trial judge’s conclusion that Miazga did not have a subjective
belief in the existence of reasonable and probable grounds because it formed
the basis for the majority in the court below to conclude that malice had been
proven.  [96]
I agree with Vancise J.A. that the trial judge’s basis for
concluding that Miazga did not have the requisite subjective belief amounts to
a palpable and overriding error and, as such, is not entitled to deference. 
Miazga testified that while he did not believe the ritualistic or satanic
aspect of the allegations (which were not made against these respondents), he
believed the children.  The trial judge did not reject this testimony but
faulted Miazga for failing to state that he believed in the respondents’
“probable guilt”.  However, even if he had so testified, his testimony would
have been rejected because, in the trial judge’s view, the children’s
allegations could not possibly give rise to a reasonable belief in probable
guilt.  I agree with Vancise J.A., for the reasons that he gave, that this conclusion
is not supported by the evidence. I also agree that, in the circumstances of
this case, reliance on the findings of courts in antecedent proceedings does
not amount to improper “bootstrapping”, but simply belies the trial judge’s
assertion that no one could possibly have believed the children.  [97]
I wish to add a general comment about “bootstrapping”.  Generally
speaking, in an action for malicious prosecution, “bootstrapping” occurs when a
prosecutor argues that he or she had reasonable and probable grounds to
commence or continue a prosecution on the basis of subsequent judicial
determinations made at the preliminary inquiry or the trial itself.  While a
determination of guilt at a criminal proceeding is not determinative of the
reasonable and probable cause question under the third prong of the test for
malicious prosecution, it is a relevant factor that may be properly considered
in ascertaining the existence or absence of reasonable cause.  Giving weight to
antecedent judicial determinations works to ensure consistency between the
criminal and civil justice systems.  The intervener the Attorney General of
Canada explains the justification for this practice at para. 20 of its factum:  Giving evidentiary weight in a civil action to the fact that a prima
facie case of guilt was found in earlier criminal proceedings takes into
account the jurisdiction of the criminal court and the similarity of the facts
in dispute.  Neither a committal after a preliminary inquiry nor a dismissal of
a non-suit motion at the close of the Crown’s case in a trial is necessarily
determinative of the reasonable and probable cause issue, but those
determinations are objectively compelling, at least where no new facts have
emerged.  The judicial decisions in the criminal process may thus support a
finding by a civil court that reasonable and probable cause for prosecution
existed.  Absent a
fundamental flaw in the criminal proceedings relied upon, it is perfectly
reasonable that antecedent judicial determinations may support a finding by a
civil court that there existed reasonable and probable cause for an impugned
criminal prosecution.  [98]
 I now turn to the question of malice.  [99]
The majority in the court below accurately stated the legal
framework for malicious prosecution (at paras. 80-96), in accordance with both Nelles
and Proulx. Where the majority appears to have taken the wrong path, in
my respectful view, is at the following passage (at para. 97):  There is a good deal of merit to the argument for a test requiring
some proof of malice in addition to and independent of the lack of reasonable
and probable cause.  However, as will be seen from our conclusion in this
case, the test cannot be reduced to such a rigid formula.  As stated in Proulx,
at para. 37, in determining an issue of malice, “it is the totality of all the
circumstances that are to be considered in cases of this kind”.  [Emphasis
added.]   [100]     
The majority of the Court of Appeal relied on the “totality of
all the circumstances” requirement in Proulx to forgo the need for
evidence beyond absence of reasonable and probable cause to prove that Miazga
was in fact actuated by an improper purpose.  As recounted at the outset of
these reasons, the Court of Appeal was unanimous in overturning virtually all
of the facts relied upon by the trial judge as indicative of malice on the part
of Miazga.  Without identifying any improper purpose, the majority then
concluded (at para. 132) that “there is one aspect of the trial judge’s
determination that there was lack of reasonable and probable cause that clearly
and unequivocally tips the balance against Miazga” (emphasis added) — the
finding that Miazga did not subjectively hold an honest belief in the guilt of
the respondents.  By concluding that Miazga’s lack of subjective belief in the
existence of grounds was sufficient to ground a finding of malice, the
majority, with respect, fell prey to the very error they correctly identify as
problematic in the trial judge’s reasons (at para. 131):  . . . what seems to be missing from the reasons for judgment is any
explanation of why the [trial] judge considered the actions in question to
indicate malice in the sense of some improper purpose, rather than merely
indications of simple bad judgment, negligence or recklessness.  It seems to us
that most of the actions are equivocal in indicating the prosecutor’s
intentions.  [101]     
As explained earlier, the malice element of malicious prosecution
requires  proof of an improper purpose so as to differentiate between
prosecutorial conduct that is not actionable and that which is, by virtue of
the fact that it brings the prosecutor outside of his or her role as “minister
of justice”.  As Vancise J.A. aptly noted, neither the plaintiffs nor the
courts below have pointed to any such improper purpose that impelled Miazga to
prosecute the respondents.  6.      Conclusion and Disposition  [102]     
In the result, I would allow the appeal and dismiss the action. 
As the appellant does not request costs, I make no order as to costs.  Appeal allowed.  Solicitors for the appellant:  MacPherson Leslie &
Tyerman, Regina.  Solicitors for the respondents Estate of Dennis Kvello (by his
personal representative, Diane Kvello), Diane Kvello, S.K.1, S.K.2., Pamela
Sharpe, Estate of Marie Klassen (by her personal representative, Peter Dale
Klassen), John Klassen, Myrna Klassen, Peter Dale Klassen and Anita Janine Klassen:  Borden
Holgate Law Office, Saskatoon.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Canada:  Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Ontario:  Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.  Solicitors for the interveners the Attorney General of Quebec and the
Director of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions of Quebec:  Bernard, Roy
& Associés, Montréal.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Nova
Scotia:  Public Prosecution Service of Nova Scotia, Halifax.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of New
Brunswick:  Attorney General of New Brunswick, Miramichi.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Manitoba:  Attorney General of Manitoba, Winnipeg.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of British
Columbia:  Attorney General of British Columbia, Vancouver.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General for
Saskatchewan:  Attorney General for Saskatchewan, Regina.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Alberta:  Attorney General of Alberta, Calgary.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Association of Crown
Counsel:  Cavalluzzo Hayes Shilton McIntyre & Cornish, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Association in Defence of the
Wrongly Convicted:  Sack Goldblatt Mitchell, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers Association
(Ontario):  Sack Goldblatt Mitchell, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties
Association:  Blake, Cassels & Graydon, Toronto.    