Athey v. Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458  Jon Athey                                                                                           Appellant  v.  Ferdinando Leonati and Kevin Johnson                                           Respondents  and between  Jon Athey                                                                                           Appellant  v.  Edward Alan Gagne, Dolphin Delivery (1985) Ltd. and Dolphin Transport Ltd.                                                               Respondents  Indexed as:  Athey v. Leonati  File No.:  24725.  1996:  June 12; 1996:  October 31.  Present:  Lamer C.J. and La Forest, Sopinka, Cory,
McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia   The appellant, a person with a history of back
problems, suffered back and neck injuries in an accident in February 1991. 
While still recovering from those injuries, he suffered further injury in a
second accident which occurred that April.  That autumn  his doctor suggested
in light of his improved condition that he resume his regular exercise
routine.  He suffered a herniated disc while “warming up” and  required
surgery.  The results were good but not excellent.  The appellant obtained 
other employment that required no heavy physical duties at a reduced salary.   Held:  The appeal should be allowed.   Causation is established where the plaintiff proves to
the civil standard that the defendant caused or contributed to the injury.  The
general, but not conclusive, test for causation is the “but for” test, which
requires the plaintiff to show that the injury would not have occurred but for
the negligence of the defendant.   Where the “but for” test is unworkable, the
courts have recognized that causation is established where the defendant’s
negligence “materially contributed” to the occurrence of the injury.   In some
circumstances an inference of causation may be drawn from the evidence without
positive scientific proof.  The plaintiff need not establish that the
defendant’s negligence was the sole cause of the injury.  The law does not
excuse a defendant from liability merely because other causal factors for which
he or she is not responsible also helped produce the harm.  It is sufficient if
the defendant’s negligence was a cause of the harm.    The disc herniation  was a past event which cannot be
addressed in terms of probabilities.  Once the plaintiff met the burden of
proving that the injuries sustained in the accidents caused or contributed to
the disc herniation, causation must be accepted as a certainty.   Hypothetical
events (such as how the plaintiff’s life would have proceeded without the
tortious injury) or future events need not be proven on a balance of
probabilities and are simply given weight according to their relative
likelihood.    The loss of chance doctrine whereby the plaintiffs may
be compensated where their only loss is the loss of a chance at a favourable
opportunity or of a chance of avoiding a detrimental event did not need to be
considered here.  The factual findings did not support the contention that the
loss would be the loss of a chance of avoiding the disc herniation.  The
finding at trial was that the accidents contributed to the actual disc
herniation itself.    This appeal involved a straightforward application of
the thin skull rule.  The pre-existing disposition may have aggravated the
injuries, but the defendant must take the plaintiff as he finds him.  If the
defendant’s negligence exacerbated the existing condition and caused it to
manifest in a disc herniation, then the defendant is a cause of the disc
herniation and is fully liable.  Cases Cited  Considered:  Jobling
v. Associated Dairies Ltd., [1981] 2 All E.R. 752; Penner v.
Mitchell (1978), 89 D.L.R. (3d) 343; referred to:  Snell v.
Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311; McGhee v. National Coal Board, [1972]
3 All E.R. 1008; Horsley v. MacLaren, [1972] S.C.R. 441; Myers v.
Peel County Board of Education, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 21; Bonnington Castings,
Ltd. v. Wardlaw, [1956] 1 All E.R. 615; R. v. Pinske (1988), 30
B.C.L.R. (2d) 114, aff’d [1989] 2 S.C.R. 979; Alphacell Ltd. v. Woodward,
[1972] 2 All E.R. 475;  School Division of Assiniboine South, No. 3 v.
Greater Winnipeg Gas Co., [1971] 4 W.W.R. 746, aff’d [1973] 6 W.W.R. 765
(S.C.C.), [1973] S.C.R. vi; Mallett v. McMonagle, [1970] A.C. 166; Malec
v. J. C. Hutton Proprietary Ltd. (1990), 169 C.L.R. 638; Janiak v.
Ippolito, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 146; Schrump v. Koot (1977), 18 O.R. (2d) 337;
Graham v. Rourke (1990), 74 D.L.R. (4th) 1; Lamb v. Kincaid
(1907), 38 S.C.R. 516.  Authors Cited   Fleming, John G.  “Probabilistic
Causation in Tort Law” (1989), 68 Can. Bar Rev. 661.  Fleming, John G.  The Law of
Torts, 8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.  King, Joseph H.  “Causation,
Valuation, and Chance in Personal Injury Torts Involving Preexisting Conditions
and Future Consequences” (1981), 90 Yale L.J. 1353.  Munkman, John.  Damages for
Personal Injuries and Death, 9th ed.  London:  Butterworths, 1993.  Sopinka, John and Mark A. Gelowitz.  The Conduct of an Appeal. 
Toronto:  Butterworths, 1993.   APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal, [1995] B.C.J. No. 666,  54 A.C.W.S. (3d) 503, dismissing an appeal
from a judgment of Boyd J. (1994), 44 A.C.W.S. (3d) 908.  Appeal allowed.  Thomas R. Berger, Q.C.,
and Frits Verhoeven, for the appellant.  Patrick G. Foy and Vincent
R. Orchard,  for the respondents.  //Major J.//  The judgment of the Court was delivered  1                                  
Major J. -- The appellant
suffered back injuries in two successive motor vehicle accidents, and soon
after experienced a disc herniation during a mild stretching exercise.  The
herniation was caused by a combination of the injuries sustained in the two
motor vehicle accidents and a pre-existing disposition.  The issue in this
appeal is whether the loss should be apportioned between tortious and
non-tortious causes where both were necessary to create the injury.  I.                 Facts  2                                  
The appellant, Jon Athey, was injured in two motor vehicle accidents,
the first of which took place in February 1991 and the second in April 1991. 
Before the accidents, he worked as an autobody repairman and body shop manager
at Budget  Rent-A-Car.  He was 43 years old, with a history of minor back
problems  since 1972.  3                                  
In the first accident, the appellant’s vehicle was demolished by front
and rear end collisions.  He was taken to the hospital, examined and released. 
Almost immediately, he began to suffer from pain and stiffness in his neck and
back.  Physiotherapy and chiropractic treatments were prescribed and he was on
the way to recovery when the second accident occurred.  4                                  
In the second accident, a semitrailer truck crossed into his lane of
traffic and hit his vehicle head-on.  His immediate injuries did not appear to
be severe.  He did not lose consciousness and was able to walk from the wrecked
vehicle.  He continued to work full time at light tasks and managerial work but
did not perform any duties involving heavy labour.  The appellant continued his
physiotherapy and chiropractic treatment.  By the fall of 1991, his condition
had improved and he was again on the road to recovery.  5                                  
In light of the improvements in the appellant’s condition, his doctor
suggested that he try to resume his regular exercise routine.  The appellant
went to a health club where, while stretching as part of his warm-up, he felt a
‘pop’ in his back and immediately experienced a great deal of pain.  He hobbled
to the showers, dressed and returned home.  By the next morning, he was unable
to move.  He was transported by ambulance to the hospital, where he remained
for three weeks.   6                                  
His condition was diagnosed as a disc herniation, which was ultimately
treated by surgery (a discectomy) and more physiotherapy.  The doctor described
the result of the surgery as “good, but not excellent”.  Mr. Athey obtained
alternative employment as a manager at another company, where he would not have
heavy physical duties.  The new job paid him less than the old.  7                                  
The respondents were represented at trial by the same counsel.  All
parties proceeded as if there were only one defendant and only one accident, and
no  attempt was made to apportion fault between the respondents or between the
accidents.  The respondents admitted liability.  There was no allegation of
contributory negligence with respect to the accidents, or negligence by Mr.
Athey or his doctor in resuming the exercise program.  The only issue was
whether the disc herniation was caused by the injuries sustained in the 
accidents or whether it was attributable to the appellant’s pre-existing back
problems.  II.                Judicial
History  A.                Supreme
Court of British Columbia  8                                  
The trial judge held that although the accidents were “not the sole
cause” of the disc herniation, they played “some causative role”.  She stated:  In my view, the plaintiff has proven, on a balance
of probabilities, that the injuries suffered in the two earlier accidents
contributed to some degree to the subsequent disc herniation.  I believe,
however, that the accidents were but a minor contributing factor.  To the
extent that such factors can be expressed in terms of percentages, I fix the
accidents causation factor as no more than 25%.  9                                  
She assessed the appellant’s damages, including past wage loss, future
wage loss, non-pecuniary damages and special damages, at $221,516.78.  Since
she held that the accidents were only a 25 percent cause of the disc
herniation, she awarded 25 percent of the global amount to the appellant.  B.                Court
of Appeal, [1995] B.C.J. No. 666  10                              
Southin J.A. observed that counsel for the appellant put forward a “most
interesting argument” that the appellant was entitled to 100 percent of the
damages resulting from the disc herniation, given the finding of fact that the
negligence of the respondents was a cause of the disc herniation.  She declined
to consider this argument, at paras. 8 and 9:  Unfortunately, it is plain to us that the
application of those authorities, and more particularly the meaning of the
phrase in them of “material contribution”, was never put to the learned trial
judge.  In my view, it would not be appropriate for us to
address a theory of liability for the disc herniation which was not advanced
before the learned trial judge who was not, in my view, in her reasons for
judgment addressing the concepts of those authorities.  Accordingly,
the appeal was dismissed.  III.               Issues  11                              
1.    Whether the Court of Appeal erred in failing to hold that the
trial judge’s apportionment of causation was reversible error.  2.                Whether the Court of Appeal erred
in limiting the scope of judicial review by declining to consider the
appellant’s theory of liability.  IV.              Analysis  12                              
The respondents’ position is that where a loss is created by tortious
and non-tortious causes, it is possible to apportion the loss according to the
degree of causation.  This is contrary to well-established principles.  It has
long been established that a defendant is liable for any injuries caused or
contributed to by his or her negligence.  If the defendant’s conduct is found
to be a cause of the injury, the presence of other non-tortious contributing
causes does not reduce the extent of the defendant’s liability.  A.                General
Principles  13                              
Causation is established where the plaintiff proves to the civil
standard on a balance of probabilities that the defendant caused or contributed
to the injury:  Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311; McGhee v.
National Coal Board, [1972] 3 All E.R. 1008 (H.L.).  14                              
The general, but not conclusive, test for causation is the “but for”
test, which requires the plaintiff to show that the injury would not have
occurred but for the negligence of the defendant:  Horsley v. MacLaren,
[1972] S.C.R. 441.  15                              
The “but for” test is unworkable in some circumstances, so the courts
have recognized that causation is established where the defendant’s negligence
“materially contributed” to the occurrence of the injury: Myers v. Peel
County Board of Education; [1981] 2 S.C.R. 21, Bonnington Castings, Ltd.
v. Wardlaw, [1956] 1 All E.R. 615 (H.L.); McGhee v. National Coal Board,
supra.  A contributing factor is material if it falls outside the de
minimis range:  Bonnington Castings, Ltd. v. Wardlaw, supra; see
also R. v. Pinske (1988), 30 B.C.L.R. (2d) 114 (B.C.C.A.), aff’d [1989]
2 S.C.R. 979.  16                              
In Snell v. Farrell, supra, this Court recently confirmed
that the plaintiff must prove that the defendant’s tortious conduct caused or
contributed to the plaintiff’s injury.  The causation test is not to be applied
too rigidly.  Causation need not be determined by scientific precision; as Lord
Salmon stated in Alphacell Ltd. v. Woodward, [1972] 2 All E.R. 475, at
p. 490, and as was quoted by Sopinka J. at p. 328, it is “essentially a
practical question of fact which can best be answered by ordinary common
sense”.  Although the burden of proof remains with the plaintiff, in some
circumstances an inference of causation may be drawn from the evidence without
positive scientific proof.  17                              
It is not now necessary, nor has it ever been, for the plaintiff to
establish that the defendant’s negligence was the sole cause of the
injury. There will  frequently be a myriad of other background events which
were necessary preconditions to the injury occurring. To borrow an example from
Professor Fleming (The Law of Torts (8th ed. 1992) at p. 193), a “fire
ignited in a wastepaper basket is . . . caused not only by the dropping of a
lighted match, but also by the presence of combustible material and oxygen, a
failure of the cleaner to empty the basket and so forth”.  As long as a
defendant is part of the cause of an injury, the defendant is liable,
even though his act alone was not enough to create the injury. There is no
basis for a reduction of liability because of the existence of other
preconditions: defendants remain liable for all injuries caused or contributed
to by their negligence.  18                              
This proposition has long been established in the jurisprudence.  Lord
Reid stated in  McGhee v. National Coal Board, supra,  at p.
1010:  It has always been the law that a pursuer succeeds
if he can shew that fault of the defender caused or materially contributed to
his injury.   There may have been two separate causes but it is enough if one
of the causes arose from fault of the defender.  The pursuer does not have to
prove that this cause would of itself have been enough to cause him injury.    19                              
The law does not excuse a defendant from liability merely because other
causal factors for which he is not responsible also helped produce the harm: 
Fleming,  supra, at p. 200.  It is sufficient if the defendant’s
negligence was a cause of the harm:  School Division of Assiniboine
South, No. 3 v. Greater Winnipeg Gas Co., [1971] 4 W.W.R. 746 (Man. C.A.),
at p. 753, aff’d [1973] 6 W.W.R. 765 (S.C.C.), [1973] S.C.R. vi;  Ken
Cooper-Stephenson, Personal Injury Damages in Canada (2nd ed. 1996), at
p. 748.  20                              
This position is entrenched in our law and there is no reason at present
to depart from it.  If the law permitted apportionment between tortious causes
and non-tortious causes, a plaintiff could recover 100 percent of his or her
loss only when the defendant’s negligence was the sole cause of the
injuries.  Since most events are the result of a complex set of causes, there
will frequently be non-tortious causes contributing to the injury.  Defendants
could frequently and easily identify non-tortious contributing causes, so
plaintiffs would rarely receive full compensation even after proving that the
defendant caused the injury.  This would be contrary to established principles
and the essential purpose of tort law, which is to restore the plaintiff to the
position he or she would have enjoyed but for the negligence of the defendant.  B.                Inapplicability
of Respondents’ Analogies  21                              
The respondents attempted to relate the present case to those where
apportionment had been made.  Consideration of the principles of tort law shows
that none of the apportionment cases is analogous to this appeal.  A review of
the respondents’ six analogies will show why apportionment was appropriate in
those cases but not here.  (1)   Multiple Tortious Causes  22                              
The respondents argued that apportionment between tortious and
non-tortious causes should be permitted just as it is where multiple
tortfeasors cause the injury.  The two situations are not analogous. 
Apportionment between tortious causes is expressly permitted by provincial negligence
statutes and is consistent with the general principles of tort law.  The
plaintiff is still fully compensated and is placed in the position he or she
would have been in but for the negligence of the defendants.   Each defendant
remains fully liable to the plaintiff for the injury, since each was a cause of
the injury.  The legislation simply permits defendants to seek contribution and
indemnity from one another, according to the degree of responsibility for the
injury.  23                              
In the present case, the suggested apportionment is between tortious and
non-tortious causes.  Apportionment between tortious and non-tortious causes is
contrary to the principles of tort law, because the defendant would escape full
liability even though he or she caused or contributed to the plaintiff's entire
injuries.  The plaintiff would not be adequately compensated, since the
plaintiff would not be placed in the position he or she would have been in
absent the defendant's negligence.  (2)   Divisible Injuries  24                              
The respondents submitted that apportionment is permitted where the
injuries caused by two defendants are divisible (for example, one injuring the
plaintiff's foot and the other the plaintiff's arm): Fleming, supra, at
p. 201. Separation of distinct and divisible injuries is not truly
apportionment; it is simply making each defendant liable only for the injury he
or she has caused, according to the usual rule.  The respondents are correct
that separation is also permitted where some of the injuries have tortious causes
and some of the injuries have non-tortious causes: Fleming, supra, at p.
202.  Again, such cases merely recognize that the defendant is not liable for
injuries which were not caused by his or her negligence.  25                              
In the present case, there is a single indivisible injury, the disc
herniation, so division is neither possible nor appropriate. The disc
herniation and its consequences are one injury, and any defendant found to have
negligently caused or contributed to the injury will be fully liable for it.  (3)   Adjustments for Contingencies  26                              
The respondents argued that the trial judge’s assessment of
probabilities in causation was similar to the assessment of probabilities
routinely undertaken by courts in adjusting damages to reflect contingencies. 
This argument overlooks the fundamental distinction between the way in which
courts deal with alleged past events and the way in which courts deal with
potential future or hypothetical events.  27                              
Hypothetical events (such as how the plaintiff’s life would have
proceeded without the tortious injury) or future events need not be proven on a
balance of probabilities.  Instead, they are simply given weight according to
their relative likelihood: Mallett v. McMonagle, [1970] A.C. 166 (H.L.);
Malec v. J. C. Hutton Proprietary Ltd. (1990), 169 C.L.R. 638 (Aust.
H.C.);  Janiak v. Ippolito, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 146.   For example, if there
is a 30 percent chance that the plaintiff’s injuries will worsen, then the
damage award may be increased by 30 percent of the anticipated extra damages to
reflect that risk.  A future or hypothetical possibility will be taken into
consideration as long as it is a real and substantial possibility and not mere
speculation: Schrump v. Koot (1977), 18 O.R. (2d) 337 (C.A.);  Graham
v. Rourke (1990), 74 D.L.R. (4th) 1 (Ont. C.A.).  28                              
By contrast, past events must be proven, and once proven they are
treated as certainties.  In a negligence action, the court must declare whether
the defendant was negligent, and that conclusion cannot be couched in terms of
probabilities.  Likewise, the negligent conduct either was or was not a cause
of the injury.  The court must decide, on the available evidence, whether the
thing alleged has been proven;  if it has, it is accepted as a certainty:  Mallett
v. McMonagle, supra;  Malec v. J. C. Hutton Proprietary Ltd.,
supra, Cooper-Stephenson, supra, at pp. 67-81.  29                              
This point was expressed by Lord Diplock in Mallett v. McMonagle,
supra, at p. 176:  The role of the court in making an assessment of damages
which depends upon its view as to what will be and what would have been is to
be contrasted with its ordinary function in civil actions of determining what
was.  In determining what did happen in the past a court decides on the balance
of probabilities.  Anything that is more probable than not it treats as
certain.  But in assessing damages which depend upon its view as to what will
happen in the future or would have happened in the future if something had not
happened in the past, the court must make an estimate as to what are the
chances that a particular thing will or would have happened and reflect those
chances, whether they are more or less than even, in the amount of damages
which it awards.  30                              
In this case, the disc herniation occurred prior to trial.  It was a
past event, which cannot be addressed in terms of probabilities.  The plaintiff
has the burden of proving that the injuries sustained in the accidents caused
or contributed to the disc herniation.  Once the burden of proof is met,
causation must be accepted as a certainty.  (4)   Independent Intervening Events  31                              
The respondents also sought to draw an analogy with cases where an
unrelated event, such as a disease or non-tortious accident, occurs after the
plaintiff is injured.  One such case was Jobling v. Associated Dairies Ltd.,
[1981] 2 All E.R. 752 (H.L.), in which the defendant negligently caused the
plaintiff to suffer a back injury.  Before the trial took place, it was discovered
that the plaintiff had a condition, completely unrelated to the accident, which
would have proved totally disabling in a few years.  Damages were reduced
accordingly.  In Penner v. Mitchell (1978), 89 D.L.R. (3d) 343 (Alta.
C.A.),  damages for loss of income for 13 months were reduced because the
plaintiff had a heart condition, unrelated to the accident, which would have
caused her to miss three months of work in any event.  32                              
To understand these cases, and to see why they are not applicable to the
present situation, one need only consider first principles.  The essential
purpose and most basic principle of tort law is that the plaintiff must be
placed in the position he or she would have been in absent the defendant’s
negligence (the “original position”).  However, the plaintiff is not to be
placed in a position better than his or her original one.  It is
therefore necessary not only to determine the plaintiff’s position after the
tort but also to assess what the “original position” would have been.  It is
the difference between these positions, the “original position” and the
“injured position”, which is the plaintiff’s loss. In the cases referred to
above, the intervening event was unrelated to the tort and therefore affected
the plaintiff’s “original position”.  The net loss was therefore not as great
as it might have otherwise seemed, so damages were reduced to reflect this.  33                              
In the present case, there was a finding of fact that the accident
caused or contributed to the disc herniation.  The disc herniation was not an
independent intervening event.  The disc herniation was a product of the
accidents, so it does not affect the assessment of the plaintiff’s “original
position” and thereby reduce the net loss experienced by the plaintiff.  (5)   The Thin Skull and “Crumbling Skull” Doctrines  34                              
The respondents argued that the plaintiff was predisposed to disc
herniation and that this is therefore a case where the "crumbling
skull" rule applies.  The “crumbling skull” doctrine is an awkward label
for a fairly simple idea.  It is named after the well-known “thin skull” rule,
which makes the tortfeasor liable for the plaintiff's injuries even if the
injuries are unexpectedly severe owing to a pre-existing condition. The
tortfeasor must take his or her victim as the tortfeasor finds the victim, and
is therefore liable even though the plaintiff’s losses are more dramatic than
they would be for the average person.  35                              
The so-called “crumbling skull” rule simply recognizes that the
pre-existing condition was inherent in the plaintiff’s “original position”. The
defendant need not put the plaintiff in a position better than his or
her original position.  The defendant is liable for the injuries caused, even
if they are extreme, but need not compensate the plaintiff for any debilitating
effects of the pre-existing condition which the plaintiff would have
experienced anyway.  The defendant is liable for the additional damage but not
the pre-existing damage:  Cooper-Stephenson, supra, at pp. 779-780 and
John Munkman, Damages for Personal Injuries and Death (9th ed. 1993), at
pp. 39-40.   Likewise, if there is a measurable risk that the pre-existing
condition would have detrimentally affected the plaintiff in the future,
regardless of the defendant’s negligence, then this can be taken into account
in reducing the overall award:  Graham v. Rourke,  supra; Malec
v. J. C. Hutton Proprietary Ltd., supra; Cooper-Stephenson, supra,
at pp. 851-852.  This is consistent with the general rule that the plaintiff must
be returned to the position he would have been in, with all of its attendant
risks and shortcomings, and not a better position.  36                              
The “crumbling skull” argument is the respondents’ strongest submission,
but in my view it does not succeed on the facts as found by the trial judge. 
There was no finding of any measurable risk that the disc herniation would have
occurred without the accident, and there was therefore no basis to reduce the
award to take into account any such risk.  (6)   The Loss of Chance Doctrine  37                              
The respondents submitted that the accidents merely increased the risk
of herniation, and that the defendant is liable only for that increase in
risk.  This is an application of the “loss of chance” doctrine which is the
subject of considerable controversy:  see Joseph H. King, “Causation,
Valuation, and Chance in Personal Injury Torts Involving Preexisting Conditions
and Future Consequences” (1981), 90 Yale L.J. 1353; John G. Fleming,
“Probabilistic Causation in Tort Law” (1989), 68 Can. Bar Rev. 661.  38                              
The doctrine suggests that plaintiffs may be compensated where their only
loss is the loss of a chance at a favourable opportunity or of a chance of
avoiding a detrimental event.  In this case, the loss would arguably be the
loss of a chance of avoiding the disc herniation.   However, this contention is
not supported by the factual findings.  The trial judge made no findings
suggesting that the injury was a loss of chance of avoiding a disc herniation. 
The finding at trial was that the accidents contributed to the actual disc
herniation itself.  It is therefore unnecessary to consider the loss of chance
doctrine, and these reasons neither approve nor disapprove of the doctrine.  C.                Application
of Principles to Facts  39                              
A matter to be resolved is the identification of the competing causes. 
Some of the trial judge’s comments suggest that the “Fitness World incident”
was a possible cause of the herniation.  The “Fitness World incident” was not a
cause; it was the effect.  It was the injury.  Mere stretching alone was
not sufficient to cause disc herniation in the absence of some latent
disposition or previous injuries.  There was no suggestion that it was
negligent of the appellant to attempt to exercise or that he exercised in a
negligent manner.  40                              
Some latent weakness spontaneously manifested itself during the
stretching, and the  issue is whether the weakness was because of the accidents
or a pre-existing condition.  The reasons of the trial judge show that she
understood this.  She referred to the appellant’s poor spinal health, his
history of back problems, and to the fact that there had been no herniation or
injury to the disc prior to the accidents.  The competing causes in this case
were the injuries sustained in the accidents and a pre-existing disposition to
back problems.  41                              
The applicable principles can be summarized as follows.  If the injuries
sustained in the motor vehicle accidents caused or contributed to the disc
herniation, then the defendants are fully liable for the damages flowing from
the herniation.  The plaintiff must prove causation by meeting the “but for” or
material contribution test.  Future or hypothetical events can be factored into
the calculation of damages according to degrees of probability, but causation
of the injury must be determined to be proven or not proven.  This has the
following ramifications:  1.                If the disc herniation would
likely have occurred at the same time, without the injuries sustained in the
accident, then causation is not proven.  2.                If it was necessary to have both
the accidents and the pre-existing back condition for the herniation to
occur, then causation is proven, since the herniation would not have occurred
but for the accidents.  Even if the accidents played a minor role, the
defendant would be fully liable because the accidents were still a necessary
contributing cause.  3.                If the accidents alone could have
been a sufficient cause, and the pre-existing back condition alone could have
been a sufficient cause, then it is unclear which was the cause-in-fact of the
disc herniation.  The trial judge must determine, on a balance of
probabilities, whether the defendant’s negligence materially contributed to the
injury.  42                              
The findings of the trial judge are slightly ambiguous.  She awarded
only 25 percent of the global damages because she held that the accidents were
a “causation factor” of 25 percent.  Taken out of context, this could be read
as meaning that there was a 25 percent chance that the injury was caused by the
accidents, and a 75 percent chance that it was caused by the pre-existing
condition.  In that case, causation would simply not be proven.  However, it is
clear from the reasons for judgment that this is not what the trial judge
concluded.  43                              
The findings of the trial judge indicate that it was necessary to have both
the pre-existing condition and the injuries from the accidents to cause
the disc herniation in this case.  She made a positive finding that the accidents
contributed to the injury, but that the injuries suffered in the two accidents
were “not the sole cause” of the herniation.  She expressly found that “the
herniation was not unrelated to the accidents” and that the accidents
“contributed to some degree” to the subsequent herniation.  She concluded that
the injuries in the accidents “played some causative role, albeit a minor
one”.  These findings indicate that it was the combination of the pre-existing
condition and the injuries sustained in the accidents which caused the
herniation.  Although the accidents played a lesser role than the pre-existing
problems, the accidents were nevertheless a necessary ingredient in bringing
about the herniation.  44                              
The trial judge’s conclusion on the evidence was that “[i]n my view, the
plaintiff has proven, on a balance of probabilities, that the injuries suffered
in the two earlier accidents contributed to some degree to the subsequent disc
herniation”.  She assessed this contribution at 25 percent.  This falls outside
the de minimis range and is therefore a material contribution:  Bonnington
Castings, Ltd. v. Wardlaw, supra.  This finding of material
contribution was sufficient to render the defendant fully liable for the
damages flowing from the disc herniation.  45                              
The finding of material contribution was not unreasonable.  Although the
plaintiff had experienced back problems before the accidents, there was no
evidence of herniation or insult to the disc and no history of complaints of
sciatica.  When a plaintiff has two accidents which both cause serious
back injuries, and shortly thereafter suffers a disc herniation during a mild
exercise which he frequently performed prior to the accidents, it seems
reasonable to infer a causal connection.  46                              
The trial judge found that the plaintiff’s condition was improving when
the herniation occurred, but this also means that the plaintiff was still to
some extent suffering from the back injuries from the accidents.  The inference
of causal link was supported by medical evidence and was reasonable.  47                              
This appeal involves a straightforward application of the thin skull
rule.  The pre-existing disposition may have aggravated the injuries, but the
defendant must take the plaintiff as he finds him.  If the defendant’s negligence
exacerbated the existing condition and caused it to manifest in a disc
herniation, then the defendant is a cause of the disc herniation and is fully
liable.  48                              
Had the trial judge concluded (which she did not) that there was some
realistic chance that the disc herniation would have occurred at some point in
the future without the accident, then a reduction of the overall damage award
may have been considered.  This is because the plaintiff is to be returned to
his “original position”, which might have included a risk of spontaneous disc
herniation in the future.  However, in the absence of such a finding, it
remains “speculative” and need not be taken into consideration: Schrump v.
Koot, supra; Graham v. Rourke, supra. The plaintiff is
entitled to the full amount of the damages as found by the trial judge.  D.                Conclusion  49                              
The trial judge erred in failing to hold the defendant fully liable for
the disc herniation after finding that the defendant had materially contributed
to it.  Once it is proven that the defendant’s negligence was a cause of the
injury, there is no reduction of the award to reflect the existence of
non-tortious background causes.  In this case, the thin skull rule reinforces
that conclusion.  50                              
The Court of Appeal erred in failing to reverse the trial judge’s
error.  The Court of Appeal refused to consider the appellant’s arguments
because they had not been advanced before the trial judge.  If the Court of
Appeal intended to suggest that the appellant’s theory was novel, with respect
that is not so.  It is a well-established principle that a defendant is liable
for any injuries for which the defendant’s negligence is a cause.  51                              
In any event, the Court of Appeal erred in refusing to consider the
appellant’s arguments on the grounds they were not raised at trial.  The
general rule is that an appellant may not raise a point that was not pleaded,
or argued in the trial court, unless all the relevant evidence is in the
record:  John Sopinka and Mark A. Gelowitz, The Conduct of an Appeal
(1993), at p. 51.  In this case, all relevant evidence was part of the record. 
In fact, all the requisite findings of fact had been made.  The point raised by
the appellant was purely a question of law.  52                              
Most importantly, the respondents did not suffer prejudice, since they
would not have proceeded any differently even if the appellant had expressly
relied on McGhee v. National Coal Board and Bonnington Castings, Ltd.
v. Wardlaw, supra, from the very beginning. The defence theory was
that the disc herniation was not causally related in any way to the injuries
suffered in the motor vehicle accidents.  The respondents could not have made
any more emphatic defence than this.  This was a case where “had the question
been raised at the proper time, no further light could have been thrown upon
it”:  Lamb v. Kincaid (1907), 38 S.C.R. 516, at p. 539, per
Duff J. (as he then was).  Given that the appellant’s arguments raised an issue
of law which did not require any further evidence (or indeed any further
findings of fact) and which would not have caused any prejudice to the respondents,
it was an error for the Court of Appeal to refuse to consider the argument.  53                              
The appeal is allowed.  Judgment is entered for the appellant for the
full global amount of $221,516.78 plus interest and costs throughout.  Appeal allowed.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Edwards, Kenny & Bray, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the respondents:  Ladner, Downs, Vancouver.    