                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation: 
  Holland v. Saskatchewan, [2008] 2
  S.C.R. 551, 2008 SCC 42  Date:  20080711 Docket:  31979  Between: Roger Holland Appellant and Government of
Saskatchewan, as represented by the Minister in Charge of
Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization,
John Doe and Jane Doe Respondents Attorney General
of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario and Attorney
General of British Columbia Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Fish, Abella,
Charron and Rothstein JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 18)   McLachlin C.J. (Binnie, LeBel,
  Fish, Abella, Charron and Rothstein JJ. concurring)  ______________________________ Holland v. Saskatchewan, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 551, 2008 SCC 42  Roger Holland                                                                                                                    Appellant  v.  Government of
Saskatchewan, as represented by the Minister in Charge of
Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization, John Doe and Jane Doe                                                                       Respondents  and  Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario and Attorney General of British Columbia                                                                    Interveners  Indexed as:  Holland v. Saskatchewan  Neutral citation:  2008 SCC 42.  File No.:  31979.  2008:  May 21; 2008:  July 11.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Fish,
Abella, Charron and Rothstein JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for saskatchewan   Torts — Negligence — Claim for negligently acting
outside the law — Claim for negligent failure to implement judicial decree —
Farmers obtaining declaration that government’s action of reducing
certification status of their herds unlawful — Minister taking no steps to
reinstate farmers’ certification — Whether Court of Appeal erred in striking
out farmers’ cause of action in negligence.  Crown law — Crown liability — Duty to implement
judicial decree — Whether action lies against public authorities for
negligently failing to implement judicial decree.   Held:  The appeal should
be allowed in part.   Cases Cited  Referred to:  Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Cooper v. Hobart,
[2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79; The Queen in right of Canada v.
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205; Welbridge Holdings Ltd. v.
Greater Winnipeg, [1971] S.C.R. 957; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; Laurentide
Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 705; Lewis (Guardian ad
litem of) v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1145.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Saskatchewan Court of
Appeal (Gerwing, Richards and Smith JJ.A.) (2007), 281 D.L.R. (4th) 349, [2007]
7 W.W.R. 17, 299 Sask. R. 109, 408 W.A.C. 109, [2007] S.J. No. 75 (QL),
2007 CarswellSask 120, 2007 SKCA 18, setting aside a decision of Laing C.J.
(2006), 277 Sask. R. 131, [2006] S.J. No. 144 (QL), 2006 CarswellSask 133,
2006 SKQB 99.  Appeal allowed in part.  Reynold A. J. Robertson, Q.C., Cameron Pallett and Clinton G. Docken,
Q.C., for the appellant.  Barry J. Hornsberger,
Q.C., and Jerome A. Tholl, for the respondents.  John S. Tyhurst, for
the intervener the Attorney General of Canada.  Sara Blake, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Ontario. Karen A. Horsman,
for the intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by   [1]    
The Chief Justice — The
issue in this case is whether the Court of Appeal erred in striking out the
plaintiff’s cause of action in negligence.  The result of this order was to
prevent the claim in negligence from proceeding to trial.  [2]    
The appellant, Roger Holland, represents a group of approximately 200
game farmers who refused to register in a federal program aimed at preventing
chronic wasting disease (“CWD”) in domestic cervids, because they objected to a
broadly worded indemnification and release clause in the registration form. As
a result of their refusal to sign the form, the game farmers lost the CWD-free
herd certification level which they had acquired by conforming to provincial
CWD prevention rules, before the merging of the provincial and federal
programs. The down-grading of the farmers’ certification status both reduced
the market price of their product and diminished their ability to sell it. 
This resulted in a financial loss to the farmers.  [3]    
The game farmers successfully established on judicial review that the
indemnification and release clauses had been invalidly included in the
registration form. These clauses required that game farm operators would not
only assume “sole responsibility for any death losses . . . which may occur
when animals are being handled for the purposes of inspection, sampling or
testing”, but would also indemnify the federal and provincial governments “from
and against all claims and demands . . . arising out of or
attributable or with respect to the Program, or any aspect of the Program or
its implementation”. Gerein C.J.Q.B. found that the Minister had no legislative
authority to make acceptance of these clauses, which he characterized as “broad
in the extreme”, a condition to participate in the CWD program ((2004), 258
Sask. R. 243, 2004 SKQB 478, at para. 38). The program’s reliance upon game
farm operators might justify limited indemnification and release clauses
restricted to the operator’s actions, but it could not validly extend to the
actions of government employees (para. 37). While Gerein C.J.Q.B. found that
the applicants’ herd status was wrongly reduced to the lowest level of “surveillance”,
he declined to reinstate the prior herd status in the absence of any evidence
on the current circumstances of the game farm operations. He specified,
however, that if the applicants met the certification program conditions, the
court’s declarations would “serve to remove the earlier impediments” (para.
50). The government did not appeal this decision.  [4]    
 Despite the court’s declaration that the government’s reduction of the
herd status was invalid, the government did not take the necessary steps to
consider reinstating the farmers’ certification or take any steps to compensate
the farmers for the revenue they lost through the wrongful cancellation of
their prior certification level.  [5]    
Seeking a remedy for the financial loss they suffered as a result of the
government’s wrongful reduction of certification status, the game farmers
turned to the law of tort.  They commenced a class action, in the name of the
appellant, claiming damages on three alleged grounds: (1) the tort of
misfeasance in public office; (2) the tort of intimidation; and (3) the tort of
negligence.  [6]    
The government brought a motion to strike out the farmers’ claims.  The
motions judge, Laing C.J., struck the intimidation claim for lack of evidence
of any threat ((2006), 277 Sask. R. 131, 2006 SKQB 99, at para. 36), granted
leave to amend the statement of claim with regard to the misfeasance claim
(para. 33), and denied the motion on the negligence claim (para. 34).  The
Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan allowed the government’s appeal from the ruling
on negligence, holding that no action lies against public authorities for
negligently acting outside their lawful mandates ((2007), 299 Sask. R. 109,
2007 SKCA 18, at para. 40).  The question before this Court is whether the
Court of Appeal erred in striking out the appellant’s negligence claim in its
entirety.  [7]    
The Court of Appeal read the appellant’s negligence claim as a claim for
negligently acting outside the law (paras. 18-21).  With one exception,
discussed more fully later, I agree with this characterization of the
negligence claim.  For purposes of these reasons, I would characterize the
imputed fault as breach of statutory duty.  The statement of claim, read
generously as required in an application to strike, focused mainly on two
alleged acts of negligence: requiring the game farmers to enter into the broad
indemnification agreement, and down-grading the status of those who refused to
do so.   In both cases, the alleged fault may be described as failing to act in
accordance with the authorizing acts and regulations.  As the statement of
claim puts it at para. 58, the government and its employees “were under a duty
of care to the Class [game farmers] to ensure those Acts and Regulations were
administered in accordance with law and not to operate in breach of them”.  [8]    
I agree with the Court of Appeal that the claim, thus characterized,
discloses no cause of action recognized by law and must be struck.  The Court
of Appeal correctly concluded that the viability of the action in negligence
falls to be determined by application of Anns v. Merton London Borough
Council, [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.), adopted and refined by this Court in Cooper
v. Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79.  The Court of Appeal concluded
that to date the law has not recognized an action against a government
authority for negligent breach of statutory duty by acting outside or contrary
to the law. This being the case, the question was whether a new instance of
negligence should be permitted. This question is resolved by asking whether a
new kind of duty of care arises under the two-step Anns inquiry.  The
Court of Appeal did not find it necessary to consider the first branch of Anns,
holding that even if the requirement of proximity were established, residual
policy considerations at the second step militate against recognizing such a
cause of action.  [9]    
In my view, the Court of Appeal was correct in these conclusions.  The
law to date has not recognized an action for negligent breach of statutory
duty.  It is well established that mere breach of a statutory duty does not
constitute negligence: The Queen in right of Canada v. Saskatchewan Wheat
Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205.  The proper remedy for breach of statutory duty
by a public authority, traditionally viewed, is judicial review for
invalidity.  The appellant pursued this remedy before Gerein C.J.Q.B. and
obtained a declaration that the government’s action of reducing the herd
certification status was unlawful and invalid.  No parallel action lies in
tort.  [10] The
next question was whether a hitherto unrecognized relationship of potential
liability in negligence should be recognized under the Anns test. 
Assuming, without deciding, that the legislative and regulatory matrix
established proximity between the Class and the government at the first step,
policy considerations would negate recognition of liability, as the Court of
Appeal detailed.  These include the chilling effect and specter of indeterminate
liability. As Richards J.A. stated at para. 43 of the Court of Appeal’s
decision:  . . . the
respondent’s theory of liability would fundamentally shift the way in which the
public and private spheres historically have carried the consequences or burden
of governmental action which is shown to be ultra vires. I see no policy reason
which would warrant such a dramatic revision in the shape of the law and, as
indicated above, see much which cuts tellingly against shaping the law in the
manner sought by the respondent.   [11] I
therefore agree with the Court of Appeal that the appellant’s claim for
negligently acting outside the law, or breach of statutory duty, cannot succeed
and that the paragraphs of the statement of claim asserting this cause of
action were rightly struck.  [12] One
allegation of negligence, however, appears to fall into a different category. 
Paragraph 61.1(f) of the appellant’s statement of claim alleges that the
Minister  was negligent because “[n]otwithstanding the declarations of Mr.
Justice Gerein that the indemnification and release clauses were invalid and
[of] no effect, and that the herd status of ‘surveillance’ was wrongfully
assigned, [he] refused to restore the CWD herd status . . . to the level . . .
enjoyed before or to pay compensation . . . for . . . loss”. The claim is
essentially one of negligent failure to implement an adjudicative decree.  [13] The
Court of Appeal treated this claim as separate and different from the claim for
breach of statutory duty, dealing with it under the heading “The Other Alleged
Duties of Care”.  However, it did not address the central assertion in this
claim that the Minister was under a duty to implement the judicial decree of
Gerein C.J.Q.B.  Chief Justice Gerein’s order arguably placed the Minister
under a duty to remedy the wrongful reduction of the applicants’ herd status. 
The Court of Appeal never discussed this question.  Instead, it held that the pleadings’
reference to restoration of herd status must be struck, not because it
disclosed no cause of action, but because the appellant “has not pleaded any
facts to the effect his herd or any other farmer’s herd had been maintained so
as to warrant any particular CWD status, including the status it enjoyed before
being reduced to ‘surveillance’ . . . .  [T]he failure to plead such facts in
the statement of claim”, it concluded, “means this aspect of the negligence
action must fail” (para. 49).  [14] With
respect, it is not clear to me that the reasons given by the Court of Appeal
provide a sound basis for striking para. 61.1(f) at the outset of the
proceedings.  The real issue, not addressed by the Court of Appeal, is whether
a claim for negligent failure to implement a judicial decree clearly cannot
succeed in law and hence must be struck at the outset.  Such a claim is not a
claim for negligent breach of statute.  It stands on a different footing.  In Welbridge
Holdings Ltd. v. Greater Winnipeg, [1971] S.C.R. 957, at p. 970, this Court
noted the difference in terms that appear to recognize the possibility of an
action for failure to implement a judicial decree:  . . . the risk
of loss from the exercise of legislative or adjudicative authority is a general
public risk and not one for which compensation can be supported on the basis of
a private duty of care.  The situation is different where a claim for
damages for negligence is based on acts done in pursuance or in implementation
of legislation or of adjudicative decrees. [Emphasis added.]    More recent
authorities describe the distinction in terms of “policy” versus “operational” 
decisions.  Policy decisions about what acts to perform under a statute do not
give rise to liability in negligence.  On the other hand, once a decision to
act has been made, the government may be liable in negligence for the manner in
which it implements that decision: Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; Laurentide
Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 705; Lewis (Guardian ad
litem of) v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1145. Public authorities are
expected to implement a judicial decision.  Consequently, implementation of a
judicial decision is an “operational” act.  It is therefore not clear that an
action in negligence cannot succeed on the breach of a duty to implement a
judicial decree.  [15] The
remaining question is whether para. 61.1(f) must be struck because it fails to
plead sufficient facts.  In my view, it should not. The government’s refusal
“to restore the CWD herd status” is pleaded as a fact.  It is also pleaded,
elsewhere, that loss of herd status led to losses to the members of the Class. 
These facts, in my view, were sufficient to support the claim for negligent
failure to implement a judicial decree.  It might be argued that facts relating
to the conditions for restoration should have been pleaded. However, I am
satisfied that the pleading was sufficient to put the government on the notice
of the essence of the appellant’s claim.  Taking a generous view, it should not
have been struck.  [16] I do
not comment on whether the evidence and the applicable law will in fact
establish a claim for negligence on this head at the time of trial.  However,
applying the rule that, on an application to strike, pleadings must be read
broadly and that it must be clear that the claim cannot succeed if it goes to
trial, I am of the view that para. 61.1(f) should not be struck.  [17] I
would therefore confirm the order of the Court of Appeal that paras. 58 to 63.1
of the statement of claim should be struck out, with the exception of para.
61.1(f).  I add that this order should not be read as precluding further
applications by the appellant to amend the statement of claim, nor to prevent
reliance on facts mentioned in the portions of the claim struck out, insofar as
such facts relate to the actions properly raised in the statement of claim.  [18] In the
result, I would allow the appeal in part, with costs in the cause.  Appeal allowed in part.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Robertson
Stromberg Pedersen, Saskatoon; Legge & Legge, Toronto; Docken & Co.,
Calgary.  Solicitor for the respondents:  Ministry of
Justice, Regina.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Canada:  Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Ontario:  Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
British Columbia:  Attorney General of British Columbia, Vancouver.  