                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Grant v.
  Torstar Corp., 2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640  Date:  20091222 Docket:  32932  Between: Peter
Grant and Grant Forest Products Inc. and Torstar
Corporation, Toronto Star Newspapers Limited, Bill
Schiller, John Honderich and Mary Deanne Shears Ottawa
Citizen, Canadian Newspaper Association, Ad
IDEM/Canadian Media Lawyers’ Association, RTNDA
Canada/Association of Electronic Journalists, Magazines
Canada, Canadian Association of Journalists, Canadian
Journalists for Free Expression, Writers’
Union of Canada, Professional Writers Association of
Canada, Book and Periodical Council, PEN
Canada, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Canadian
Civil Liberties Association and Danno Cusson Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Abella, Charron, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 141)  Concurring
  Reasons: (paras. 142 to 146)   McLachlin C.J. (Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Charron,
  Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. concurring)  Abella J.  ______________________________ Grant v.
Torstar Corp., 2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640  Peter Grant
and  v.  Torstar
Corporation, Toronto Star
Newspapers Limited, Bill
Schiller, John Honderich and  and  Ottawa
Citizen, Canadian Newspaper Association, Ad
IDEM/Canadian Media Lawyers Association, RTNDA
Canada/Association of Electronic Journalists, Magazines
Canada, Canadian Association of Journalists, Canadian
Journalists for Free Expression, Writers’
Union of Canada, Professional
Writers Association of Canada, Book and
Periodical Council, PEN Canada, Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, Canadian
Civil Liberties Association and Danno Cusson                                                                                                           Interveners  Indexed
as:  Grant v. Torstar Corp.  Neutral
citation:  2009 SCC 61.  File
No.:  32932.  2009:  April 23;
2009:  December 22.  Present:  McLachlin C.J.
and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Charron, Rothstein and
Cromwell JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario  Torts — Defamation — Defences — Responsible communication on matters
of public interest — Newspaper and reporter being sued for libel after article
was published concerning proposed private golf course development — Whether 
traditional defences for defamatory statements of fact are inconsistent with
values underlying freedom of expression — Whether law of defamation should be
modified to recognize defence of responsible communication on matters of public
interest. Torts — Defamation — Defences — Responsible communication on matters
of public interest — Elements of defence — Respective roles of judge and jury.  Torts — Defamation — Defences — Fair comment — Newspaper and
reporter being sued for libel after article was published concerning proposed
private golf course development — Whether trial judge erred in his charge to
jury on fair comment.       The judge determines whether the impugned statement relates to a
matter of public interest.  If public interest is shown, the jury decides
whether on the evidence the defence of responsible communication is
established.  The following factors may aid in determining whether a defamatory
communication on a matter of public interest was responsibly made: (a) the
seriousness of the allegation; (b) the public importance of the matter;
(c) the urgency of the matter; (d) the status and reliability of the
source; (e) whether the plaintiff’s side of the story was sought and
accurately reported; (f) whether the inclusion of the defamatory statement
was justifiable; (g) whether the defamatory statement’s public interest
lay in the fact that it was made rather than its truth (“reportage”); and (h)
any other relevant circumstances.  [110] [126] [128]     Cases Cited  By McLachlin C.J.   By Abella J.  Referred to: Edmonton Journal v.
Alberta (Attorney General), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326; Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation v. New Brunswick (Attorney General), [1991] 3
S.C.R. 459; Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R.
1130; WIC Radio Ltd. v. Simpson, 2008 SCC 40, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 420; Australian
Broadcasting Corp. v. Reading, [2004] NSWCA 411 (AustLII); Jameel v.
Wall Street Journal Europe SPRL, [2005] EWCA Civ 74, [2005] 4 All E.R. 356.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms, ss. 1 , 2 (b). Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, ss. 108, 134(6). Libel Act, 1792
(U.K.), 32 Geo. 3, c. 60. Libel and Slander Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. L.12, s. 14. Privacy Act, R.S.B.C.
1996, c. 373, s. 1(1). Privacy Act, R.S.M.
1987, c. P125, s. 2(1). Supreme Court Rules,
B.C. Reg. 221/90, r. 39(27).  Authors Cited   Beattie, Kate.  “New Life for the Reynolds
‘Public Interest Defence’?  Jameel v Wall Street Journal Europe”, [2007]
E.H.R.L.R. 81.  Boivin, Denis W.  “Accommodating Freedom of
Expression and Reputation in the Common Law of Defamation” (1997), 22 Queen’s
L.J. 229.  Bonnington, Alistair J. “Reynolds Rides Again”
(2006), 11 Comms. L. 147.   Gatley on Libel and Slander, 11th ed. by Patrick Milmo and W. V. H. Rogers.  London:  Sweet
& Maxwell, 2008.  Hooper, David.  “The Importance of the Jameel Case”,
[2007] Ent. L.R. 62.  Kenyon, Andrew T. “Lange and Reynolds
Qualified Privilege:  Australian and English Defamation Law and Practice”
(2004), 28 Melb. U.L. Rev. 406.  New South Wales.  Law Reform Commission.  Report 75. 
Defamation, September 1995 (online: 
http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lrc.nsf/pages/R75CHP3).  Smolla, Rodney A. “Balancing Freedom of
Expression and Protection of Reputation Under Canada’s Charter of Rights and
Freedoms”, in David Schneiderman, ed., Freedom of Expression and the
Charter.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Thomson Professional Publishing Canada, 1991,
272.  Weaver, Russell L., et al.  “Defamation Law
and Free Speech:  Reynolds v. Times Newspapers and the English Media”
(2004), 37 Vand. J. Transnat’l L. 1255.     Richard G. Dearden and Wendy J.
Wagner, for the intervener the Ottawa Citizen.  Brian MacLeod Rogers and Blair
Mackenzie, for the interveners the Canadian Newspaper Association, Ad
IDEM/Canadian Media Lawyers Association, RTNDA Canada/Association of Electronic
Journalists, Magazines Canada, the Canadian Association of Journalists, the
Canadian Journalists for Free Expression, the Writers’ Union of Canada, the
Professional Writers Association of Canada, the Book and Periodical Council,
and PEN Canada.  Daniel J. Henry, for the
intervener the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.  Patricia D. S. Jackson, Andrew E.
Bernstein and Jennifer A. Conroy, for the intervener the
Canadian Civil Liberties Association.  Ronald F. Caza and Jeff
G. Saikaley, for the intervener Danno Cusson.  The judgment
of McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Charron, Rothstein and
Cromwell JJ. was delivered by  The Chief Justice —  I.       Introduction  [1]     Freedom of
expression is guaranteed by s. 2 (b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms . It is essential to the functioning of our democracy, to
seeking the truth in diverse fields of inquiry, and to our capacity for
self-expression and individual realization.  [2]     But
freedom of expression is not absolute. One limitation on free expression is the
law of defamation, which protects a person’s reputation from unjustified
assault. The law of defamation does not forbid people from expressing
themselves. It merely provides that if a person defames another, that person
may be required to pay damages to the other for the harm caused to the other’s
reputation. However, if the defences available to a publisher are too narrowly
defined, the result may be “libel chill”, undermining freedom of expression and
of the press.  [3]     Two
conflicting values are at stake — on the one hand freedom of expression and on
the other the protection of reputation.  While freedom of expression is a
fundamental freedom protected by s. 2 (b) of the Charter , courts
have long recognized that protection of reputation is also worthy of legal
recognition. The challenge of courts has been to strike an appropriate balance
between them in articulating the common law of defamation. In this case, we are
asked to consider, once again, whether this balance requires further
adjustment.  [4]     Peter
Grant and his company Grant Forest Products Inc. (“GFP”) sued the Toronto
Star in defamation for an article the newspaper published on June 23, 2001,
concerning a proposed private golf course development on Grant’s lakefront
estate. The story aired the views of local residents who were critical of the
development’s environmental impact and suspicious that Grant was exercising
political influence behind the scenes to secure government approval for the new
golf course. The reporter, an experienced journalist named Bill Schiller,
attempted to verify the allegations in the article, including asking Grant for
comment, which Grant chose not to provide. The article was published, and Grant
brought this libel action.  [5]     The trial
proceeded with judge and jury. The jury found the respondents (the “Star
defendants”) liable and awarded general, aggravated and punitive damages
totalling $1.475 million.  [6]     The Star
defendants argue that what happened in this trial shows that something is wrong
with the traditional law of libel: a journalist or publisher who diligently
tries to verify a story on a matter of public interest before publishing it can
still be held liable in defamation for massive damages, simply because the
journalist cannot prove to the court that all of the story was true or bring it
within one of the “privileged” categories exempted from the need to prove
truth.  This state of the law, they argue, unduly curbs free expression and
chills reporting on matters of public interest, depriving the public of
information it should have. The Star defendants ask this Court to revise the
defences available to journalists to address these criticisms, following the
lead of courts in the United States and England. Mr. Grant and his corporation,
for their part, argue that the common law now strikes the proper balance and
should not be changed.  [7]     For the
reasons that follow, I conclude that the common law should be modified to
recognize a defence of responsible communication on matters of public
interest.  In view of this new defence, as well as errors in the jury
instruction on fair comment, a new trial should be ordered.  II.      Facts  [8]     Peter
Grant owns and operates a successful forestry business, GFP, in northern Ontario.
GFP’s executive offices and Grant’s home are located on a lakefront estate on
the Twin Lakes near New Liskeard, Ontario. In the mid-1990s, Grant decided to
build a private three-hole golf course on the property, which he named Frog’s
Breath.  In 1998, he began to host an annual charitable golf tournament and
decided to expand the course to nine holes. For this he needed to purchase some
adjacent Crown land and secure various government approvals.  [9]     Neighbouring
cottagers and local residents opposed the development, citing environmental
impact on the lake and quality-of-life concerns. They sent letters of objection
to the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources (“MNR”), which had the ultimate
say on approving Grant’s plan, and retained an environmental consultant who
evaluated the plan. The consultant substantiated their fears of a detrimental
impact on the lake and its surroundings, disputing the positive claims made by
Grant’s own experts.  [10] On January 13, 2001, the Hudson
Lakes Association (“HLA”) held a public meeting at which Grant’s
representatives explained the proposal and tried to assuage local concerns.        Suspicion
about the integrity of the approval process was already widespread, however.
Grant was a long-time supporter of the Ontario Progressive Conservative Party,
and a personal friend of Mike Harris, who was then the premier of the province.
While he endeavoured to maintain a low public profile, his wealth and close
ties to the government attracted the notice of watchers of the Ontario business
and political scene.  [11] Coincidentally, on the same day as
the HLA’s public meeting on the Grant development, the Toronto Star had
published an article by veteran reporter Bill Schiller headlined “Slicing
through the rules: Genesis of a land deal — How Harris friends overcame fish
habitat controls to build their dream”. The article told of how another of
Harris’s friends, Peter Minogue, had withstood MNR objections and secured
approval for a golf course and resort development called Osprey Links after
complaining at “political levels” about the delay. Though Peter Grant had
nothing to do with the Osprey Links development, the reports of political
interference in the approval of a comparable development also involving a
Harris friend heightened local concerns and was the subject of much discussion
at the HLA public meeting.  [12] A representative of the MNR was on
hand at the meeting to assure the residents that the approval would go through
normal bureaucratic channels and that no final decision had yet been made. But
given the appearance of the Osprey Links article that very day, this assurance
was not well received by the assembled group. One resident, holding up the
newspaper, demanded to know “whether, given today’s article in the Toronto Star,
the final answer will come from North Bay or Queen’s Park”. In other words,
whether the decision would be made by Ministry bureaucrats themselves or by
their political masters in Toronto.  Another resident expressed the concern
that approval might already be a “done deal”.  [13] Dr. Lorrie Clark, a professor of
English at Trent University in Peterborough who has a cottage on the Twin
Lakes, attended the meeting. Following the meeting, Clark sent Bill Schiller an
e-mail advising him that the Osprey Links story had “hit New Liskeard like a
bombshell” and that the similarities between Osprey Links and the events
surrounding Grant’s golf course development were “extraordinary”.  She
explained the situation giving rise to the public meeting and described the sentiments
of local cottagers in the following manner:  Basically, the
situation is this: Peter Grant, multimillionaire owner of Grant Forest Products
in Englehart and Mike Harris supporter and crony, is trying to buy 40 acres of
Crown Land behind his “cottage” on Twin Lakes, just west of New Liskeard, for a
private golf course. . . . Everyone thinks it’s a done deal, because of Grant’s
influence (he employs 10,000 people in Northern Ontario) but most of all his
Mike Harris ties. . . .  There has been
a constant sense from the beginning that this is, as one cottager put it last
night, “a done deal,” and that nothing we can do to stop a development that is
NOT in the public interest — but obviously only a very private one — will make
any difference. Everyone suspects — although I do grant that this is perhaps
all unfounded — that there may be political pressure on the MNR people to give
Mr. Grant what he wants. [A.R., vol. X, at p. 78]  Schiller received other
communications from cottagers critical of Grant’s proposal and suspicious of
his influence. The story captured his attention — in his words, it was a
“classic public interest story” — and he decided to investigate.  [14] Schiller began by examining
records from Elections Ontario, which confirmed a history of large political
contributions by Grant and GFP to the provincial PC Party and Mike Harris. He
then went to New Liskeard and met with several local residents. He received
information about the proposed development, listened to the residents’ concerns,
and learned more about Peter Grant and his prominence in the community. He
spoke with MNR representatives and collected an array of documents dealing with
the project. Schiller also attempted on several occasions to interview Grant in
order to “get both sides” of the story, but was repeatedly rebuffed. When, in
June, Schiller again wrote to Grant, putting to him some of the cottagers’
objections and asking for a response, Grant’s lawyer responded by threatening a
libel suit.  [15] In early June, the Star sent a
photographer named Mike Slaughter to take photos of Grant’s property for the
newspaper article. Slaughter photographed Grant’s property from a canoe in the
lake. He also took photos of the golf course, parking by the side of a public
road and walking a few steps on to the course in the process. Noticing the
photographer and suspecting that he was from the Star, Grant instructed an
employee, Ted Webster, to go and find out who the photographer was and try to
detain him. Apparently, Grant wanted Webster to keep Slaughter there until the
police responded to his trespass complaint. In any event, Webster parked his
truck on the road in front of Slaughter’s car in an attempt to block him in.
Slaughter nonetheless drove around him, narrowly missing driving into a ditch.
Webster followed him in his truck, with another Grant employee joining in the
chase, but Slaughter escaped. Accounts of this event vary widely between the
parties and became a significant issue at trial. According to Grant, the event
constituted an egregious trespass by the Star; according to the Star, it
demonstrated Grant’s ruthless desire to suppress all scrutiny, and his
aggressive posture toward the press.   “Everyone
thinks it’s a done deal because of Grant’s influence — but most of all his Mike
Harris ties,” says Lorrie Clark, who owns a cottage on Twin Lakes.  All in all, the article gave
greater credence and prominence to the cottagers’ side of the story than to
Grant’s. It did not paint Grant in a flattering light. However, its constituent
facts were largely true,  depending on whether the quote from Dr. Clark that
“[e]veryone thinks it’s a done deal” is seen as a statement of fact or opinion
— a matter to which I will return.  [17] As promised, Grant and GFP sued
Schiller, the Star and affiliates of the paper, and Lorrie Clark.  Dr. Clark
settled before trial.  III.    Judicial History  A.     Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Rivard J. sitting with a
jury)  [18] At trial, the principal focus was
on the “done deal” statement attributed to Dr. Clark, which the plaintiffs said
contained the core of the article’s defamatory import. The plaintiffs contended
that the article effectively accused Grant of improperly using his influence to
obtain government favours. The defendants countered that the article simply
aired the real and legitimate concerns of local residents without actually
levelling any allegation of impropriety against Grant.  [19] In the alternative, the
defendants, relying on recent English jurisprudence, argued that an expanded
qualified privilege defence based on a concept of public interest responsible
journalism should apply.  Without rejecting the possibility of such expansion,
the trial judge ruled that the defence would not apply in these circumstances
because the story was primarily one of local import and had a “very negative
tone”.  [20] Accordingly, the case went to the
jury essentially on the defences of truth and fair comment.  The jury rejected
these defences and awarded the plaintiffs general, aggravated and punitive
damages totalling $1.475 million. Punitive damages alone were assessed at $1
million.  B.      Ontario Court of Appeal (Rosenberg, Feldman and Simmons
JJ.A.) (2008 ONCA 796, 92 O.R. (3d) 561)  [21] Fortified by the intervening
decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Cusson v. Quan, 2007 ONCA
771, 231 O.A.C. 277 (reasons on appeal in this Court released concurrently: Quan
v. Cusson, 2009 SCC 62, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 712), which recognized a new
defence of responsible journalism, the Star defendants appealed the jury
verdict on both liability and quantum of damages.  [22] Writing for the Court of Appeal,
Feldman J.A. affirmed the new responsible journalism defence elaborated in Quan,
and concluded that the trial judge had erred in failing to leave this defence
with the jury.  Feldman J.A. held that the trial judge had applied an
inappropriately narrow conception of the public interest: he should have found
as a matter of law that the subject of the article was in the public interest
and gone on to assess responsibility on that basis.  On the issue of
responsibility, Feldman J.A. took the view that the trial judge had
inaccurately downplayed the extent to which Schiller actually attempted to
verify the allegations. She also held that the jury should have been required
to answer a preliminary question as to the meaning of the statement, since it
could be interpreted in different ways.   [24] Concluding that the jury
instructions were flawed, the Court of Appeal ordered a new trial.  [25] Mr. Grant and his corporation
appeal to this Court to reinstate the jury verdict. The Star defendants
cross-appeal, asking the Court to apply the new defence in this case and
dismiss the action. In the alternative, they ask the Court to dismiss the
action on the basis of fair comment.  IV.    Issues  [26] While both fair comment and public
interest responsible communication remain live issues on appeal, the principal
legal question before us is whether the protection accorded to factual
statements published in the public interest should be strengthened and, if so,
how. This suggests the following analytical framework:  1.    Should the common law provide a defence based on responsible
communication in the public interest?  2.    If so, what are the elements of the new defence?  3.    If so, what procedures should apply? In particular, what are
the respective roles of the judge and jury?  4.    Application to the case at bar (a)       Fair comment (b)       Responsible communication  V.     Analysis  A.     Should the Common Law Provide a Defence Based on Responsible
Communication in the Public Interest?  [27] I will first examine the current
law, and then consider the arguments for and against change.  (1)   The Current Law  [28] A plaintiff in a defamation action
is required to prove three things to obtain  judgment and an award of damages:
(1) that the impugned words were defamatory, in the sense that they would tend
to lower the plaintiff’s reputation in the eyes of a reasonable person; (2)
that the words in fact referred to the plaintiff; and (3) that the words were
published, meaning that they were communicated to at least one person other
than the plaintiff.  If these elements are established on a balance of
probabilities, falsity and damage are presumed, though this rule has been
subject to strong criticism: see, e.g., R. A. Smolla, “Balancing Freedom
of Expression and Protection of Reputation Under Canada’s Charter of Rights
and Freedoms”, in D. Schneiderman, ed., Freedom of Expression and the
Charter (1991), 272, at p. 282. (The only exception is that slander
requires proof of special damages, unless the impugned words were slanderous per
se:  R. E. Brown, The Law of Defamation in Canada (2nd ed.
(loose-leaf)), vol. 3, at pp. 25-2 and 25-3.) The plaintiff is not required to
show that the defendant intended to do harm, or even that the defendant was
careless. The tort is thus one of strict liability.  [29] If the plaintiff proves the
required elements, the onus then shifts to the defendant to advance a defence
in order to escape liability.  [30] Both statements of opinion and
statements of fact may attract the defence of privilege, depending on the
occasion on which they were made. Some “occasions”, like Parliamentary and
legal proceedings, are absolutely privileged.  Others, like reference letters
or credit reports, enjoy “qualified” privilege, meaning that the privilege can
be defeated by proof that the defendant acted with malice: see Horrocks v.
Lowe, [1975] A.C. 135 (H.L.).  The defences of absolute and qualified
privilege reflect the fact that “common convenience and welfare of society”
sometimes requires untrammelled communications:  Toogood v. Spyring
(1834), 1 C.M. & R. 181, 149 E.R. 1044, at p. 1050, per Parke
B. The law acknowledges through recognition of privileged occasions that false
and defamatory expression may sometimes contribute to desirable social ends.   [32] Where statements of fact are at
issue, usually only two defences are available: the defence that the statement
was substantially true (justification); and the defence that the statement was
made in a protected context (privilege).  The issue in this case is whether the
defences to actions for defamatory statements of fact should be expanded, as
has been done for statements of opinion, in recognition of the importance of
freedom of expression in a free society.  [33] To succeed on the defence of
justification, a defendant must adduce evidence showing that the statement was
substantially true.  This may be difficult to do.  A journalist who has checked
sources and is satisfied that a statement is substantially true may
nevertheless have difficulty proving this in court, perhaps years after the
event. The practical result of the gap between responsible verification and the
ability to prove truth in a court of law on some date far in the future, is
that the defence of justification is often of little utility to journalists and
those who publish their stories.  [34] If the defence of justification
fails, generally the only way a publisher can escape liability for an untrue
defamatory statement of fact is by establishing that the statement was made on
a privileged occasion.  However, the defence of qualified privilege has seldom
assisted media organizations.  One reason is that qualified privilege has
traditionally been grounded in special relationships characterized by a “duty”
to communicate the information and a reciprocal “interest” in receiving it. The
press communicates information not to identified individuals with whom it has a
personal relationship, but to the public at large. Another reason is the
conservative stance of early decisions, which struck a balance that preferred
reputation over freedom of expression. In a series of judgments written by
Cartwright J. (as he then was), this Court refused to grant the communications
media any special status that might have afforded them greater access to the
privilege: Douglas v. Tucker, [1952] 1 S.C.R. 275; Globe and Mail
Ltd. v. Boland, [1960] S.C.R. 203; Banks v. Globe and Mail Ltd.,
[1961] S.C.R. 474; Jones v. Bennett, [1969] S.C.R. 277.  [35]       
In recent decades, courts have begun to moderate the strictures of
qualified privilege, albeit in an ad hoc and incremental way.  When a
strong duty and interest seemed to warrant it, they have on occasion applied
the privilege to publications to the world at large. For example, in suits
against politicians expressing concerns to the electorate about the conduct of
other public figures, courts have sometimes recognized that a politician’s
“duty to ventilate” matters of concern to the public could give rise to
qualified privilege: Parlett v. Robinson (1986), 5 B.C.L.R. (2d) 26
(C.A.), at p. 39.  [36] In the last decade, this
recognition has sometimes been extended to media defendants. For example, in Grenier
v. Southam Inc., [1997] O.J. No. 2193 (QL), the Ontario Court of Appeal (in
a brief endorsement) upheld a trial judge’s finding that the defendant media
corporation had a “social and moral duty” to publish the article in question.
Other cases have adopted the view that qualified privilege is  available to
media defendants, provided that they can show a social or moral duty to publish
the information and a corresponding public interest in receiving it: Leenen
v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp. (2000), 48 O.R. (3d) 656 (S.C.J.), at p.
695, aff’d (2001), 54 O.R. (3d) 612 (C.A.), and Young v. Toronto Star
Newspapers Ltd. (2003), 66 O.R. (3d) 170 (S.C.J.), aff’d (2005), 77 O.R.
(3d) 680 (C.A.).  [37] Despite these tentative forays,
the threshold for privilege remains high and the criteria for reciprocal duty
and interest required to establish it unclear. It remains uncertain when, if
ever, a media outlet can avail itself of the defence of qualified privilege.  (2) The
Case for Changing the Law  [38] Two related arguments are
presented in support of broadening the defences available to public
communicators, such as the press, in reporting matters of fact.  [39] The first argument is grounded in principle. 
It asserts that the existing law is inconsistent with the principle of freedom
of expression as guaranteed by s. 2 (b) of the Charter .  In the
modern context, it is argued, the traditional rule has a chilling effect that
unjustifiably limits reporting facts, and strikes a balance too heavily
weighted in favour of protection of reputation. While the law should provide
redress for baseless attacks on reputation, defamation lawsuits, real or
threatened, should not be a weapon by which the wealthy and privileged stifle
the information and debate essential to a free society.  [40] The second argument is grounded in
jurisprudence.  This argument points out that many foreign common law
jurisdictions have modified the law of defamation to give more protection to
the press, in recognition of the fact that the traditional rules
inappropriately chill free speech.  While different countries have taken
different approaches, the trend is clear.  Recent Canadian cases, most notably
the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Quan, have affirmed this
trend.  The time has arrived, it is argued, for this Court to follow suit.  (a)   The
Argument From Principle  [41] The fundamental question of
principle is whether the traditional defences for defamatory statements of fact
curtail freedom of expression in a way that is inconsistent with Canadian
constitutional values.  Does the existing law strike an appropriate balance
between two values vital to Canadian society — freedom of expression on the one
hand, and the protection of individuals’ reputations on the other?  As Binnie
J. stated in WIC Radio, “[a]n individual’s reputation is not to
be treated as regrettable but unavoidable road kill on the highway of public
controversy, but nor should an overly solicitous regard for personal reputation
be permitted to ‘chill’ freewheeling debate on matters of public interest”
(para. 2).  [42] Freedom of expression and respect
for vigorous debate on matters of public interest have long been seen as
fundamental to Canadian democracy.  Many years before the Charter  this
Court, in the Reference re Alberta Statutes, [1938] S.C.R. 100, per
Duff C.J., suggested that the Canadian Constitution contained an implied right
of free expression on political matters.  That principle, affirmed in cases
like Saumur v. City of Quebec, [1953] 2 S.C.R. 299, and Switzman v.
Elbling, [1957] S.C.R. 285, has stood the test of time.  [43] In 1982, the Charter ,
through s. 2 (b), confirmed and expanded constitutional protection
for free expression, specifically extending it to the press: “Everyone has . .
. freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the
press and other media of communication”.  [44] The constitutional status of
freedom of expression under the Charter  means that all Canadian laws
must conform to it.  The common law, though not directly subject to Charter 
scrutiny where disputes between private parties are concerned, may be modified
to bring it into harmony with the Charter . As Cory J. put it in Hill
v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130, at para. 97,
“Charter  values, framed in general terms, should be weighed against the
principles which underlie the common law. The Charter  values will then
provide the guidelines for any modification to the common law which the court
feels is necessary.”  [45] The argument that the Charter 
requires modification of Canadian defamation law was considered in Hill.
Writing for a unanimous Court on this point, Cory J. declined to adopt the
American “actual malice” rule from New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376
U.S. 254 (1964), which provides immunity for defamation of public officials
except where malice is shown. Cory J. did, however, undertake a modest
expansion of the recognized qualified privilege for reports on judicial
proceedings.  [46] While Hill stands for a
rejection of the Sullivan approach and an affirmation of the common law of
defamation’s general conformity with the Charter , it does not close the
door to further changes in specific rules and doctrines. As Iacobucci J.
observed in R. v. Salituro, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 654, at p. 670, “[j]udges
can and should adapt the common law to reflect the changing social, moral and
economic fabric of the country.” It is implicit in this duty that the courts
will, from time to time, take a fresh look at the common law and re-evaluate
its consistency with evolving societal expectations through the lens of Charter 
values.  [47] The guarantee of free expression
in s. 2 (b) of the Charter  has three core rationales, or
purposes:  (1) democratic discourse; (2) truth-finding; and (3)
self-fulfillment: Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Quebec (Attorney General), [1989] 1
S.C.R. 927, at p. 976. These purposes inform the content of s. 2 (b) and
assist in determining what limits on free expression can be justified under s.
1 .  [48] First and foremost, free
expression is essential to the proper functioning of democratic governance. As
Rand J. put it, “government by the free public opinion of an open society . . .
demands the condition of a virtually unobstructed access to and diffusion of
ideas”: Switzman, at p. 306.  [49] Second, the free exchange of ideas
is an “essential precondition of the search for truth”: R. v. Keegstra,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 697, at p. 803, per McLachlin J. This rationale,
sometimes known as the “marketplace of ideas”, extends beyond the political
domain to any area of debate where truth is sought through the exchange of information
and ideas. Information is disseminated and propositions debated.  In the course
of debate, misconceptions and errors are exposed.  What withstands testing
emerges as truth.   [51] Of the three rationales for the
constitutional protection of free expression, only the third, self-fulfillment,
is of dubious relevance to defamatory communications on matters of public
interest. This is because the plaintiff’s interest in reputation  may be just
as worthy of protection as the defendant’s interest in self-realization through
unfettered expression. We are not talking here about a direct prohibition
of expression by the state, in which the self-fulfillment potential of even
malicious and deceptive expression can be relevant (R. v. Zundel, [1992]
2 S.C.R. 731), but rather a means by which individuals can hold one another
civilly accountable for what they say.  Charter  principles do not
provide a licence to damage another person’s reputation simply to fulfill one’s
atavistic desire to express oneself.  [52] By contrast, the first two
rationales for free expression squarely apply to communications on matters of
public interest, even those which contain false imputations.  The first
rationale, the proper functioning of democratic governance, has profound resonance
in this context.  As held in WIC Radio, freewheeling debate on
matters of public interest is to be encouraged, and must not be thwarted by
“overly solicitous regard for personal reputation” (para. 2).  Productive
debate is dependent on the free flow of information.  The vital role of the
communications media in providing a vehicle for such debate is explicitly
recognized in the text of s. 2 (b) itself: “freedom of thought, belief,
opinion and expression, including freedom of the press and other media of communication”.  [53] Freedom does not negate
responsibility. It is vital that the media act responsibly in reporting facts
on matters of public concern, holding themselves to the  highest journalistic
standards.  But to insist on court-established certainty in reporting on
matters of public interest may have the effect of preventing communication of
facts which a reasonable person would accept as reliable and which are relevant
and important to public debate.  The existing common law rules mean, in effect,
that the publisher must be certain before publication that it can prove the
statement to be true in a court of law, should a suit be filed.  Verification
of the facts and reliability of the sources may lead a publisher to a
reasonable certainty of their truth, but that is different from knowing that
one will be able to prove their truth in a court of law, perhaps years later.
This, in turn, may have a chilling effect on what is published.  Information
that is reliable and in the public’s interest to know may never see the light
of day.  [54] The second rationale — getting at
the truth — is also engaged by the debate before us.  Fear of being sued for
libel may prevent the publication of information about matters of public
interest.  The public may never learn the full truth on the matter at hand.  [55] Against this, it is argued that
false statements cannot advance the purposes of s. 2 (b).  This
contention, however, is belied by the fact the existing defence of privilege
concedes:  sometimes the public interest requires that untrue statements should
be granted immunity, because of the importance of robust debate on matters of
public interest (e.g. Parliamentary privilege), or the importance of discussion
and disclosure as a means of getting at the truth (e.g. police reports,
employment recommendations).  [56] The argument also overlooks the
fact that the Charter ’s s. 2 (b) protection is not confined to
statements that a person can ultimately prove are true.  As Professor Boivin
puts it:  Those who
argue that false and defamatory publications have a weak claim to Charter 
protection omit to mention that it is only at trial, usually several years
after publication, that a trier of fact determines whether a defence of
justification is well founded. Moreover, it is only then that the defamatory
nature of the publication is assessed.  Surely freedom of expression
encompasses more than statements which, after the fact, are either proven
factually accurate or do not injure someone’s reputation. [Emphasis added.] (D. W. Boivin,
“Accommodating Freedom of Expression and Reputation in the Common Law of
Defamation” (1997), 22 Queen’s L.J. 229, at p. 270)   [57]  I conclude that media reporting
on matters of public interest engages the first and second rationales of the
freedom of expression guarantee in the Charter .  The statement in Hill
(at para. 106) that “defamatory statements are very tenuously related to
the core values which underlie s. 2 (b)” must be read in the context of
that case.  It is simply beyond debate that the limited defences available to
press-related defendants may have the effect of inhibiting political discourse
and debate on matters of public importance, and impeding the cut and thrust of
discussion necessary to discovery of the truth.  [58] This brings me to the competing
value: protection of reputation.  Canadian law recognizes that the right to
free expression does not confer a licence to ruin reputations.  In assessing
the constitutionality of the Criminal Code ’s defamatory libel
provisions, for example, the Court has affirmed that  “[t]he protection of an
individual’s reputation from wilful and false attack recognizes both the innate
dignity of the individual and the integral link between reputation and the
fruitful participation of an individual in Canadian society”:  R. v. Lucas,
[1998] 1 S.C.R. 439, at para. 48, per Cory J. This applies both to
private citizens and to people in public life. People who enter public life
cannot reasonably expect to be immune from criticism, some of it harsh and
undeserved. But nor does participation in public life amount to open season on
reputation.   [60] The Grant appellants argue that a
defence based on the conduct of the defendant devalues the plaintiff’s ability
to vindicate reputation. A plaintiff’s concern, it is said, is with the falsity
of the libel, not the responsibility of the journalistic practices that led to
its publication. To the extent that a revised defence shifts the focus of the
litigation from the truth or falsity of the defamatory statements to the
diligence of the defendant in verifying them, the plaintiff’s very reason for
bringing the suit is obscured.  [61] The answer to this argument lies
in the fact that a balanced approach to libel law properly reflects both the
interests of the plaintiff and the defendant.  The law must take due account of
the damage to the plaintiff’s reputation.  But this does not preclude
consideration of whether the defendant acted responsibly, nor of the social
value to a free society of debate on matters of public interest.  I agree with
Sharpe J.A. that the partial shift of focus involved in considering the
responsibility of the publisher’s conduct is an “acceptable price to pay for
free and open discussion” (Quan, at para. 142).  [62] The protection offered by a new
defence based on conduct is meaningful for both the publisher and those whose
reputations are at stake. If the publisher fails to take appropriate steps
having regard to all the circumstances, it will be liable. The press and others
engaged in public communication on matters of public interest, like bloggers,
must act carefully, having regard to the injury to reputation that a false
statement can cause. A defence based on responsible conduct reflects the social
concern that the media should be held accountable through the law of
defamation.  As Kirby P. stated in Ballina Shire Council v. Ringland
(1994), 33 N.S.W.L.R. 680 (C.A.), at p. 700:  “The law of defamation is one of
the comparatively few checks upon [the media’s] great power.” The requirement
that the publisher of defamatory material act responsibly provides
accountability and comports with the reasonable expectations of those whose
conduct brings them within the sphere of public interest.  People in public
life are entitled to expect that the media and other reporters will act
responsibly in protecting them from false accusations and innuendo.  They are
not, however, entitled to demand perfection and the inevitable silencing of
critical comment that a standard of perfection would impose.  [63] It is also argued that a defence
based on the conduct of the defendant may lead to costly and lengthy litigation
over questions of journalistic practice about which claimants can have no
advance knowledge: see A. T. Kenyon, “Lange and Reynolds
Qualified Privilege: Australian and English Defamation Law and Practice”
(2004), 28 Melb. U.L. Rev. 406, at p. 425.  Of the relevant factors (see
discussion of Reynolds below, at paras. 69-71) only the opportunity to
respond to the allegation prior to publication is likely to lie within the
plaintiff’s knowledge, making it hard for a potential plaintiff to judge the
strength of her case, it is said.  [64] Again, the objection goes not so
much to principle as to the particular test and procedures adopted.  Whatever
defence is accepted, it must be workable and fair to both plaintiff and
defendant, as discussed in greater detail below.  Procedural objections,
however, do not negate the conclusion that the traditional test fails to
protect reliable statements that are connected to the democratic discourse and
truth-finding rationales for freedom of expression.  [65] Having considered the arguments on
both sides of the debate from the perspective of principle, I conclude that the
current law with respect to statements that are reliable and important to
public debate does not give adequate weight to the constitutional value of free
expression.  While the law must protect reputation, the level of protection
currently accorded by the law — in effect a regime of strict liability — is not
justifiable.  The law of defamation currently accords no protection for
statements on matters of public interest published to the world at large if
they cannot, for whatever reason, be proven to be true. But such communications
advance both free expression rationales mentioned above — democratic discourse
and truth-finding — and therefore require some protection within the law of
defamation. When proper weight is given to the constitutional value of free
expression on matters of public interest, the balance tips in favour of
broadening the defences available to those who communicate facts it is in the
public’s interest to know.  (b) The
Argument on the Jurisprudence  [66] A consideration of the
jurisprudence of other common law democracies favours replacing the current
Canadian law governing redress for defamatory statements of fact on matters of
public interest, with a rule that gives greater scope to freedom of expression
while offering adequate protection of reputation.  Different countries
canvassed have taken different approaches.  Most, however, give more weight to
the value of freedom of expression and robust public debate than does the
traditional Canadian approach.  [67]       
In Sullivan, the United States Supreme Court applied the 
First Amendment’s free speech guarantee to hold that a “public official” cannot
recover in defamation absent proof that the defendant was motivated by “actual
malice”, meaning knowledge of falsity or reckless indifference to truth. In
subsequent cases, the “actual malice” rule was extended to apply to all “public
figures”, not only people formally involved in government or politics: Curtis
Publishing Co. v. Butts, 388 U.S. 130 (1967).  Sullivan and its
progeny have made it extremely difficult for anyone in the public eye to sue
successfully for defamation. In the contest between free expression and
reputation protection, free expression decisively won the day.  [68]  Commonwealth courts have rejected
the precise balance struck in Sullivan between free expression and
protection of reputation.  However, the law has begun to shift in favour of
broader defences for press defendants, most prominently in England, but also in
Australia (Lange v. Australian Broadcasting Corp. (1997), 145 A.L.R. 96
(H.C.)), New Zealand (Lange v. Atkinson, [1998] 3 N.Z.L.R. 424 (C.A.) (“Lange
v. Atkinson No. 1”); Lange v. Atkinson, [2000] 1 N.Z.L.R. 257 (P.C.)
(“Lange v. Atkinson No. 2”); Lange v. Atkinson, [2000] 3 N.Z.L.R.
385 (C.A.) (“Lange v. Atkinson No. 3”)), and South Africa (Du Plessis
v. De Klerk, 1996 (3) SA 850 (CC); National Media Ltd. v. Bogoshi,
1998 (4) SA 1196 (SCA)).  (i)  United
Kingdom  [69] Reynolds v. Times Newspapers
Ltd., [1999] 4 All E.R. 609, marked a decisive departure from the
traditional pro-reputation orientation of defamation law in England. The case
involved allegations of improper dealing by an Irish politician. The House of
Lords, for the first time, recognized that “freedom to disseminate and receive
information on political matters is essential to the proper functioning of the
system of parliamentary democracy”, (p. 621) and that the news media plays a
vital role in furthering that interest. It followed that the law of defamation
should provide greater protection to publications made on matters of public
interest. A new standard was pronounced — responsible journalism. Effectively,
the House of Lords recognized a compelling duty on the press to publish such reports
and a corresponding interest on the part of the public in receiving them.  [70] In order to determine whether a
publication should be covered by responsible journalism, Lord Nicholls provided
a list of considerations which have come to be known as the “Reynolds
factors” (at p. 626):  (1) The
seriousness of the allegation. The more serious the charge, the more the public
is misinformed and the individual harmed, if the allegation is not true.  (2)
The nature of the information, and the extent to which the subject matter is a
matter of public concern.  (3) The source of the information. Some informants
have no direct knowledge of the events. Some have their own axes to grind, or
are being paid for their stories.  (4) The steps taken to verify the
information.  (5) The status of the information. The allegation may have
already been the subject of an investigation which commands respect.  (6) The
urgency of the matter. News is often a perishable commodity.  (7) Whether
comment was sought from the plaintiff. He may have information others do not
possess or have not disclosed. An approach to the plaintiff will not always be
necessary.  (8) Whether the article contained the gist of the plaintiff’s side
of the story.  (9) The tone of the article. A newspaper can raise queries or
call for an investigation. It need not adopt allegations as statements of
fact.  (10) The circumstances of the publication, including the timing.   Lord Nicholls made clear that the
ultimate determination of responsibility would be a legal question for the
judge, though he allowed that any dispute of “primary fact” would be decided by
the jury (p. 626).  [71] Reynolds was quickly
recognized as a “media-friendly” development. In practical terms, however, Reynolds
only partially succeeded in changing the landscape. The ten Reynolds
factors proved difficult to apply. Some courts saw them as merely an
illustrative list of possible considerations, while others viewed them as a
complete code for what constitutes responsible journalism. Journalists and
publishers, for their part, found it difficult to anticipate what kind of
conduct would satisfy the Reynolds criteria, applied with the benefit of
judicial hindsight. (See, e.g., R. L. Weaver et al., “Defamation Law and Free
Speech: Reynolds v. Times Newspapers and the English Media” (2004), 37 Vand.
J. Transnat’l L. 1255, at pp. 1303-7.) As one commentator has observed:  . . . the Reynolds
defence virtually never succeeded because the 10 pointers of responsible
journalism were treated by the judges as hurdles to be surmounted. The judges
applied a dollop of hindsight, finding something which they, as a
responsible editor or journalist, would have done differently. The Reynolds
defence spawned satellite litigation where, often for understandable reasons,
the underlying facts could not be proved and much time and money had to be
spent on analysing how the story was constructed. Anonymous sources tended to
be viewed with suspicion and juries were given a complex list of factual issues
to decide, sometimes with confusing directions as to the presumption of falsity
which served to push them in the direction of disbelieving what the journalists
said. [Emphasis in original.]  (D. Hooper,
“The Importance of the Jameel Case”, [2007] Ent. L.R. 62, at p. 62.
See also A. J. Bonnington, “Reynolds Rides Again” (2006), 11 Comms. L. 147.)   [72] The House of Lords addressed this
uncertainty in Jameel v. Wall Street Journal Europe SPRL, [2006] UKHL
44, [2007] 1 A.C. 359. The defendant Wall Street Journal Europe had published
an article, shortly after September 11, 2001, revealing that the bank accounts
of certain prominent Saudi Arabian businessmen, including the plaintiff, were
being monitored for possible terrorist connections by Saudi authorities at the
behest of the U.S. government, citing anonymous sources. The tone of the
article was neutral and unsensational, and the article bore the indicia of
responsible journalism. Nonetheless, the trial judge denied the defendants
access to the Reynolds privilege, and the Court of Appeal upheld that
denial on the sole ground that the paper had not waited long enough to hear
back from the plaintiff before running the story.  [73] The House of Lords reversed the
judgment of the Court of Appeal and held that the responsible journalism
defence applied. It criticized the lower courts for applying the Reynolds
factors restrictively as “a series of hurdles to be negotiated by a publisher”
(para. 33, per Lord Bingham), rather than as an illustrative guide to
what might constitute responsible journalism on the facts of a given case.
Given that the defence was meant to foster free expression and a free press,
its requirements should not be pitched so high as to make its availability all
but illusory. The House of Lords also emphasized that the assessment of
responsible journalism is not an invitation for courts to micro-manage the
editorial practices of media organizations. Rather, a degree of deference
should be shown to the editorial judgment of the players, particularly
professional editors and journalists. For instance, a court should be slow to
conclude that the inclusion of a particular defamatory statement was
“unnecessary” and therefore outside the scope of the defence. As Lord Hoffmann
put it:  The fact that
the judge, with the advantage of leisure and hindsight, might have made a
different editorial decision should not destroy the defence. That would make
the publication of articles which are, ex hypothesi, in the public interest,
too risky and would discourage investigative reporting. [para. 51]  The House of Lords also made
clear that the defence is available to “anyone who publishes material of public
interest in any medium”, not just journalists or media companies: Jameel,
at para. 54, per Lord Hoffmann; Seaga v. Harper, [2008]
UKPC 9, [2008] 1 All E.R. 965.   [75] One unresolved issue is whether
the new defence is a species of privilege or a distinct defence.  If the former,
a further issue arises of whether it could be defeated by malice.  The judges
in Jameel discussed these issues but reached no consensus.  [76] Another unresolved issue is the
status of so-called “reportage”.  “Reportage” refers to defamatory statements
clearly attributed to someone other than, and not adopted by, the defendant. On
one view, reportage is simply the accurate reporting of facts — the fact of
what someone said. Such reportage is essential, the media argue, to
comprehensive coverage of public debate. Charges flung back and forth between
contending factions in a dispute are themselves, it is argued, an essential
part of the story, and will be understood by the public as such. However, the
reporting of defamatory statements is barred by the “repetition rule” of
defamation law, which holds that someone who repeats a defamatory statement is
no less liable than the person who originated it. Recent cases suggest that
this rule has been attenuated in the context of actions brought against media
outlets, although whether as a distinct defence or as one of the factors to
consider in applying the responsible journalism standard remains unclear: Charman
v. Orion Publishing Group Ltd.,  [2007] EWCA Civ 972, [2008] 1 All E.R.
750.  I will return to this question below.  (ii)  Australia  [77] Despite the absence of a
constitutional bill of rights guaranteeing freedom of expression, the High
Court of Australia has increased the protection afforded to the media on
factual reports. In Lange v. Australian Broadcasting Corp., a case
involving a former prime minister of New Zealand, the High Court confirmed the
existence of a qualified privilege for publications on “government and
political matters”, established earlier in Theophanous v. Herald &
Weekly Times Ltd. (1994), 124 A.L.R. 1. The High Court held that “each
member of the Australian community has an interest in disseminating and
receiving information, opinions and arguments concerning government and
political matters that affect the people of Australia [a category that, while
broad, does not extend to all matters of public interest].  The duty to
disseminate such information is simply the correlative of the interest in
receiving it” (p. 115).  Lange defined “government and political matters”
relatively narrowly to cover matters within the sphere of electoral politics,
whether at a local, state, or federal level, adding that “discussion of matters
concerning the United Nations or other countries may be protected by the
extended defence of qualified privilege” (p. 115).  [78] The burden rests on the defendant
to show that publishing the information was reasonable in the circumstances.
The defendant’s conduct “will not be reasonable unless the defendant had
reasonable grounds for believing that the imputation was true, took proper
steps, so far as they were reasonably open, to verify the accuracy of the
material and did not believe the imputation to be untrue” (Lange, at p.
118).  “Reasonableness” may also require the publisher to seek a response from
the person being defamed.  [79] In its focus on reasonableness, Lange
resembles Reynolds and Jameel. There are indications,
however, that Lange’s reasonableness requirement has been applied more
stringently than the responsibility test under its English counterparts: see
Kenyon, at p. 432.  (iii)  New
Zealand    (iv)  South
Africa  [82] Developments in South Africa have
generally parallelled those in the other jurisdictions just discussed, the U.K.
most particularly. In Du Plessis, the Constitutional Court of South
Africa considered and rejected an argument that the common law of defamation
should be liberalized and constitutionalized along the lines of Sullivan.
The court held that s. 15 of the Constitution — the free expression guarantee —
did “not mandate any particular rule of common law” (p. 885) because the
guarantee does not apply directly to disputes between private litigants.
However, echoing the Canadian “Charter  values” approach, it held that
the common law ought to be developed by courts in a manner consistent with
constitutional values.  [83] The Supreme Court of Appeal
subsequently adopted a responsible journalism defence in Bogoshi.
Writing for the court, Hefer J.A. held that “the publication in the press of
false defamatory allegations of fact will not be regarded as unlawful if, upon
a consideration of all the circumstances of the case, it is found to have been
reasonable to publish the particular facts in the particular way and at the
particular time” (p. 1212).  Approving of this approach in the Constitutional
Court, Sachs J. recently commented that “[i]n Bogoshi the SCA developed
in a way that was sensitive to contemporary concerns and realities, a
well-weighted means of balancing respect for individual personality rights with
concern for freedom of the press”: N.M. v. Smith, [2007] ZACC 6, 2007
(5) SA 250, at para. 203. See also Khumalo v. Holomisa, [2002] ZACC 12,
2002 (5) SA 401; Mthembi-Mahanyele v. Mail & Guardian Ltd., [2004]
ZASCA 67, 2004 (6) SA 329.  [84] The effect of Bogoshi has
been to establish in South African law a reasonableness defence resembling Reynolds
in most respects, but naturally with its own distinctive features elaborated in
the jurisprudence.  (c) Conclusion  [85] A number of countries with common
law traditions comparable to those of Canada have moved in recent years to
modify the law of defamation to provide greater protection for communications
on matters of public interest. These developments confront us with a range of
possibilities.  The traditional common law defence of qualified privilege,
which offered no protection in respect of publications to the world at large,
situates itself at one end of the spectrum of possible alternatives.  At the
other end is the American approach of protecting all statements about public
figures, unless the plaintiff can show malice.  Between these two extremes lies
the option of a defence that would allow publishers to escape liability if they
can establish that they acted responsibly in attempting to verify the information
on a matter of public interest.  This middle road is the path chosen by courts
in Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and the United Kingdom.  [86] In my view, the third option,
buttressed by the argument from Charter  principles advanced earlier,  represents
a reasonable and proportionate response to the need to protect reputation while
sustaining the public exchange of information that is vital to modern Canadian
society.  [87] What remains to be decided is how,
consistent with Charter  values, the new defence should be formulated.  B.    The Elements of the Defence of Responsible Communication  (1)  Preliminary
Issues  [88] The first preliminary issue is
whether the defence should be considered a new defence or an extension of the
traditional defence of qualified privilege.  [89] In Reynolds, the House of
Lords saw itself as extending the traditional law of qualified privilege in a
manner appropriate to the realities of contemporary media and the imperative of
free expression. Effectively, the Law Lords decided that the media has a “duty”
to report on a matter of public interest and the public has a corresponding
“interest” in receiving such a report. Whether the duty and interest had
crystallized into a privilege in the particular case depended on whether the
defendant had acted responsibly, having regard to Lord Nicholls’ non-exhaustive
list of factors.  [90] The introduction of the Reynolds
factors into the analysis, amounting in effect to a due diligence test,
produced an uneasy fit with the traditional model of qualified privilege, which
looked only to the occasion on which the communication was made. The conduct of
the defendant was only relevant after the privilege had already been
established, to show whether it was defeated by malice. By contrast, under Reynolds,
the defendant’s conduct became the dominant focus of the inquiry.  [91] This led some courts and
commentators to argue that Reynolds had introduced a substantially new
defence into the law of defamation. For instance, in Loutchansky v. Times
Newspapers Ltd., [2001] EWCA Civ 1805, [2002] 1 All E.R. 652, at para. 35,
Lord Phillips, M.R. (as he then was), opined that the Reynolds privilege
is “a different jurisprudential creature from the traditional form of privilege
from which it sprang”.  [92] The majority of the Law Lords in Jameel
maintained the view that “Reynolds privilege” or “responsible
journalism” rests at least notionally on the duty/interest analysis associated
with qualified privilege.  However, Lord Hoffmann, with the concurrence of
Baroness Hale, insisted that responsible journalism could not be assimilated to
traditional qualified privilege, adopting Lord Phillips’ view that it is “a
different jurisprudential creature”.  It is not the occasion which is protected
by the new defence, but the published material itself. (See also Brown, vol. 4,
at pp. 27-45 and 27-46, fn. 116.) Furthermore, it makes little sense to speak
of an assertion of responsible journalism being defeated by proof of malice,
because the absence of malice is effectively built into the definition of
responsible journalism itself.  [93] Characterizing the change to the
law as introducing a new defence is also supported by the fact that many forms
of qualified privilege would not be well served by opening up the privilege to
media publications. The duties and interests of people communicating and
receiving job references or police reports are definable with some precision
and involve a genuine reciprocity. The reciprocal duty and interest involved in
a journalistic publication to the world at large, by contrast, is largely
notional.  [94] The traditional duty/interest
framework works well in its established settings of qualified privilege. These
familiar categories should not be compromised or obscured by the addition of a
broad new privilege based on public interest. Further, qualified privilege as
developed in the cases is grounded not in free expression values but in the
social utility of protecting particular communicative occasions from civil
liability.  [95] I therefore conclude that the
proposed change to the law should be viewed as a new defence, leaving the
traditional defence of qualified privilege intact.  [96] A second preliminary question is
what the new defence should be called.  In arguments before us, the defence was
referred to as the responsible journalism test.  This has the value of
capturing the essence of the defence in succinct style.  However, the
traditional media are rapidly being complemented by new ways of communicating
on matters of public interest, many of them online, which do not involve
journalists.  These new disseminators of news and information should, absent
good reasons for exclusion, be subject to the same laws as established media
outlets.  I agree with Lord Hoffmann that the new defence is “available to
anyone who publishes material of public interest in any medium”: Jameel,
at para. 54.  [97] A review of recent defamation case
law suggests that many actions now concern blog postings and other online media
which are potentially both more ephemeral and more ubiquitous than traditional
print media. While established journalistic standards provide a useful guide by
which to evaluate the conduct of journalists and non-journalists alike, the
applicable standards will necessarily evolve to keep pace with the norms of new
communications media.  For this reason, it is more accurate to refer to the new
defence as responsible communication on matters of public interest.  (2)   Formulating the Defence of Responsible Communication on
Matters of Public Interest   [98] This brings us to the substance of
the test for responsible communication.  In  Quan, Sharpe J.A. held that
the defence has two essential elements: public interest and responsibility.  I
agree, and would formulate the test as follows.  First, the publication must be
on a matter of public interest. Second, the defendant must show that
publication was responsible, in that he or she was diligent in trying to verify
the allegation(s), having regard to all the relevant circumstances.  (a)   Was
the Publication on a Matter of Public Interest?  [99] To be protected by the defence of
responsible communication, the publication must be on a matter of public
interest.  [100]      This
is a matter for the judge to decide.  To be sure, whether a statement’s
publication is in the public interest involves factual issues. But it is
primarily a question of law; the judge is asked to determine whether the nature
of the statement is such that protection may be warranted in the public
interest.  The judge acts as a gatekeeper analogous to the traditional function
of the judge in determining whether an “occasion” is subject to privilege. 
Unlike privilege, however, the determination of whether a statement relates to
a matter of public interest focusses on the substance of the publication itself
and not the “occasion”.  Where the question is whether a particular
communication fits within a recognized subject matter of public interest, it is
a mixed question of fact and law, and will therefore attract more deference on
appeal than will a pure determination of public interest. But it properly
remains a question for the trial judge as opposed to the jury.  [101]      In
determining whether a publication is on a matter of public interest, the judge
must consider the subject matter of the publication as a whole. The defamatory
statement should not be scrutinized in isolation. The judge’s role at this
point is to determine whether the subject matter of the communication as a
whole is one of public interest. If it is, and if the evidence is legally
capable of supporting the defence, as I will explain below, the judge should
put the case to the jury for the ultimate determination of responsibility.  [102]      How
is “public interest” in the subject matter established? First, and most fundamentally,
the public interest is not synonymous with what interests the public. The
public’s appetite for information on a given subject — say, the private lives
of well-known people — is not on its own sufficient to render an essentially
private matter public for the purposes of defamation law. An individual’s
reasonable expectation of privacy must be respected in this determination.
Conversely, the fact that much of the public would be less than riveted by a
given subject matter does not remove the subject from the public interest. It
is enough that some segment of the community would have a genuine interest in
receiving information on the subject.  [103]      The
authorities offer no single “test” for public interest, nor a static list of
topics falling within the public interest (see, e.g., Gatley on Libel and
Slander (11th ed. 2008), at p. 530). Guidance, however, may be found in the
cases on fair comment and s. 2 (b) of the Charter .  [104]      In London
Artists, Ltd. v. Littler, [1969] 2 All E.R. 193 (C.A.), speaking of the
defence of fair comment, Lord Denning, M.R., described public interest broadly
in terms of matters that may legitimately concern or interest people:  There is no
definition in the books as to what is a matter of public interest. All we are
given is a list of examples, coupled with the statement that it is for the
judge and not for the jury. I would not myself confine it within narrow limits.
Whenever a matter is such as to affect people at large, so that they may be
legitimately interested in, or concerned at, what is going on; or what may
happen to them or to others; then it is a matter of public interest on which
everyone is entitled to make fair comment. [p. 198]   [105]      To
be of public interest, the subject matter “must be shown to be one inviting
public attention, or about which the public has some substantial concern
because it affects the welfare of citizens, or one to which considerable public
notoriety or controversy has attached”: Brown, vol. 2, at pp. 15-137 and
15-138.  The case law on fair comment “is replete with successful fair comment
defences on matters ranging from politics to restaurant and book reviews”:  Simpson
v. Mair, 2004 BCSC 754, 31 B.C.L.R. (4th) 285, at para. 63, per
Koenigsberg J.  Public interest may be a function of the prominence of the
person referred to in the communication, but mere curiosity or prurient
interest is not enough. Some segment of the public must have a genuine stake in
knowing about the matter published.  [106]      Public
interest is not confined to publications on government and political matters,
as it is in Australia and New Zealand.  Nor is it necessary that the plaintiff
be a “public figure”, as in the American jurisprudence since Sullivan. 
Both qualifications cast the public interest too narrowly. The public has a genuine
stake in knowing about many matters, ranging from science and the arts to the
environment, religion and morality. The democratic interest in such
wide-ranging public debate must be reflected in the jurisprudence.  [107]      Care
must be taken by the judge making this determination to characterize the
subject matter accurately. Overly narrow characterization may inappropriately
defeat the defence at the outset. For example, characterizing the subject
matter in this case simply as “Peter Grant’s business dealings” would obscure
the significant public interest engaged by the article and thus restrict the
legitimate scope of public interest. Similarly, characterizing the subject
matter too broadly as “Ontario politics” might render the test a mere rubber
stamp and bring unworthy material within the protection of the defence.  [108]      The
question then arises whether the judge or the jury should decide whether the
inclusion of a particular defamatory statement in a publication was necessary
to communicating on the matter of public interest.  Is this question merely a
subset of determining generally whether the publication is in the public
interest?  Or is it better treated as a factor in the jury’s assessment of
responsibility?  Lord Hoffmann in Jameel took the view that determining
whether a defamatory statement was necessary to communicating on a matter of
public interest is a question of law for the judge, conceding, however, that
this may require the judge to second-guess editorial judgment, and must be
approached in a deferential way (para. 51).  [109]      In
my view, if the publication, read broadly and as a whole, relates to a matter
of public interest, the judge should leave the defence to the jury on the
publication as a whole, and not editorially excise particular statements from
the defence on the ground that they were not necessary to communicating on the
matter of public interest.  Deciding whether the inclusion of the impugned
statement was justifiable involves a highly fact-based assessment of the
context and details of the publication itself.  Whereas a given subject matter
either is or is not in law a matter of public interest, the justifiability of
including a defamatory statement may admit of many shades of gray. It is
intimately bound up in the overall determination of responsibility and should
be left to the jury.  It is for the jury to consider the need to include
particular defamatory statements in determining whether the defendant acted
responsibly in publishing what it did.  (b)   Was Publication of the Defamatory Communication
Responsible?  [110]      Against
this background, I turn to some relevant factors that may aid in determining
whether a defamatory communication on a matter of public interest was
responsibly made.  (i)  The
Seriousness of the Allegation  [111]      The
logic of proportionality dictates that the degree of diligence required in
verifying the allegation should increase in proportion to the seriousness of
its potential effects on the person defamed. This factor recognizes that not
all defamatory imputations carry equal weight. The defamatory “sting” of a
statement can range from a passing irritant to a blow that devastates the
target’s reputation and career. The apprehended harm to the plaintiff’s dignity
and reputation increases in relation to the seriousness of the defamatory
sting. The degree to which the defamatory communication intrudes upon the
plaintiff’s privacy is one way in which the seriousness of the sting may be
measured. Publication of the kinds of allegations traditionally considered the
most serious — for example, corruption or other criminality on the part of a
public official — demand more thorough efforts at verification than will
suggestions of lesser mischief.  So too will those which impinge substantially
on the plaintiff’s reasonable expectation of privacy.  (ii) The
Public Importance of the Matter  [112]      Inherent
in the logic of proportionality is the degree of the public importance of the
communication’s subject matter. The subject matter will, however, already have
been deemed by the trial judge to be a matter of public interest. However, not
all matters of public interest are of equal importance. Communications on grave
matters of national security, for example, invoke different concerns from those
on the prosaic business of everyday politics. What constitutes reasonable
diligence with respect to one may fall short with respect to the other. Where
the public importance in a subject matter is especially high, the jury may
conclude that this factor tends to show that publication was responsible in the
circumstances. In many cases, the public importance of the matter may be
inseparable from its urgency.  (iii) The
Urgency of the Matter  [113]      As
Lord Nicholls observed in Reynolds, news is often a perishable
commodity. The legal requirement to verify accuracy should not unduly hamstring
the timely reporting of important news. But nor should a journalist’s (or
blogger’s) desire to get a “scoop” provide an excuse for irresponsible reporting
of defamatory allegations. The question is whether the public’s need to know
required the defendant to publish when it did. As with the other factors, this
is considered in light of what the defendant knew or ought to have known at the
time of publication. If a reasonable delay could have assisted the defendant in
finding out the truth and correcting any defamatory falsity without
compromising the story’s timeliness, this factor will weigh in the plaintiff’s
favour.  (iv) The
Status and Reliability of the Source  [114]      Some
sources of information are more worthy of belief than others. The less
trustworthy the source, the greater the need to use other sources to verify the
allegations. This applies as much to documentary sources as to people; for
example, an “interim progress report” of an internal inquiry has been found to
be an insufficiently authoritative source in the circumstances: Miller v.
Associated Newspapers Ltd., [2005] EWHC 557 (QB) (BAILII).
Consistent with the logic of the repetition rule, the fact that someone has
already published a defamatory statement does not give another person licence
to repeat it. As already explained, this principle is especially vital when
defamatory statements can be reproduced electronically with the speed of a few
keystrokes.  At the same time, the fact that the defendant’s source had an axe
to grind does not necessarily deprive the defendant of protection, provided
other reasonable steps were taken.  [115]      It
may be responsible to rely on confidential sources, depending on the
circumstances; a defendant may properly be unwilling or unable to reveal a
source in order to advance the defence.  On the other hand, it is not difficult
to see how publishing slurs from unidentified “sources” could, depending on the
circumstances, be irresponsible.  (v)   Whether the Plaintiff’s Side of the Story Was Sought and
Accurately Reported   [116]     
It has been said that this is “perhaps the core Reynolds
factor” (Gatley, at p. 535) because it speaks to the essential sense of
fairness the defence is intended to promote, as well as thoroughness. In most
cases, it is inherently unfair to publish defamatory allegations of fact
without giving the target an opportunity to respond: see, e.g., Galloway v.
Telegraph Group Ltd., [2004] EWHC 2786 (QB) (BAILII), at paras. 166-67, per Eady J.  Failure to do so also
heightens the risk of inaccuracy, since the target of the allegations may well
be able to offer relevant information beyond a bare denial.  [117]      The
importance of this factor varies with the degree to which fulfilling its
dictates would actually have bolstered the fairness and accuracy of the
report.  For example, if the target of the allegations could have no special
knowledge of them, this factor will be of little importance: see Jameel,
at paras. 35, and 83-85,  where the House of Lords held that the plaintiff
(whose group of companies had been put on a terrorism monitoring list) could
not realistically have added anything material to the story because the
relevant actions of the Saudi and U.S. governments were secret and entirely
beyond his control.  (vi) Whether
Inclusion of the Defamatory Statement Was Justifiable  [118]      As
discussed earlier (paras. 108-9), it is for the jury to determine whether
inclusion of a defamatory statement was necessary to communicating on a matter
of public interest. Its view of the need to include a particular statement may
be taken into account in deciding whether the communicator acted responsibly.
In applying this factor, the jury should take into account that the decision to
include a particular statement may involve a variety of considerations and
engage editorial choice, which should be granted generous scope.  (vii) Whether the Defamatory Statement’s Public Interest Lay in
the Fact That It Was Made Rather Than Its Truth (“Reportage”)   [119]     
   The “repetition rule” holds that repeating a libel has the
same legal consequences as originating it. This rule reflects the law’s concern
that one should not be able to freely publish a scurrilous libel simply by
purporting to attribute the allegation to someone else.   The law will not
protect a defendant who is “willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike”: “Truth”
(N.Z.) Ltd. v. Holloway, [1960] 1 W.L.R. 997 (P.C.), at p. 1001, per
Lord Denning.  In sum, the repetition rule preserves the
accountability of media and other reporting on matters of public interest.  
The “bald retailing of libels” is not in the public interest: Charman,
at para. 91, per Sedley L.J. Maintaining the repetition rule is
particularly important in the age of the Internet, when defamatory material can
spread from one website to another at great speed.   [121]      Where
the defendant claims that the impugned publication (in whole or in part)
constitutes reportage, i.e. that the dominant public interest lies in reporting
what was said in the context of a dispute, the judge should instruct the jury
on the repetition rule and the reportage exception to the rule. If the jury is
satisfied that the statements in question are reportage, it may conclude that
publication was responsible, having regard to the four criteria set out above.
As always, the ultimate question is whether publication was responsible in the
circumstances.  (viii)  Other
Considerations  [122]      As
noted, the factors serve as non-exhaustive but illustrative guides. Ultimately,
all matters relevant to whether the defendant communicated responsibly can be
considered.  [123]      Not
all factors are of equal value in assessing responsibility in a given case. For
example, the “tone” of the article (mentioned in Reynolds) may not
always be relevant to responsibility. While distortion or sensationalism in the
manner of presentation will undercut the extent to which a defendant can
plausibly claim to have been communicating responsibly in the public interest,
the defence of responsible communication ought not to hold writers to a
standard of stylistic blandness: see Roberts, at para. 74, per
Sedley L.J.  Neither should the law encourage the fiction that fairness and
responsibility lie in disavowing or concealing one’s point of view. The best
investigative reporting often takes a trenchant or adversarial position on
pressing issues of the day. An otherwise responsible article should not be
denied the protection of the defence simply because of its critical tone.  [124]      If
the defamatory statement is capable of conveying more than one meaning, the
jury should take into account the defendant’s intended meaning, if reasonable,
in determining whether the defence of responsible communication has been
established.  This follows from the focus of the inquiry on the conduct of the
defendant. The weight to be placed on the defendant’s intended meaning is a
matter of degree: “The more obvious the defamatory meaning, and the more
serious the defamation, the less weight will a court attach to other possible
meanings when considering the conduct to be expected of a responsible
journalist in the circumstances” (Bonnick v. Morris, [2002] UKPC 31,
[2003] 1 A.C. 300 (P.C.), at para. 25, per Lord Nicholls). Under the
defence of responsible communication, it is no longer necessary that the jury
settle on a single meaning as a preliminary matter. Rather, it assesses the
responsibility of the communication with a view to the range of meanings the
words are reasonably capable of bearing.  [125]      Similarly,
the defence of responsible communication obviates the need for a separate
inquiry into malice. (Malice may still be relevant where other defences are
raised.) A defendant who has acted with malice in publishing defamatory
allegations has by definition not acted responsibly.  (3)  Summary
of the Required Elements  [126]      The
defence of public interest responsible communication is assessed with reference
to the broad thrust of the publication in question. It will apply where:  A.   The publication is on a matter of public interest, and  B.    The publisher was diligent in trying to verify the allegation,
having regard to:  (a)       the seriousness of the allegation;  (b)       the public importance of the matter;  (c)       the urgency of the matter;  (d)       the status and reliability of the source;  (e)       whether the plaintiff's side of the story was sought and
accurately reported;  (f)        whether the inclusion of the defamatory statement was
justifiable;  (g)       whether the defamatory statement’s public interest
lay in the fact that it was made rather than its truth (“reportage”); and  (h)       any other relevant circumstances.  C.     Procedural Issues: Judge and Jury  [127]      As a
general rule, the judge decides questions of law, while the jury decides
questions of fact and applies the law to the facts.  As is the case in other
actions, for example negligence trials, issues of fact and law cannot be
entirely disentangled.  Nevertheless, it is possible to arrive at the following
allocation of responsibility on the defence of responsible communication,
having regard to whether the issue is predominantly legal or factual, to the
traditional allocations of responsibility in defamation trials, and to relevant
legislation.  [128]      The 
judge decides whether the statement relates to a matter of public interest. If
public interest is shown, the jury decides whether on the evidence the defence
is established, having regard to all the relevant factors, including the
justification for including defamatory statements in the article.  [129]      As
in any trial by judge and jury, the judge may, upon motion, rule out the
defence on the basis that the facts as proved are incapable of supporting the
inference of responsible communication.  This is consistent with the power of
the judge in existing jurisprudence to withdraw the issue of malice from the
jury where there is no basis for an inference of malice on the evidence.  [130]      The
defence of responsible communication does not require preliminary rulings from
the jury on primary meaning, since it does not depend on the supposition of a
single meaning. The jury should be instructed to assess the responsibility of
the communication in light of the range of meanings the words are reasonably
capable of bearing, including evidence as to the defendant’s intended meaning.   [132]      The
plaintiffs argue against a central role for the jury.  In their view, if a
conduct-based defence is recognized, it should be for the judge alone to
determine whether it lies and whether it is established on the facts. This,
they contend, is the only way to safeguard the nuanced constitutional balance
between free expression and the protection of reputation.  [133]      This
argument cannot be sustained.  First, restricting the role of the jury in this
manner may run afoul of the statutory rights accorded by s. 108 of the Ontario Courts
of Justice Act (it is for the jury to decide questions of fact), and most
certainly would violate s. 14 of the Ontario Libel and Slander Act (the
jury cannot be required to decide preliminary questions, and must be permitted
to render a general verdict).  The argument is essentially a plea to the Court
to amend the provisions of these Acts.  This the Court cannot do.  [134]      Second,
permitting the jury to have the ultimate say on whether or not the new defence
applies, is consistent with the jury’s role with respect to the defence of fair
comment. The Reynolds model, where “primary facts” are determined by the
jury but the decision on responsible journalism is made by the judge, entails a
complex back and forth between judge and jury and may lead to interlocutory
rulings, and in due course appeals from those interlocutory decisions. 
Moreover, confining the jury’s role to preliminary fact-finding would entail
seeking jury responses to numerous detailed questions, which may in turn
“thwart many of the benefits sought through the doctrinal changes”: Kenyon, at
p. 433; see also Lord Phillips, M.R., in Jameel v. Wall Street Journal Europe
SPRL, [2005] EWCA Civ 74, [2005] 4 All E.R. 356, at para. 70, lamenting the
division of roles that has taken shape in English courts under Reynolds.  [135]      Third,
it is not unusual for juries to render verdicts where constitutionally
protected interests are at stake. They do so every day in criminal trials
across the country. Sufficient safeguards exist in the proposed division of
responsibility to ensure the appropriate constitutional balance is struck.  The
judge exercises a gatekeeper function in determining the legal issues and
evidentiary sufficiency, and instructs the jury on all relevant factors,
including the nature and importance of the Charter  values of free
expression and protection of reputation. The judge’s decisions can be appealed
for legal error.  VI.  Application to the Facts
of This Case  [136]      The
evidence revealed a basis for three defences: (1) justification; (2) fair
comment;  and (3) responsible communication on a matter of public interest. 
All three defences should have been left to the jury.  It is unnecessary to
deal further with the defence of justification; no error is alleged in the
trial judge’s directions on this defence.  [137]      Where
the judge retains genuine doubt as to whether a given statement should be
characterized as fact or opinion, the question should be left to the jury to
decide: Scott v. Fulton, 2000 BCCA 124, 73 B.C.L.R. (3d) 392. In this
case, it was open to the jury to consider the statement attributed to Dr. Clark
that “[e]veryone thinks it’s a done deal” as a comment, or statement of
opinion.  The statement could be read as an idiomatic expression of an opinion
about the likelihood of something, namely government approval, that had
not yet come to pass.  This would raise the defence of fair comment.  [138]      The
defence of fair comment was left to the jury at trial.  However, I agree with
the Court of Appeal, per Feldman J.A., that the trial judge erred in his
charge to the jury on fair comment.  He failed to instruct the jury that “since
Mr. Schiller was the conduit for the comment and not its maker, the fact that
he did not honestly believe it could not be used as a foundation for finding
malice unless in the context of the article, he had adopted the comment as his
own” (Feldman J.A., at para. 93). This recalls Binnie J.’s observation in WIC
Radio that “defamation proceedings will have reached a troubling level of
technicality if the protection afforded by the defence of fair comment to
freedom of expression (‘the very lifeblood of our freedom’) is made to depend
on whether or not the speaker is prepared to swear to an honest belief in
something he does not believe he ever said” (para. 35). Additionally, as also
held in WIC Radio, the “fair-minded” component of the traditional test
should not form part of a charge on fair comment. For the reasons given by
Feldman J.A., at paras. 83-94 of her reasons, these problems in the trial
judge’s charge could have led the jury to wrongly conclude that the fair
comment defence had been defeated by malice.  [139]      It
was also open to the jury to consider the critical “done deal” remark as a
statement of fact.  Read literally, it can be taken as an assertion that
government approval for the development was actually already sealed, either
formally behind closed doors or by tacit understanding.  This raises the
defence of responsible communication on a matter of public interest.  The trial
judge did not leave this or any similar defence to the jury.  [140]      In
Ontario, an appellate court cannot order a new trial in a civil matter “unless
some substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice has occurred”: Courts of
Justice Act, s. 134(6). Taken together, in my view, the errors I have
described rise to this level and require a new trial.  Since the facts and
submissions on the new trial may differ from those on the first trial, detailed
discussion of how the new trial should proceed would be inappropriate. 
However, on the assumption the evidence will mirror the evidence on the first
trial, the following observations may be helpful.  1.    The jury should be told that three defences may arise on the
facts: (1) justification (truth); (2) fair comment, with respect to any
statements of opinion; and (3) responsible communication on a matter of public
interest, with respect to any statements of fact.  2.    Since the statement most at issue (the “done deal” remark) can
be viewed as opinion, the trial judge should instruct the jury on the defence
of fair comment in accordance with this Court’s decision in WIC Radio.  3.    Since the statement can also be viewed as a statement of fact,
raising the defence of responsible communication on a matter of public
interest, the trial judge should rule on whether communication of the statement
was in the public interest.  On the evidence in the first trial, the answer to
this question is affirmative.  The communication related to issues of
government conduct is clearly in the public interest.  4.    The jury should be instructed to determine whether publication
of the defamatory material was responsible, having regard to the factors
enumerated above.  VII.  Conclusion  [141]      I
would dismiss the appeal and the cross-appeal, and affirm the order for a new
trial. The respondents should have their costs of the main appeal in this
Court.  The following
are the reasons delivered by  [142]     
Abella J. — I am in complete agreement with the Chief Justice’s reasons for
adding the “responsible communication” defence to Canadian defamation law.  I
also share her view that determining the availability of this defence entails a
two-step analysis: the first to determine whether a publication is on a
matter of public interest; and the second to determine whether the standard of
responsibility is met.  Yet while I agree that the first question is a matter
of law for the judge to decide, I do not, with great respect, share her view
that the jury should decide the second step.  I see very little conceptual
difference between deciding whether a communication is in the public interest
and whether it is responsibly made.  While both inquiries engage questions of
fact and law, both are nonetheless predominantly legal issues.  As a result, in
my view the legal character of deciding whether the applicable standard of
responsibility has been met in a given case is, like the public interest
analysis, a matter for the judge.  [143]      The
responsible communication analysis requires that the defendant’s interest in
freely disseminating information and the public’s interest in the free flow of
information be weighed against the plaintiff’s interest in protecting
his or her reputation.  This is true no less of the second and determinative
step as of the first.  The exercise as a whole involves balancing freedom of
expression, freedom of the press, the protection of reputation, privacy
concerns, and the public interest.  Each of these is a complex value protected
either directly or indirectly by the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
(Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General), [1989] 2 S.C.R.
1326, at p. 1336; Canadian Broadcasting Corporation v. New Brunswick
(Attorney General), [1991] 3 S.C.R. 459, at p. 475; Hill v. Church of
Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130, at para. 107; and WIC
Radio Ltd. v. Simpson, 2008 SCC 40, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 420, at para. 2). 
Weighing these often competing constitutional interests is a legal
determination.  It is, therefore, a determination that the judge should
undertake.  [144]       I
accept that the jury’s participation in defamation cases is firmly entrenched
in the psyche of defamation law and that authorizing judges to decide both
steps of the responsible communication analysis leaves juries with a limited
role.  But I am unpersuaded that it is inconsistent with the statutory scheme
to leave the legal issues at stake here with the judge and any disputed facts
with the jury.  It is worth remembering that such a potentially determinative
role for the judge already exists when the defence of absolute or qualified
privilege is engaged (Raymond E. Brown, The Law of Defamation in Canada
(2nd ed. (loose-leaf)), vol. 2, at pp. 12-289, 13-405 and 16-136).  It is also
useful to bear in mind the historical basis for the jury’s preeminent role in
defamation cases.  It was an outgrowth of Britain’s Libel Act of 1792
when juries were seen to be necessary as “watchdogs of democratic rights
against unrepresentative governments” (New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Report 75, Defamation (1995), at para. 3.2, cited in Australian
Broadcasting Corp. v. Reading, [2004] NSWCA 411 (AustLII), at para. 143). 
More than two centuries later, this rationale is difficult to sustain, as is
the primacy of the jury’s role (Brown, vol.  3, at p. 17-115; Jameel v. Wall
Street Journal Europe SPRL, [2005] EWCA Civ 74, [2005] 4 All E.R.
356, at para. 70, per Lord Phillips, M.R.; Gatley on Libel and
Slander (11th ed. 2008), at p. 1241; and David A. Anderson, “Is Libel Law
Worth Reforming?” (1991-1992), 140 U. Pa. L. Rev. 487, at p. 540).  [145]      By
adopting the responsible communication defence, we are recognizing the
sophistication and constitutional complexity of defamation cases involving
communications on matters of public interest. What is most important is
protecting the integrity of the interests and values at stake in such cases. 
This defence is a highly complex legal determination with constitutional
dimensions.  That takes it beyond the jury’s jurisdiction and squarely into
judicial territory.  [146]      Other
than this concern over the proper division of labour between judge and jury, I
agree with the Chief Justice’s reasons and with her decision to order a new
trial.                                                                APPENDIX     Cottagers teed off over golf
course   Bill Schiller  FEATURE WRITER  Saturday Special  NEW LISKEARD — During the past
decade, millionaire lumber magnate Peter Grant — one of the most powerful
business people in northern Ontario — has been generous with Mike Harris and
the Conservatives.  In 1990, Grant, through his
companies, gave Harris more than $14,000 to help him win the Conservative
leadership.   Of this $80,000, at least $5,000
went to Natural Resources Minister John Snobelen and his Mississauga riding
association.  But Peter Grant also wants
something from the government.   To do so, he needs the Harris
government — with the support of Snobelen’s ministry — to sell him 10.5
hectares of crown land and approve the project.  The planned course will be
private, so private in fact, it will be for Grant’s own “personal use and
enjoyment.”  But in the minds of many who own
cottages here on Twin Lakes, about 500 kilometres north of Toronto, Grant’s
dream of carving a course out of the northern wilderness for his own pleasure,
is a nightmare.   Last winter, she wrote the
province to say she’s worried about the impact the course could have on lake
and well water — especially, she said, “with Walkerton still fresh on everyone’s
mind.”  For his part, Grant refuses to be
interviewed.  “Our client . . . does not intend
to discuss his personal affairs with you,” his lawyers informed The Star by
letter.  When a Star photographer went to
take pictures at the site this month, men the OPP believe were Grant employees,
accused the photographer of trespassing. They then tried to drive the
photographer’s vehicle off a public road, and finally followed the photographer
out of town for almost 20 kilometres.  But for concerned cottagers back
at lakeside — the issue is water.  Grant already has provincial
permission to draw as much as 300,000 litres per day from the lake to water his
three golf holes.  According to environment ministry
guidelines, the same amount of treated water could support a community of 750
to 1,500 people.  And ratepayers worry that if
Grant’s plan goes ahead, his need for water will grow.   Grant’s expanded course would
also clear trees from almost 23.5 hectares in total: 10.5 hectares of crown
land, and another 13 hectares of privately held land he also intends to buy for
the project.  Perhaps most worrisome from the
cottagers’ perspective, planning documents show the course will use $20,000
worth of pesticides annually, including small amounts of Daconil, a highly
effective pesticide that is also highly toxic to fish and invertebrates. But locals aren’t the only ones
concerned about Grant’s plans. Officials from the Ministry of Natural Resources
are too. Currently conducting a limited environmental assessment, they’ve
informed Grant of at least a dozen concerns they have about the project, from
potential effects on water quality, to the impact on lake levels.  Grant’s consultants are preparing
a response.  But the ministry’s concerns are
small comfort to cottagers.  They know the expressed concerns
of government officials don’t always mean much when it comes to development
projects led by supporters of the Premier.  “Everyone thinks it’s a done deal
because of Grant’s influence — but most of all his Mike Harris ties,” says
Lorrie Clark, who owns a cottage on Twin Lakes.  Earlier this year, the local
cottagers’ association invited Grant’s consultants, as well as ministry
officials to a meeting to discuss Grant’s proposal. A number of cottagers
brought copies of a Toronto Star article detailing how the Premier’s best
friend Peter Minogue complained “at political levels” to try to get his North
Bay golf course and subdivision approved in the face of opposition from the
Ministry of Natural Resources.  Minogue’s partners in that
venture, known as Osprey Links, included the president of Harris’ riding
association and a veritable Who’s Who of Harris’ North Bay friends. Ministry
objections were overruled just 12 days after a senior bureaucrat warned by memo
that Minogue had begun complaining.  With that experience in mind,
lawyer Peter Ramsay, a ratepayer and cottager rose at the public meeting here
and put his concerns bluntly.  “Is this (Grant) project going to
be decided by the Ministry of Natural Resources?” he asked officials present.
“Or is it going to be decided by Queen’s Park?”  A ministry official at the
meeting, Greg Gillespie, said he couldn’t speak for what happens at Queen’s
Park.  “But we did our job,” he said of
the Osprey experience.  Such suspicions and anxiety over
the approval process have set the stage for a classic confrontation, which — in
the cottagers’ view — pits the public good of ordinary Ontarians, many of whom
are senior citizens, against a single, powerful, private interest: Peter Grant.  “This is a development that is
not in the public interest,” cottage owner Clark emphasizes, “but only a very
private one.”  For an outsider, however, looking
at the history of the lake, one might think Grant is fighting an uphill battle.  After all, in 1985 the Ontario
Municipal Board shut down a proposal to build a small subdivision on Twin Lakes
out of concerns about potential environmental damage.  The board — a kind of court of
appeal for developers and citizens who disagree on a development — sided with a
consultant who argued that the lake was too sensitive, teetering on
overdevelopment with 200 cottages, and any additional building might constitute
an environmental hazard.  Those arguments won the day.  But Grant is undaunted.  Today, the same consultant who
convinced the board to block that development more than 15 years ago, now
consults for Grant.  Michael Michalski argues that
Grant’s development can be built with minimum impact and that “everything
feasible” will be done to keep contaminants on site.  Not to be outdone, local citizens
have hired their own consultants, Gartner Lee. They say neither Michalski nor
anyone else can guarantee the lake’s safety.  And so the scientific lines have
been drawn in the sand.  But if politics and power were to
have any bearing on the matter, some feel Grant would have the upper hand.  In this rough and rugged stretch
of northern Ontario, where local economies depend largely on timber and
tourism, Grant is a powerful presence.    Grant, who has been running the
event since 1998, proudly presented a cheque that day for $300,000 to help
build a local senior’s home.  Press accounts note that he’s
raised about $1 million for local causes, including area golf courses, over
three years. Up north, the charity event has
distinguished him.  So has his selection of lobbyists
down south at Queen’s Park.   Meanwhile, on the personal front,
Grant maintains a reputation for living large.  His home and corporate compound
in the bush dwarfs the dozens of cottages that surround it.      Records show these holes were
built on almost three hectares of crown land, which the province sold to Grant
in April, 1998 for $20,000.  But records also show that two
months earlier, in February, 1998, Grant had also applied to buy the 10.5
hectares he’s still pursuing today.  These developments have residents
up in arms.  “It’s difficult living here and
watching all this go on,” says Nancy Kramp, a mother of four who, like Grant,
lives permanently on Twin Lakes.  “It used to be dead silence out
here. There was nothing but the sounds of wildlife. Now, there are always (golf
course) machines running.”  Kramp can’t comprehend how the
provincial government can think of selling 10.5 hectares of land so that one
man may build a golf course for his own enjoyment.   It’s not okay yet.  The Harris government has not
sold the property to him.  Still, local politicians are
preparing the way.  Today, five politicians who
represent the people of Hudson Township here (population: 501), are scheduled
to meet to discuss a motion to amend local zoning bylaws and, according to a
published notice, “permit the construction of a personal golf course — for the
personal use of the property owner.”  Local councillor Clinton Edwards
says he doesn’t really want to say whether he’ll support it.  “I’m in a bit of a bind here,” he
says, somewhat haltingly. “My wife works for him (Grant). Employment is very
hard to get up here,” he adds.  News of impending zoning changes
even before the government has sold Grant the land makes some cottagers
distrustful about what might happen next.    Skindra and her husband Arkadis,
68, a retired nuclear plant designer, were planning on spending their
retirement on the lake.  “I grew up here,” explains
Alexandra. “My kids grew up here. And I was hoping our five grandchildren could
come here every summer.”  “We don’t have anything against
Peter,” Arkadis offers, hammer in hand as he renovates the front room of their
cottage overlooking the water.  “But I can’t see how this can go
ahead and not damage the lake and the environment.”  Down the way, Ira and Marion
Murphy have spent 56 years on a tiny stretch of land that joins Twin Lakes with
neighbouring Frere Lake.   For him, lake life is a precious
thing, something interwoven with family.   “We’ve got nothing against him.
We’re just concerned about the lake, that’s all.”   “They’re probably going to have
to blast out rock to build too,” he says.  Ptok says Grant’s consultants
have confirmed they may well have to dynamite.  Looking worriedly out at the
lake, Ptok says, “I don’t even want to think about it.”  (A.R., vol. XI, at pp. 4-12)     Solicitors for the intervener the Ottawa Citizen:  Gowling
Lafleur Henderson, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the interveners the Canadian Newspaper Association,
Ad IDEM/Canadian Media Lawyers Association, RTNDA Canada/Association of
Electronic Journalists, Magazines Canada, the Canadian Association of
Journalists, the Canadian Journalists for Free Expression, the Writers’ Union
of Canada, the Professional Writers Association of Canada, the Book and
Periodical Council, and PEN Canada:  Brian MacLeod Rogers, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation:  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties
Association:  Torys, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener Danno Cusson:  Heenan
Blaikie, Ottawa.    