SCC Case Information: 34189   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: Annapolis County District School Board v. Marshall, 2012
  SCC 27, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 84 Date: 20120607 Docket: 34189  Between: Annapolis
County District School Board and Douglas Ernest Feener Appellants
/ Respondents on cross-appeal and Johnathan
Lee Marshall, represented by his Guardian, Vaughan Caldwell Respondent
/ Appellant on cross-appeal    Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 13)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 14 to 15) Deschamps J. (McLachlin C.J. and Abella,
  Rothstein, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)  Cromwell J.      Annapolis County District School Board v. Marshall, 2012 SCC
27, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 84 Annapolis County District School Board
and v. Johnathan Lee Marshall, represented by
his Guardian, Indexed as:  Annapolis County District School Board v.
Marshall 2012 SCC 27 File No.:  34189. 2012:  May 8; 2012:  June 7. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps, Abella, Rothstein,
Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for nova scotia                     Torts
— Negligence — Standard of care — Contributory negligence — Child running into
path of oncoming bus suffering severe injuries — Whether trial judge erred in
improperly inviting jury to find child responsible for accident — Motor Vehicle
Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 293, s. 248. Cases Cited By Cromwell J. (dissenting) Statutes and Regulations Cited Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.N.S. 1989,
c. 293, s. 248.                     The judgment of McLachlin
C.J. and Deschamps, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. was
delivered by [1]                             
Deschamps J. — On the afternoon of April 12, 1994, the respondent, four-year-old
Johnathan Lee Marshall, was playing with his brothers in front of the family
home, located along Highway 201. At the same time, the appellant Douglas Ernest
Feener was driving his empty school bus along Highway 201 after having dropped
off a load of elementary school children. As Mr. Feener approached the Marshall
home, Johnathan ran onto the highway and into the path of the oncoming bus. Mr.
Feener could not stop in time and Johnathan was struck. He suffered
catastrophic injuries. [2]                             
Through his litigation guardian, Johnathan
brought an action against Mr. Feener and his employer, the Annapolis County
District School Board. The matter was heard in the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia
before Pickup J. and a jury. After a ten-week trial, the jury answered “no” to
the following question: Was there negligence on the part of the
defendant, Douglas Feener, that caused or contributed to the damages suffered
by the plaintiff, Jonathan [sic] Marshall? [3]                             
The resulting order was appealed to the Nova
Scotia Court of Appeal on four principal grounds: (1) the trial judge’s
reference in his charge to the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act,
R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 293, concerning the duty of pedestrians to yield the right of
way to vehicles; (2) his handling of the reverse onus provisions contained in
s. 248 of the Motor Vehicle Act; (3) his explanation of the special duty
of care owed by motorists where children are present; and (4) his admission of
an RCMP investigation report.  The Court of Appeal ordered a new trial on the
basis of the first ground alone. With respect to the other grounds of appeal,
MacDonald C.J.N.S., writing for the Court of Appeal, did not find that the
trial judge had committed reversible errors, but simply made suggestions to
improve the instructions to be given to the jury in the event of a new trial
(2011 NSCA 13, 298 N.S.R. (2d) 373, at paras. 36, 40, 47 and 50). [4]                             
At issue in this appeal is whether the Court of
Appeal erred in finding that the trial judge had misdirected the jury in
referring to the right-of-way provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act. For
the reasons that follow, I conclude that it did and that the appeal should be
allowed. No other elements of the trial judge’s charge warrant intervention. [5]                             
The portion of the charge to the jury which the
Court of Appeal found to constitute reversible error is reproduced below:                            Now, I’m going to mention another section
of the Motor Vehicle Act. This is the Motor Vehicle Act of 1989
which was in effect at the time, it’s RSN is 1989, Chapter 293 in particular
Section 125(3) and (4). And that says, 125(3), “Every pedestrian crossing a
roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk, shall
yield the right of way to vehicles upon the highway.” The next, Sub 4, 125(4)
says, “This section shall not relieve the driver of the vehicle or the pedestrian
from the duty to exercise care.”                            So a pedestrian has the right to cross
the highway at a point which is not a regular crossing for pedestrians, but in
such a case, a duty is cast upon him to take special care to use greater
vigilance and to yield the right of way to vehicles upon the highway. So in a
crosswalk, cars stop. If you’re not in a crosswalk, then what I just told you
applies.                            This reason — this is for the obvious
reason that drivers of motor vehicles know that there’re safety zones and crosswalks
for the use of pedestrians where they are normally expected to cross. This is
not to say however, that if a pedestrian crosses between intersections, a
motorist can run him down with impu[nity]. The question is could or should the
driver have seen the pedestrian in time to avoid the collision?                            The pedestrian on the other hand has a
duty to look out for his own safety, and to keep a lookout for approaching
vehicles. Did he do what a reasonable person would be expected to do?  Did he
step from a place [of safety] to a place of danger and fail to use reasonable
care as required by the circumstance? These are the questions you must put to
yourself.                            Now standard of care owed to children
crossing the highway.  Johnathan was four years, four months old.  So the
standard of care owed to children on a highway is the same as that owed to
adults, but there may be circumstances which should put motorists on their
guard. . . .                            He
[the driver] has the right to expect that a pedestrian will not act without care.
The duty of a pedestrian when using the public street or highway is to use
reasonable care at all times for his own safety, and to avoid placing himself
in a position from which injury might result. However, he’s entitled to assume
that motorists will drive according to the law. [A.R., vol. I, at pp. 100-103] [6]                             
MacDonald C.J.N.S. concluded that, in referring
to the right-of-way provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act, the trial judge
improperly invited the jury to treat Johnathan “like an adult” (para. 16). This,
according to MacDonald C.J.N.S., would have left the jury “with little choice
but to find Johnathan responsible for this accident” (para. 19) even though the
trial judge had already concluded that Johnathan could not be contributorily
negligent because of his young age. In offering guidance for a possible
retrial, MacDonald C.J.N.S. recommended expunging the entire passage dealing
with the right-of-way provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act (para. 38). [7]                             
I agree with the appellants that the Court of
Appeal failed to appreciate the dual function of statutory right-of-way
provisions. Not only do such provisions inform the assessment of whether a
pedestrian was contributorily negligent by failing to yield a right of way,
they can also help determine whether a driver breached the applicable standard
of care in the circumstances. In this case, even though Johnathan’s
contributory negligence had been ruled out as a matter of law, the statutory
right-of-way provisions continued to inform the standard of care that Mr.
Feener owed to all pedestrians. The jury needed to be told that, absent special
circumstances, where the driver has the right of way, he or she can reasonably
proceed on the assumption that others will follow the rules of the road and
yield the right of way to drivers. [8]                             
I respectfully disagree with the Court of
Appeal’s conclusion that, in referring to the right-of-way provisions, the
trial judge effectively invited the jury to find Johnathan legally responsible
for the accident. At the outset of his charge, Pickup J. made it clear that
Johnathan’s liability was not at issue because of his young age (A.R., vol. I,
at p. 44). In no part of the charge did the trial judge instruct the jury to
adjudicate on the child’s negligence. When the trial judge’s instructions on
the right-of-way provisions are read in light of the entire charge, it is clear
that they served only to delineate the standard of care applicable to Mr.
Feener. The jury was invited to consider the conduct of a reasonable pedestrian
in assessing whether Mr. Feener had demonstrated the requisite degree of
precaution. [9]                             
A further factor that had to inform the jury’s
ruling on Mr. Feener’s negligence was whether there were special circumstances
that would indicate to the driver that he was in an area where children were
likely to be present. In this respect, the trial judge made the following
comment to the jury:                            In
a school or playground area or in a built-up residential district, a motorist
should drive more slowly and carefully and keep a lookout for the possibility
of children running out into the street. Here you must decide whether the
circumstances were such as to put the defendant motorist on notice that he was
approaching an area where children were likely to be, and therefore should
exercise greater care in the operation of his motor vehicle. [A.R., vol. I, at
p. 102] [10]                         
The respondent argues that the jury would have
inferred from the trial judge’s instructions that a motorist need only take
precautions in the three specific circumstances cited, and therefore that Mr.
Feener would not have had to take precautions in this case. I cannot accept
this submission. The accident clearly did not take place in a school or
playground area or in a built-up residential district. The trial judge was
asking the jury whether the situation was one in which Mr. Feener should have
expected children to be present. In this context, I see no error in the trial
judge’s instruction. [11]                         
In this Court, as in the Court of Appeal, the
respondent maintains that the trial judge also erred in explaining the burden
of proof on motorists under s. 248 of the Motor Vehicle Act and in
admitting an RCMP report. For the reasons given by the Court of Appeal, I am of
the view that there is no reversible error. [12]                         
The respondent has cross-appealed, seeking a
finding of liability against the appellants in the event that the Court
dismissed the appeal. As I would allow the appeal, the merits of the cross-appeal
do not need to be considered. [13]                         
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal with
costs throughout, including costs of the application for leave to appeal in
this Court, dismiss the cross-appeal without costs and restore the order after
trial with jury of the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia.                     The
following are the reasons delivered by [14]                         
Cromwell J. (dissenting) — With respect to my colleagues who have taken the
opposite view, I would uphold the decision of the Court of Appeal.  Although I
make no comment on the Court of Appeal’s suggestions for the conduct of a
second trial, I would adopt as my own paras. 16 to 18 of the Court of Appeal’s
reasons: 2011 NSCA 13, 298 N.S.R. (2d) 373.  Much like in Byrne v. Hodgins (1972),
30 D.L.R. (3d) 128 (S.C.C.),
affirming the dissent in (1972), 27
D.L.R. (3d) 617 (B.C.C.A.) (sub nom. Bryne v. Hodgins), there was a
real risk in this case that the charge left the jury with the understanding
that it was to consider whether the plaintiff was responsible for the accident.
The critical instruction was that the jury had to consider whether the
circumstances were such as to put the defendant motorist on notice that he was
approaching an area where children were likely to be and should therefore
exercise greater care. This instruction was given almost in passing and in the
midst of confusing instructions about the duty of pedestrians and
self-contradictory instructions about the burden of proof. The plaintiff was
entitled to have the key liability issue in the case put to the jury in clear
terms.  Looking at the charge as a whole, this, in my respectful view, did not
occur.  The misdirection may have given rise to an injustice.  I would
therefore dismiss the appeal. [15]                         
I would also dismiss the cross-appeal from the
Court of Appeal’s decision to send the matter back for a second trial.  It
cannot be said in this case that “the evidence is of such a character that only
one view can reasonably be taken of its effect”: Petijevich v. Law, [1969] S.C.R. 257, at p. 265,
quoting from Jardine v. Northern Co-operative Timber and Mill Association,
[1945] 1 W.W.R. 533 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 535.  This Court is not in a position to
make a determination on liability.    