  and  Gilbert Duclos                                                                                    Appellant  v.  Pascale Claude Aubry Respondent  and  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation                                                Intervener   File No.:  25579.  1997:  December 8; 1998:  April 9.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec      The respondent brought an action in civil liability
against the appellants, a photographer and the publisher of a magazine, for
taking and publishing, in a magazine dedicated to the arts, a photograph
showing the respondent, then aged 17, sitting on the steps of a building.  The
photograph, which was taken in a public place, was published without the
respondent’s consent.  The trial judge recognized that the unauthorized
publication of the photograph constituted a fault and ordered the appellants to
pay $2,000 jointly and severally.  The majority of the Court of Appeal affirmed
this decision.  Held (Lamer C.J. and Major J. dissenting):  The appeal should be
dismissed.   The right to one’s image is an element of the right to
privacy under s. 5 of the Quebec Charter.  If the purpose of the right
to privacy is to protect a sphere of individual autonomy, it must include the
ability to control the use made of one’s image.  There is an infringement of a
person’s right to his or her image and, therefore, fault as soon as the image
is published without consent and enables the person to be identified.  However, the right to respect for one’s private life
comes into conflict here with the right to freedom of expression protected by
s. 3 of the Quebec Charter.  Freedom of expression includes freedom of
artistic expression, and it is unnecessary to create special categories of
expression.  The right to respect for one’s private life, like freedom of
expression, must be interpreted in accordance with s. 9.1 of the Quebec Charter. 
The public’s right to information, supported by freedom of expression, places
limits on the right to respect for one’s private life in certain
circumstances.  The balancing of the rights in question depends both on the
nature of the information and on the situation of those concerned.  In short,
this is a question that depends on the context.  For the purposes of legal
analysis, it is inappropriate to resort to the notion of “socially useful
information” adopted by the Court of Appeal.  In this case, the appellants are liable a priori,
since the photograph was published when the respondent was identifiable.  The
artistic expression of the photograph cannot justify the infringement of the
right to privacy it entails.  An artist’s right to publish his or her work is
not absolute and cannot include the right to infringe, without any
justification, a fundamental right of the subject whose image appears in the
work.  It has not been shown that the public’s interest in seeing this
photograph is predominant.  In these circumstances, the respondent’s right to
protection of her image is more important than the appellants’ right to publish
the photograph of the respondent without first obtaining her permission.  As
for the causal connection between the publication of the photograph and the
prejudice, there clearly is one.  Finally, although the infringement of a right
guaranteed by the Quebec Charter is in itself insufficient to establish
that prejudice has been sustained, the evidence, while limited, could serve as
a basis for the extrapatrimonial damages awarded.  While the trial judge did
make some errors in assessing the moral prejudice, these errors do not call
into question the existence of such prejudice resulting from the infringement
of the respondent’s right to respect for her private life and accordingly do
not warrant this Court’s intervention to reduce a compensatory award that,
although high, is within reasonable limits.   Here, the dissemination of the respondent’s image
constituted a violation of her privacy and of her right to her image.  In the
abstract, to appropriate another person’s image without his or her consent to
include it in a publication constitutes a fault.  However, in light of the
first paragraph of s. 9.1 of the Quebec Charter, the respondent’s right
to privacy must be interpreted and harmonized in a manner consistent with the
appellants’ freedom of expression and the public’s right to information, which
is guaranteed by s. 44 of the Quebec Charter.  In matters involving the
right to one’s image, this harmonizing role is played by the concept of the
public interest.  The content of this concept depends on the nature of the
information conveyed by the image and on the situation of the parties
involved.  On the other hand, it must be balanced against the reasonable
expectation of privacy of the person whose image is reproduced and, generally,
against the severity of the infringement of the parties’ rights.  The concept
of public interest limited to the right to receive “socially useful information”
is too narrow.  In this case, the public interest does not justify the
appellants’ fault.  The photographer could easily have obtained the
respondent’s consent, but did not do so.  As for causality, it is not at
issue.  Regarding prejudice, the Quebec law of civil liability requires proof
of prejudice resulting from the fault.  The respondent’s simple statement that
her classmates laughed at her does not in itself constitute sufficient
evidence of prejudice, since it does not provide any information about how she
felt.  Nor is there any evidence that the respondent has become a “well-known
figure” or that the instant proceedings and the media coverage they received
have increased her notoriety.  Per Major J.
(dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed for the reasons of the dissenting
judge in the Court of Appeal that there was no evidence of damage.  Cases Cited    By Lamer C.J. (dissenting)   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 1 , 8 .   Civil Code of Lower Canada, arts. 1053, 1073.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, art. 36.    Authors Cited  Caron, Madeleine.  “Le Code civil
québécois, instrument de protection des droits et libertés de la personne”
(1978), 56 Can. Bar Rev. 197.   Deleury, Édith, et Dominique
Goubau.  Le droit des personnes physiques, 2e éd.
Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1997.  Glenn, H. Patrick.  “Le droit au
respect de la vie privée” (1979), 39 R. du B. 879.  Kayser, Pierre.  La protection
de la vie privée, 2e éd. Paris:  Économica, 1990.  Nerson, R.  Les droits
extrapatrimoniaux.  Paris:  L.G.D.J., 1939.  Perret, Louis.  “De l’impact de la
Charte des droits et libertés de la personne sur le droit civil des contrats et
de la responsabilité au Québec” (1981), 12 R.G.D. 121.  Potvin, Louise.  La personne et
la protection de son image:  étude comparée des droits québécois, français et
de la common law anglaise.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1991.   Ravanas, J.  La protection des
personnes contre la réalisation et la publication de leur image.  Paris: 
L.G.D.J., 1978. Vallières, Nicole.  La presse
et la diffamation.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur, 1985.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[1996] R.J.Q. 2137, 141 D.L.R. (4th) 683 (sub nom. Aubry v. Duclos), 71
C.P.R. (3d) 59, [1996] Q.J. No. 2116 (QL), affirming a decision of the Court of
Québec, [1991] R.R.A. 421. Appeal dismissed, Lamer C.J. and Major J.
dissenting.   Vivianne De Kinder, for
the appellant Duclos.  Nathalie Charbonneau
and Yves Archambault, for the respondent.   English version of the reasons delivered by   I.  Civil Liability and Rights  2                             To a great
extent, the oral arguments of the parties in this Court concerned the scope of
the right to one’s image and the limits imposed on it by the freedom of
expression of a photographer and that of a publishing company.  To this effect,
the intervener Canadian Broadcasting Corporation relied on this Court’s freedom
of expression jurisprudence to challenge the scope of a person’s right to his
or her image.  The important role played by freedom of expression in our
society was raised.  While these submissions are most relevant to the
resolution of the case, I think it is important to clarify first how rights
influence our analysis of civil liability.  This approach makes clear to us how
to reconcile the conflicting values at issue.    The fact that an interpreter of the Charter
first has to clarify the scope of a protected right in light of a specific
provision does not make this exercise any different from the one that involves
deducing a specific application from the principle recognized in art. 1053
C.C.L.C.  5                             My intention
here is to place the analytical approach that characterizes the dispute in this
case as being primarily a conflict between the rights of the respondent and
those of the appellants in its proper theoretical context.  Accordingly, even
though she relies on a certain right to her image, the plaintiff respondent
must prove that a fault committed by the appellants caused her prejudice.   7                             More often than
not, the decisions of this Court concerning fundamental rights have been
rendered in the criminal law context.  It must first be asked whether those
decisions are directly applicable to a dispute between private parties, as in
the case at bar.  Although I do not intend to give a general answer to this
question, my comments can be illustrated with an example.   9                             It would
therefore be wrong to define the scope of the right to privacy between citizens
solely on the basis of the decisions relating to s. 8 .  Although I agree with
the functional definitions of privacy adopted by this Court, particularly in R.
v. Dyment, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417, and Godbout v. Longueuil (City), [1997]
3 S.C.R. 844, it seems to me that the right to privacy can have a different
scope in private law.    12                           Second, I do not
think that a civil liability analysis allows the burden of proof to be shifted
between the parties in the same manner as is permitted in Charter law.  Section
9.1 of the Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms is relevant here.  It
reads as follows:   In this respect, the scope of the
freedoms and rights, and limits to their exercise, may be fixed by law.   The Court continued its analysis in Ford by noting that the
second paragraph of s. 9.1 does refer to “legislative authority to impose
limits on the fundamental freedoms and rights” (p. 770).  It held that this
second paragraph must be interpreted in the same way as s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter .  14                           Similarly, in
the recent case of Godbout v. Longueuil (City), supra,
La Forest J. stated, at para. 103:   15                           Furthermore, the
statement of the test for s. 1  of the Canadian Charter  itself refers to
“the legislative objective which the limitation is designed to promote”:  R.
v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 713, at p. 768.  It is
difficult to apply this language to the law of civil liability.  Article 1053
of the Civil Code of Lower Canada lays down a standard of conduct in
general wording that does not lend itself well to a sufficiently specific
analysis of its objective.  In light of the foregoing, I believe that we must
give the first paragraph of s. 9.1 an interpretative significance and adapt the
law of civil liability, as needed, to make it consistent with the rights
guaranteed by the Quebec Charter.  16                           In this respect,
a parallel can be drawn between the present case and the case before the Court
in Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130.  This
Court recognized in Hill that in libel cases, “the twin values of
reputation and freedom of expression will clash” (para. 100).  This type
of balancing must also be done here.  While this Court concluded in that case
that the Canadian Charter  did not apply to the actions of the plaintiff
Casey Hill, it repeated that the common law is subject to the Canadian
Charter .  Cory J. quoted the comments of Iacobucci J. to that effect in R.
v. Salituro, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 654, at p. 675:  Where the principles underlying a
common law rule are out of step with the values enshrined in the Charter,
the courts should scrutinize the rule closely. If it is possible to change the
common law rule so as to make it consistent with Charter values, without
upsetting the proper balance between judicial and legislative action that I
have referred to above, then the rule ought to be changed. In my view, this is a judicial process similar to that prescribed by
s. 9.1.  17                           In short, the
real issue is whether the appellants committed a fault.  This approach
recognizes the flexible and contextual nature of the concept of fault, and its
capacity to reconcile the rights relied upon in this case (see L. Perret, “De
l’impact de la Charte des droits et libertés de la personne sur le droit civil
des contrats et de la responsabilité au Québec” (1981), 12 R.G.D. 121,
at p. 124).  A reasonable person respects the rights and freedoms of
everyone and carries out his or her obligations while bearing his or her own
rights in mind.   [translation]
The purpose of s. 9.1 is to temper the absolute nature of the freedoms and
rights set out in ss. 1  to 9  both from the perspective of the limits
imposed on the holders of those rights and freedoms in respect of other
citizens, which is the case for the first paragraph, and from that of the
limits the legislature may place on the community as a whole, a principle
formed in the second paragraph.   19                           This case cannot
be resolved merely by relying upon the respondent’s right to her image or the
appellants’ freedom of expression; the rights concerned must also be balanced. 
Since freedom of expression is fairly well known, I shall now discuss the right
to one’s image.  II.  Right to One’s Image  20                           The Quebec
courts have applied the principles of civil liability to allow compensation for
the prejudice resulting from the use of a person’s image without his or her
consent.  According to the authors, these judicial interventions have created a
right to one’s image at issue in the present case.  The reasons of the Court of
Appeal include a detailed account of the evolution of Quebec and French
jurisprudence and doctrine, and that account is entirely satisfactory. 
However, I wish to add the following comments.  21                           I would hesitate
to conclude that the right to one’s image has no existence independent of the
right to privacy.  It is common knowledge that this Court has defined the right
to privacy very broadly (albeit in the public law context).  In Dyment, supra,
La Forest J. noted that according to certain authors privacy “is at the heart
of liberty in a modern state” (p. 427), and that it is based “on the
notion of the dignity and integrity of the individual” (p. 429).  La
Forest J. reiterated this functional approach in Godbout v. Longueuil (City),
supra, in which he stated at para. 97 that the right to privacy
protects, inter alia, the “narrow sphere of personal autonomy within
which inherently private choices are made”, a view shared by all the members of
this Court.  I believe that the right to privacy can be analysed in similar
terms in private law.  Furthermore, this right certainly includes a person’s
right to his or her image.  Nevertheless, I do not rule out the possibility
that a person’s commercial interest in his or her image does not derive
uniquely from his or her right to privacy.  As a result, it may be advisable to
preserve the integrity of the concept of privacy.  22                           I also agree
with my colleagues that the right to one’s image is primarily a personality
right, an interest of an extrapatrimonial nature.  I do not consider it
necessary to go further and determine whether there is also a right to one’s
image of a patrimonial nature, as Rothman J. suggested in Deschamps v.
Renault Canada (1977), 18 C. de D. 937 (Que.
Sup. Ct.).  I would note simply that it is not contrary to public order
for individuals, whether famous or not, to profit from consenting to the use of
their image.    III.  Public Interest  25                           The respondent’s
right to privacy must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the
appellants’ freedom of expression and the public’s right to information, which
is guaranteed by s. 44 of the Quebec Charter.  As the Court of Appeal
recently stated in The Gazette (Division Southam inc.) v. Valiquette,
[1997] R.J.Q. 30 (C.A.), at p. 36:  [translation]
The right to privacy, on the other hand, is not absolute.  It is subject to a
series of limits, and its application requires a balancing with other
fundamental rights, including the public’s right to information.  A violation
of the right to privacy thus cannot be characterized as illicit or wrongful if
there is a reasonable justification or a legitimate purpose, or if it can be
concluded that the person consented to the invasion of his or her privacy.  26                           It is inevitable
that the concept of public interest is imprecise.  In her work on defamation,
Nicole Vallières writes of the public interest in this context:  [translation] “[t]his abstract concept
is difficult to delimit, and as far as we know, no definition of the public
interest has been applied to the press by the Quebec courts”:  La presse et
la diffamation (1985), at p. 90.  In my view, the content of the
concept of public interest depends on the nature of the information conveyed by
the image and on the situation of the parties involved.  On the other hand, it
must be balanced against the reasonable expectation of privacy of the person
whose image is reproduced and, generally, against the severity of the
infringement of the parties’ rights.  27                           With respect, I
believe that LeBel J.A. of the Court of Appeal erred in limiting the notion of
public interest to the right to receive [translation]
“socially useful” information ([1996] R.J.Q. 2137, at p. 2149).  This
concept appears to me to be too narrow.  Be that as it may, it is my view that
in the case at bar the public interest does not justify the appellants’ fault. 
The appellant Duclos could easily have obtained the respondent’s consent, but
did not do so.  It is possible for the public interest to justify the
dissemination of the image of a person who is in a crowd or is at the scene of
an important event in a purely incidental manner.  However, I will express no
opinion on this subject, and I do not think it appropriate to specify, in the
context of the present case, the circumstances in which the public interest
prevails over a person’s right to his or her image.  It is sufficient to state
that the appellants committed a fault.  Since causality is not at issue here,
it is now necessary to consider damage and the proof thereof.  IV.  Damage  28                           The Quebec law
of civil liability requires proof of prejudice resulting from the fault.  This
is an essential element of civil liability.  On this question of damage, I
agree with Baudouin J.A. that the plaintiff respondent has not proven that she
suffered prejudice.  29                           The complete
evidence of damage reads as follows:  [translation]  Q.   Did that photo cause you any difficulties?  A.   Some difficulties; people laughed at me.  Q.   People, who are these people?  A    My friends, the people at school. Q.   The people at school?   Q.   I have no further questions, Your Honour.  30                           The trial judge
concluded from the evidence that the respondent had been a victim of [translation] “teasing by friends her
own age” and that this entitled her to compensation [translation] “of at least $2,000 for the humiliation suffered
as a result of the invasion of her privacy and injury to her reputation”
([1991] R.R.A. 421, at p. 423).  For his part, LeBel J.A. of the Court of
Appeal noted that the respondent’s evidence of prejudice was limited, but
hastened to add that the trial judge believed this evidence, which accordingly
made it sufficient evidence of damage.  Thus, [translation] “[i]n order to find that there was no moral injury,
it would be necessary to go back over this assessment of credibility, an area
essentially reserved to the sovereign assessment of the trier of fact, absent
any manifest, serious and decisive error” (p. 2150).    33                           The respondent
nonetheless suggests that her prejudice consists of the fact that she has
become well-known, thereby losing her anonymity.  With respect, there is no
evidence on the record tending to show that the respondent is now a “well-known
figure”.  No witnesses were called to testify that the respondent’s face or
person is now known to them as a result of the events that gave rise to the
litigation.  The respondent also maintains that the civil proceedings in the
present case and the media coverage they received have increased her notoriety,
thereby entitling her to compensation.  Once again, no evidence was adduced as
to the respondent’s notoriety.    36                           For these
reasons, I do not rule out the possibility that the dissemination of a person’s
image without consent might result in damage for which he or she can be
compensated.  As Baudouin J.A. noted, at p. 2152,   However, the evidence satisfies me that the instant case quite
simply does not come within this category of affairs.  V.  Disposition  37                           I am of the view
that the evidence is insufficient to conclude that the wrongful dissemination
of the photograph of the respondent Aubry caused her moral prejudice.  For this
reason, I would allow the appeal, set aside the judgments below and dismiss the
action, with costs.  English version of the judgment of L’Heureux-Dubé,
Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci and Bastarache JJ. delivered by   39                      It should be noted at
the outset that since the events on which this case is based occurred in 1988,
the matter is governed by the Civil Code of Lower Canada.  I.  Facts   II.  Judicial History  A.  Court of Québec, [1991] R.R.A. 421  41                           At trial, Judge
Bourret of the Court of Québec allowed the respondent’s action in part. 
Recognizing that the unauthorized publication of the photograph constituted a
fault to which both the magazine’s publisher and the photographer who handed
over the photograph to the magazine had contributed, he ordered them to pay
$2,000 jointly and severally.  However, the judgment is somewhat ambiguous
regarding the nature of the damage this amount was intended to compensate. 
Judge Bourret wrote in this connection (at p. 423):   42                           This passage
suggests that the $2,000 would cover both the damages resulting from the injury
to her reputation and the loss of privacy resulting from the publication of the
photograph.  43                           However, since
the photograph was not defamatory in nature either in itself or by association
with the accompanying text in the magazine, Judge Bourret denied any
compensation on this ground.  He also refused to award exemplary damages, as
there was no evidence of malice on the part of the defendants.  B.  Court of Appeal, [1996] R.J.Q. 2137  44                           The majority of
the Court of Appeal affirmed Judge Bourret’s decision.  LeBel J.A. and Biron J.
(ad hoc) both found that the fault lay not in the taking of the
photograph but in its publication.  According to LeBel J.A., writing for the
majority, since the respondent was in a public place when the photograph was
taken, that act alone could not be considered an invasion of her privacy. 
However, the unauthorized publication of the photograph constituted an
infringement of her anonymity, which is an essential element of the right to
privacy.  45                           LeBel J.A.
recognized that the unauthorized publication of a photograph could be justified
on the basis of the public’s legitimate interest in information.  In his view,
however, Quebec law recognizes no such exception for artistic activity.  Even
in the absence of bad faith, the dissemination of the photograph was,
therefore, wrongful.  46                           While the judges
of the majority recognized that there was only limited evidence of moral
prejudice, they refused to alter Judge Bourret’s decision.  Relying on the
judgments of this Court in Hodgkinson v. Simms, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377, at
p. 426, and Laurentide Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1
S.C.R. 705, at p. 810, they noted that an appellate court must show
deference to findings of fact drawn from the evidence by the trial judge.  47                           Baudouin J.A.’s
dissent focussed essentially on the question of damages.  In his view, damages
cannot be found to have been sustained solely because the photograph was
wrongfully disseminated.  Nor can the absence of evidence of damages be
concealed under the head “nominal damages”.  This was particularly important,
in his view, where the right to privacy is claimed as against freedom of
information or artistic freedom.  In this case, Baudouin J.A. refused to
consider the respondent’s sole statement that [translation] “people laughed at me” as sufficient evidence. 
In his view, therefore, the issue was not one of credibility warranting an
appellate court’s deference but rather one of lack of evidence.  III.  Relevant Statutory Provisions   3.  Every person is the
possessor of the fundamental freedoms, including freedom of conscience, freedom
of religion, freedom of opinion, freedom of expression, freedom of peaceful
assembly and freedom of association.  4.  Every person has a
right to the safeguard of his dignity, honour and reputation.  5.  Every person has a
right to respect for his private life.   In this respect, the scope of the
freedoms and rights, and limits to their exercise, may be fixed by law.  49.  Any unlawful
interference with any right or freedom recognized by this Charter entitles the
victim to obtain the cessation of such interference and compensation for the
moral or material prejudice resulting therefrom.  In case of unlawful and
intentional interference, the tribunal may, in addition, condemn the person guilty
of it to exemplary damages.  IV.  Analysis   50                      It should be
mentioned at the outset that our analysis will be limited to the sole issue
before this Court, namely publication of a photograph taken without permission.   52                      In Godbout v.
Longueuil (City), the Supreme Court held that the purpose of the protection
accorded to privacy is to guarantee a sphere of individual autonomy for all
decisions relating to “choices that are of a fundamentally private or
inherently personal nature” (para. 98).  If the purpose of the right to privacy
guaranteed by s. 5 of the Quebec Charter is to protect a sphere of
individual autonomy, that right must include the ability to control the use
made of one’s image, since the right to one’s image is based on the idea of
individual autonomy, that is, on the control each person has over his or her
identity.  It can also be stated that this control implies a personal choice. 
It should be noted, finally, that art. 36 of the new Civil Code of Québec,
S.Q. 1991, c. 64, although not applicable here, confirms this
interpretation since it recognizes that the use of a person’s name, image,
likeness or voice for a purpose other than the legitimate information of the
public is an invasion of privacy.  53                      Since the right to
one’s image is included in the right to respect for one’s private life, it is
axiomatic that every person possesses a protected right to his or her image. 
This right arises when the subject is recognizable.  There is, thus, an
infringement of the person’s right to his or her image, and therefore fault, as
soon as the image is published without consent and enables the person to be
identified.  See Field v. United Amusement Corp., [1971] C.S. 283.  54                      The right to respect
for one’s private life should not be confused with the right to one’s honour
and reputation under s. 4 of the Quebec Charter even though, in certain
cases, wrongful publication of an image may in itself result in an injury to
one’s honour and reputation.  Since every person is entitled to protection of
his or her privacy, and since the person’s image is protected accordingly, it
is possible for the rights inherent in the protection of privacy to be
infringed even though the published image is in no way reprehensible and has in
no way injured the person’s reputation.  In the case at bar, the judges at
trial and on appeal found that the photograph was in no way reprehensible and
did not injure the respondent’s honour or reputation.  The Court of Appeal also
found that the manner in which the photograph was juxtaposed with the text did
not make it possible to associate the two elements and that, at any rate, the
text was serious and not open to ridicule.   56                      The right to respect
for one’s private life, like freedom of expression, must be interpreted in
accordance with the provisions of s. 9.1 of the Quebec Charter.  For
this purpose, it is necessary to balance these two rights.  57                      The public’s right to
information, supported by freedom of expression, places limits on the right to
respect for one’s private life in certain circumstances.  This is because the
expectation of privacy is reduced in certain cases.  A person’s right to
respect for his or her private life may even be limited by the public’s
interest in knowing about certain traits of his or her personality.  In short,
the public’s interest in being informed is a concept that can be applied to
determine whether impugned conduct oversteps the bounds of what is permitted.   59                      Another situation
where the public interest prevails is one where a person appears in an
incidental manner in a photograph of a public place.  An image taken in a
public place can then be regarded as an anonymous element of the scenery, even
if it is technically possible to identify individuals in the photograph.  In
such a case, since the unforeseen observer’s attention will normally be directed
elsewhere, the person “snapped without warning” cannot complain.  The same is
true of a person in a group photographed in a public place.  Such a person
cannot object to the publication of the photograph if he or she is not its
principal subject.  On the other hand, the public nature of the place where a
photograph was taken is irrelevant if the place was simply used as background
for one or more persons who constitute the true subject of the photograph.   61                      LeBel J.A. and Biron
J. analysed this question on the basis of the notion of [translation] “socially useful
information” (p. 2149).  In their view, freedom of expression and the
public’s right to information will prevail where the expression at issue
concerns information that is “socially useful”.  This notion seems to have been
borrowed from American law, which draws a distinction between useful
information, in the sense of the public’s right to be informed, and information
whose sole purpose is commercial.  See Estate of Presley v. Russen,
513 F.Supp. 1339 (D.N.J. 1981), and Current Audio Inc. v. RCA Corp.,
337 N.Y.S.2d 949 (Sup. Ct. 1972).  Only the first category is protected in the
United States.  In the United States, freedom of expression and public
information prevail over the right to privacy except where the information’s
sole purpose is commercial.  We agree with the intervener that this notion of
“socially useful” refers only to the fact that the information in question has
an economic, political, artistic, cultural, sporting or other value.  A
photograph of a single person can be “socially useful” because it serves to
illustrate a theme.  That does not make its publication acceptable, however, if
it infringes the right to privacy.  We do not consider it appropriate to adopt
the notion of “socially useful” for the purposes of legal analysis.  The
distinction based on commercial purpose is inconsistent with s. 9.1 of the
Quebec Charter.  Only one question arises, namely the balancing of the
rights at issue.  It must, therefore, be decided whether the public’s right to
information can justify dissemination of a photograph taken without
authorization.  62                      In the case at bar,
the appellants are liable a priori, since the photograph was published
when the respondent was identifiable. In our view, the artistic expression of
the photograph, which was alleged to have served to illustrate contemporary
urban life, cannot justify the infringement of the right to privacy it
entails.  It has not been shown that the public’s interest in seeing this
photograph is predominant.  The argument that the public has an interest in
seeing any work of art cannot be accepted, especially because an artist’s right
to publish his or her work, no more than other forms of freedom of expression,
is not absolute.  The wording of s. 9.1 of the Quebec Charter should be
borne in mind here, together with the fact that this Court has stated on a
number of occasions that freedom of expression must be defined in light of the
other values concerned.  See Fraser v. Public Service Staff Relations Board,
[1985] 2 S.C.R. 455; Dagenais v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp., [1994] 3
S.C.R. 835; and Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2
S.C.R. 1130, at para. 103.  See also Moises v. Canadian Newspaper Co.,
[1997] 1 W.W.R. 337 (B.C.C.A.).    Freedom can primarily be
characterized by the absence of coercion or constraint.  If a person is
compelled by the state or the will of another to a course of action or inaction
which he would not otherwise have chosen, he is not acting of his own volition
and he cannot be said to be truly free.  One of the major purposes of the Charter
is to protect, within reason, from compulsion or restraint.  Coercion includes
not only . . . blatant forms of compulsion . . . [but also]
includes indirect forms of control which determine or limit alternative courses
of conduct available to others.  65                      None of the
exceptions mentioned earlier based on the public’s right to information is
applicable here.  Accordingly, there appears to be no justification for giving
precedence to the appellants other than their submission that it would be very
difficult in practice for a photographer to obtain the consent of all those he
or she photographs in public places before publishing their photographs.  To
accept such an exception would, in fact, amount to accepting that the
photographer’s right is unlimited, provided that the photograph is taken in a
public place, thereby extending the photographer’s freedom at the expense of
that of others.  We reject this point of view.  In the case at bar, the
respondent’s right to protection of her image is more important than the
appellants’ right to publish the photograph of the respondent without first
obtaining her permission.  V. Damages  66                      The appellants argued
that there was no causal connection between the publication of the photograph
and the damages.  In our view, no particular problem arises here since the
damages are the logical, direct and immediate consequence of the fault.  A
teenager’s sensitivity and the possibility of being teased by her friends are
eminently foreseeable.  67                      Nonetheless, it was
necessary for the respondent to establish that she had suffered prejudice. 
Such prejudice may be extrapatrimonial and/or patrimonial.  68                      Where
extrapatrimonial damages are concerned, we agree with Baudouin J.A. that the
infringement of a right guaranteed by the Quebec Charter is in itself
insufficient to establish that damage has been sustained.  Nor is an award of
symbolic damages justified when the courts wish to punish the infringement of a
right that will, in most cases, result in minimal injury.  This would be
contrary to the principles of civil responsibility.   [translation]
Such a feeling is likely to be offended each time a photographer invades
someone’s privacy or serves it up to the public.  The camera lens captures a
human moment at its most intense, and the snapshot “defiles” that moment.  The
privileged instant of personal life becomes “this object image offered to the
curiosity of the greatest number”.  A person surprised in his or her private
life by a roving photographer is stripped of his or her transcendency and human
dignity, since he or she is reduced to the status of a “spectacle” for others.
. . . This “indecency of the image” deprives those photographed of
their most secret substance.  70                      In the case at bar,
the evidence of moral damages is limited.  The moral prejudice is described in
a few lines.  Nonetheless, it is possible for a trial judge in a case such as
this to assess the victim’s conduct and, going beyond his or her words, to
detect a violation of dignity in the sense described by Mr. Ravanas.  [translation]  Q.   Did that photo cause you any difficulties?  A.   Some difficulties; people laughed at me.  Q.   People, who are these people?  A.   My friends, the people at school.  Q.   The people at school?   Q.   I have no further questions, Your Honour.  71                      Although the evidence
is limited, we agree with LeBel J.A. and Biron J. that, having been accepted by
the trial judge, it could serve as a basis for the damages awarded.  This
evidence did exist and illustrated in the trial judge’s view the discomfort and
upset felt by the respondent as a result of the publication of her photograph. 
Thus, contrary to what Baudouin J.A. stated, the trial judge did not find that an
injury had been sustained solely because the photograph was wrongfully
disseminated.  To find that there was no moral prejudice, it would be necessary
to reassess the respondent’s credibility, but that assessment is essentially
the province of the trier of fact.  No manifest, serious and critical error has
been shown.  See in this regard Hodgkinson v. Simms, supra, at
p. 426.  72                      The damages awarded
were $2,000, which seems high.  It must be recognized, however, that it is
always difficult to assess moral damage and that such a decision is up to the
trier of fact.  This Court has stressed the importance of the trial court’s
role in such matters and the caution appellate courts must show before
intervening in such an assessment.  See Laurentide Motels Ltd. v. Beauport
(City), supra, at p. 810:  The rule is that an appellate
court should not alter the quantum of damages set by the trial judge simply
because it would have awarded a different amount if it had itself been sitting
at the trial level.  For the quantum to be altered, an appellate court must be
shown that the trial judge applied an erroneous rule of law or that the amount
awarded was palpably incorrect compensation for the damage suffered.  73                      It is clear, however,
that the trial judge erred with respect to the extent of the dissemination of
the magazine.  He also erred in stating that the damages would compensate in
part for the humiliation suffered by the respondent as a result of the injury
to her reputation, whereas no injury to her honour and reputation had been
proven.  However, these errors in the assessment do not call into question the
existence of moral damages resulting from the infringement of the respondent’s
right to respect for her private life.  Accordingly, they do not warrant this
Court’s intervention to reduce a compensatory award that is still within
reasonable limits.   75                      The appeal is
dismissed with costs.   77                      The first paragraph
of art. 477 C.C.P. provides that:  477.  The losing party
must pay all costs, including the costs of the stenographer, unless by decision
giving reasons the court reduces or compensates them, or orders otherwise.  78                      Section 15 of the Tariff
of judicial fees of advocates, R.R.Q. 1981, c. B-1, r. 13, reads
as follows:  15.  The Court may,
upon request or ex officio, grant a special fee, in addition to all
others [sic] fees, in an important case.    81                      In the present case,
the respondent argues that the media more or less took the initiative in the
proceedings in order to obtain a decision establishing their own rights in the
practice of the professions of photographer and journalist, and that this
justifies an additional award of costs, even though the respondent is still
eligible for legal aid.  Counsel for the appellant, Les Éditions Vice-Versa
inc., argues, for her part, that the respondent should have included such costs
in its claim for damages.  Even if this were recognized to be a test case that
entitles the respondent to additional costs, we do not feel that it would be
appropriate to award such costs.  We wish to make it clear, however, that we
also reject the appellant’s position that additional costs must be included in
the claim for damages.  This approach would be entirely inconsistent with the
provisions of art. 477 C.C.P.  It should also be noted that,
in the instant case, the costs cannot be considered to be the direct result of
the violation of the Quebec Charter.  The following are the reasons delivered by  82                              
Major J. (dissenting) -- I
agree with the result reached by the Chief Justice and would allow the appeal
for the reasons of Baudouin J.A. that there was no evidence of damage.  Appeal dismissed with costs, Lamer
C.J. and Major J. dissenting.   Solicitor for the appellant Duclos:  Vivianne De Kinder, Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Charbonneau & Archambault,
Montréal.  Solicitors for the intervener:  Lafleur Brown, Montréal.   