Giguère v.
Chambre des notaires du Québec, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 3, 2004 SCC 1  Serge
Giguère, ès qualités                                                                               Appellant  v.  Chambre des
notaires du Québec                                                                Respondent  and  Comité
administratif de la Chambre des notaires du Québec                      Intervener  Indexed
as:  Giguère v. Chambre des notaires du Québec  Neutral
citation:  2004 SCC 1.  File No.: 
28901.  2003:  June 5;
2004:  January 29.  Present: 
McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel and Deschamps JJ.  on appeal from
the court of appeal for quebec  Civil liability — Professional liability — Notaries  — Indemnity
fund — Elderly client selling property to notary for one dollar — Property
later sold by notary for $550,000 — Sale annulled by court — Notary declaring 
bankruptcy — Claim against Indemnity Fund of Chambre des notaires —
Administrative Committee of Chambre rejecting claim on ground that notary was
acting in personal rather than professional capacity — Whether Administrative
Committee’s decision patently unreasonable  — Regulation respecting the
indemnity fund of the Chambre des notaires du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981, c. N-2,
r. 8, s. 2.01 — Code of ethics of notaries, R.R.Q., c. N-2,
r. 3, s. 4.02.01.  Civil liability — Professional liability — Notaries — Indemnity fund
— Maximum indemnity payable for total claims against same notary established by
regulation at $300,000 — Whether ceiling excludes any award of interest or
additional indemnity under Civil Code — Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991,
c. 64, arts. 1617, 1619.  By private writing, Mrs. H sold her home to her notary for $1 “and
other good and valuable consideration”.  The notary, who had been handling H’s
affairs for many years, drafted the deed of sale himself.  After the notary
tried to sell the property,  both H’s brother and her nephew G, who was now H’s
curator under a protection order, filed a complaint with the syndic of the
Chambre des notaires du Québec.  The complaints were held to be unfounded. 
Meanwhile the notary sold the property for $550,000 and H died.  The Superior
Court annulled the sale and ordered the notary to reimburse H’s succession over
$1 million.  The notary having declared bankruptcy, the succession claimed
reimbursement from the Chambre’s indemnity fund for the value of the house and
other misappropriations.  The Chambre’s Indemnity Committee recommended that
certain amounts be repaid to the succession, but recommended refusal of the
claim in respect of the property on the ground that the notary was not acting
in the exercise of his profession when he swindled it from H and therefore his
actions did not come within the terms of the regulation governing the indemnity
fund.  The recommendations were later adopted by the Administrative Committee
on behalf of the Chambre.  The Superior Court dismissed the application for
judicial review, concluding that the Administrative Committee’s decision was
not patently unreasonable.  The Court of Appeal affirmed that decision.  Held (Deschamps J. dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed.  Per McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Major, Bastarache, Binnie and
LeBel JJ.:  The Administrative Committee’s decision against indemnifying the
succession on the ground that the notary was acting in a personal rather than a
professional capacity is patently unreasonable.  The Administrative Committee’s
error is predicated on a basic misunderstanding of the professional
responsibilities of notaries in Quebec law, the relationship between H and the
notary, and the purposes of the indemnity fund.  So gross a legal error cannot
be shielded by the privative clause in s. 4.03 of the Regulation
respecting the indemnity fund.  For all his false pretences of friendship, the notary was above all H’s
legal adviser within the meaning of the law.  The professional, rather than
personal, nature of the relationship is not only true as a matter of fact but
required as a matter of law.  The notary’s professional duty to advise H
impartially was engaged by this transaction.  The requirement of notarial
impartiality governs the duty of notaries to advise their clients and the
parties to acts they prepare.  The fact that this transaction occurred by
private writing does not in any sense render it a personal act.  The duty of an
independent legal adviser remains the same in the circumstances.  Any
characterization of the transaction must also be considered in the light of the
purposes of the indemnity fund.  One of those purposes is to protect clients
from misdeeds by notaries that, due to their intentional nature, will not be
covered by professional liability insurance.  By characterizing the transaction
as personal, the two Committees took the notary’s fraud outside the scope of
the fund, thus revoking the very protection the fund is intended to give.  This
decision opens a gap between notaries’ ethical obligations, as set out in s.
4.02.01(b) of the Code of ethics of notaries, and the remedy for
breach of those obligations, which is supposed to be provided, in the last
resort, by the indemnity fund.  Before this Court, the Chambre raised for the first time an argument to
the effect that no indemnity was payable to the succession because the property
does not come within the terms of the Regulation, since it is not “a sum of
money or other security”.  There is no reason to believe that this limited
understanding of “other security” actually informed the Committees’ decisions. 
In any case, in view of the judgment annulling the sale, the deed of sale is
deemed  never to have existed.  Under art. 1422 and 1701 C.C.Q., the concern
is not with H’s house but with its value and at least the proceeds the notary
earned from selling it to third party purchasers.  There is no disputing that
those proceeds are sums of money.  This matter should not be sent back to the
Chambre so that it can decide this point.  There is no dispute as to quantum
and to send the matter back would serve to reward the Chambre for the tardiness
with which it has raised this argument.  The maximum indemnity payable from the fund for the total claims
against the same notary is $300,000.  That limit is not a constraint on awards
of interest at the legal rate under art. 1617 C.C.Q. and does not oust the
Court’s power to award an additional indemnity under art. 1619 C.C.Q.  These
articles seek to compensate creditors for not having access to their funds and
to encourage debtors to restore such funds promptly.  Here, the succession,
having already received $112,535.96 out of these funds, is entitled to the
amount of $187,464.04 plus interest at the legal rate and additional indemnity,
both payable from May 3, 1996, being the date on which the Administrative
Committee rendered its decision.  Per Deschamps J. (dissenting):  The interpretation of
s. 2.01 of the  Regulation creating the indemnity fund adopted by the
Administrative Committee is not unreasonable.  The approach and conclusion
adopted by the majority mean that administrative tribunals are left no margin
for interpretation.  Neither the analysis nor the conclusion made is in keeping
with the strong privative clause, the expertise of the Committee’s members, the
nature of the issue, which is a simple claim for indemnification, or the
purpose of the Regulation.  Four cumulative elements must  be established in order to give rise to
the protection afforded by s. 2.01 of the Regulation:  (1) there must be sums
of money or other securities; (2) they must have been delivered to
the notary; (3) they must have been delivered in the practice of his
profession; and (4) the notary must have used them for purposes
other than those for which they had been delivered to him.  The
Administrative Committee’s decision is not founded solely on its opinion that
the notary was not acting in the practice of his profession.  Even if the
notary was acting in the practice of his profession, the other three conditions
still have to be examined before ruling on the entitlement to 
indemnification.  In the Committee’s opinion, the claim should have been
refused because three of the prerequisites to protection were not met.  It was
not necessary for the Committee to rule on the words “sums of money or other
securities”.  Administrative tribunals cannot be expected to conduct an
exhaustive examination of all possible grounds that could potentially support
their decision. Moreover, equating the property with a sum of money imposes an ex
post facto analysis of the property delivered.  This interpretation does
not square well with the context of the Regulation, which calls for the
property to be characterized upon its delivery, rather than after its
conversion or disposition.  A regulation explicitly specifying that coverage extends to sums of
money or other securities delivered to a notary and used for purposes other
than those authorized by the client can be interpreted differently from one
that protects against any dishonest transaction.  Since requirements (2) and
(4) are difficult to reconcile with extortion or fraud, one could perhaps
conclude that such acts are not covered by the Regulation.  It is therefore not
unreasonable to conclude that the unlawful act committed by the notary is more
properly characterized as fraud, a dishonest transaction or a fraudulent tactic
than as a misappropriation of funds, and that only a misappropriation of funds
gives rise to indemnification under the fund.  Even if the Administrative Committee’s decision was unreasonable, the
case should be referred back to the Committee so that it could render a
decision on the aspects of the case it has not yet ruled on.  None of the
exceptions that would allow a court to substitute its opinion for that of the
administrative tribunal applies here.  It would be difficult for the Court,
without usurping the function of the Committee, to substitute its own judgment
for that of the Committee with respect to the meaning of “sums of money or
other securities”.  The fact that a considerable amount of time has passed
since the Committee rendered its decision is not an exceptional circumstance
that would warrant not remitting the case to the Committee.  The delay is
inherent to the judicial process.  There is no special reason that would
justify having the Court award compensation or determine the outcome of the
claim.  Such a conclusion would put the Court outside the boundaries of
judicial review. Cases Cited  By Gonthier J.  Approved:  Ayotte v. Boucher (1883), 9 S.C.R. 460;
referred to:  Comité administratif de l’Ordre des comptables agréés du
Québec v. Schwarz, [2001] R.J.Q. 920; Hinkova v. Ordre des pharmaciens
du Québec, [2000] Q.J. No. 1445 (QL); Fortin v. Chrétien,
[2001] 2 S.C.R. 500, 2001 SCC 45; R. v. Potvin, [1993]
2 S.C.R. 880; Blencoe v. British Columbia (Human Rights Commission),
[2000] 2 S.C.R. 307, 2000 SCC 44; Reference as to the
Validity of Section 6 of the Farm Security Act, 1944 of Saskatchewan,
[1947] S.C.R. 394; Travelers Insurance Co. of Canada v. Corriveau,
[1982] 2 S.C.R. 866; Laurentide Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City),
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 705.  By Deschamps
J. (dissenting)  Guilde des employés de Super Carnaval (Lévis) v. Tribunal du travail,
[1986] R.J.Q. 1556; Pelletier v. Cour du Québec, [2002] R.J.Q.
2215; Gardner v. Air Canada, J.E. 99-1143; Panneaux Vicply inc. v.
Guindon, J.E. 98-109; Commissaire à la déontologie policière v. Bourdon,
[2000] R.J.Q. 2239; Comité de déontologie policière v. Millette, J.E.
2000-591; Compagnie des transformateurs Philips Ltée v. Métallurgistes unis
d’Amérique, local 7812, [1985] C.A. 684; Matane (Ville de) v. Fraternité
des policiers et pompiers de la Ville de Matane inc., [1987] R.J.Q. 315;
Ordre des audioprothésistes du Québec v. Chanteur, [1996] R.J.Q. 539; Nova
Scotia (Workers’ Compensation Board) v. Martin, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 504, 2003
SCC 54.   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Act respecting the distribution of financial
products and services, R.S.Q., c. D-9.2, s. 274.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64,
arts. 1422, 1617, 1619, 1701.  Code of Civil Procedure, R.S.Q.,
c. C-25, arts. 846, 878.  Code of ethics of notaries, (2002) 134 O.G.
II, 4561, ss. 18, 30.   Law Society Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.8,
s. 51(5).  Legal Profession Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. L-8,
s. 89(2).  Legal Profession Act, S.B.C. 1998,
c. 9, s. 31(4).    Professional Code, R.S.Q., c. C-26,
s. 89.  Real Estate Brokerage Act, R.S.Q.,
c. C-73.1, s. 155.  Regulation respecting the application of the
Real Estate Brokerage Act, (1993) 125 O.G. II, 7041, ss. 28 et seq.  Regulation respecting the eligibility of a claim
submitted to the Fonds d’indemnisation des services financiers, (1999) 131
O.G. II, 2091.   Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the
Chambre des notaires du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981, c. N-2, r. 8,
ss. 2.01, 4.03, 4.04 [am. (1986) 118 O.G. II, 889].  Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the
Corporation professionnelle des administrateurs agréés du Québec, R.R.Q.
1981, c. C-26, r. 12, s. 2.01.  Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the
Corporation professionnelle des comptables généraux licenciés du Québec,
R.R.Q. 1981, c. C-26, r. 33, s. 2.01.  Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the
Ordre des comptables agréés du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981, c. C-48,
r. 6, s. 2.01.  Regulation respecting trust accounting by
bailiffs and the indemnity fund of the Chambre des huissiers de justice du
Québec, (1999) 131 O.G. II, 220, s. 21.  Authors Cited  Anonyme.  “Rôle du notaire dans l’acte sous seing
privé” (1911), 14 R. du N. 56.  Baudouin, Jean-Louis, et Patrice Deslauriers. 
La responsabilité civile, 6e éd.  Cowansville, Qué.: 
Yvon Blais, 2003.  Brown, Donald J. M., and
John M. Evans.  Judicial Review of Administrative Action in Canada. 
Toronto:  Canvasback, 2003.  Canadian Bar Association.  Special Committee on
Legal Ethics.  Code of Professional Conduct.  Toronto:  The Association,
1988.  Marquis, Paul-Yvan.  La responsabilité civile du
notaire.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1999.  Roy, Alain.  Déontologie et procédure
notariales.  Montréal:  Thémis, 2002.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal, [2001] R.R.A.
876, [2001] Q.J. No. 3900 (QL), affirming a judgment of the Superior
Court, [1997] R.J.Q. 1674, [1997] Q.J. No. 1038 (QL).  Appeal allowed,
Deschamps J. dissenting.   Sylvain Généreux and Sophie Lauzon, for the
respondent.  No one appearing for the intervener.  English version of the judgment of McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Major,
Bastarache, Binnie and LeBel JJ. were delivered by 1                                  
Gonthier J. — This appeal
concerns the decision of the Administrative Committee of the Chambre des
notaires du Québec (the “Administrative Committee”) not to indemnify the
succession of a woman defrauded by her notary.  For the reasons that follow, I
find that that decision is patently unreasonable and should be quashed.  I also
order the respondents to make the required indemnity.  I.  Facts  2                                  
Mrs. Marie-Rose Hamel Longpré was born in Sainte-Thérèse,
Quebec in 1915.  During the Second World War, she and her husband moved to the
nearby town of Blainville, where they built a house for themselves.  Her
husband died in action in the 1940s, only a few years after the move.  She
never remarried and had no children.   4                                  
As she aged, Mrs. Hamel began to decline mentally.  She suffered
from delusions and paranoia.  Still, she continued to live alone in her house. 
Mr. Nolan Filiatrault looked after her affairs.  He cashed her pension cheques
and tended to other business.  He described himself and his father, now
deceased, as Mrs. Hamel’s only friends.  5                                  
But Mr. Filiatrault’s friendship came at a price.  The notary, who
has since been disciplined by the Chambre and struck from the roll, took
advantage of Mrs. Hamel’s compromised state to defraud her.  He applied to
the federal government for back payment of Mrs. Hamel’s old age pension,
for which she had not applied for fear of losing her widow’s pension, then kept
the back payment of over $17,000 for himself.  He sold land owned by
Mrs. Hamel and misused the proceeds.  He even forged her signature to
withdraw funds from a trust account in her name.  Emboldened perhaps by the
success of these scams, he next turned his attention to Mrs. Hamel’s house.  6                                  
By private writing dated October 25, 1989, Mrs. Hamel sold her
home to her notary for $1 [translation]
“and other good and valuable consideration” (“et autres bonnes et valables
considérations”).  Mr. Filiatrault drafted the deed of sale himself. 
Mrs. Hamel signed it, in her tremulous hand, on October 25, 1989. 
Under Mr. Filiatrault’s signature one reads, “Me Nolan
Filiatrault, notaire”.  7                                  
Finally, Mr. Filiatrault instigated a protection proceeding in
respect of Mrs. Hamel’s person and property, although at this point there
was little left, financially speaking, to protect.  The proceeding was formally
brought by Mrs. Hamel’s nephew, Jean-Paul Giguère.  It required an
examination of Mrs. Hamel pursuant to art. 878 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, R.S.Q., c. C-25.  When asked whom she wanted to take care of her
and her affairs, Mrs. Hamel replied, [translation]
“Mr. Filiatrault”.  When asked why, she said simply, [translation] “Because I need a lawyer”.  8                                  
Mr. Filiatrault began trying to sell Mrs. Hamel’s property
almost as soon as he acquired it.  His efforts aroused the suspicion of
Mrs. Hamel’s brother, Mr. Josephat Hamel.  Mr. Hamel consulted
his notary and wrote a letter of complaint to the syndic of the Chambre des notaires
du Québec (the “Chambre”).  So too did Mr. Giguère, who was now
Mrs. Hamel’s curator under the protection order.  A representative of the
Chambre (which is the respondent in this appeal) replied to Mr. Hamel
nearly four months later.  He said that he had spoken to Mr. Filiatrault
about the matter and was satisfied Mr. Hamel’s complaint was unfounded. 
He noted that Mrs. Hamel herself had made no complaint.  He advised
Mr. Hamel that the file was now closed.  In a similar letter to counsel
for Mr. Giguère, the Chambre’s representative described the sale as a
personal transaction between Mr. Filiatrault and Mrs. Hamel.  Meanwhile
Mr. Filiatrault sold the property in three parts for a total sale price of
$550,000. Mrs. Hamel relocated to a seniors’ residence.  9                                  
Mr. Giguère continued to contest the sale. Finally in late 1995
Marx J. of the Superior Court of Quebec annulled the transaction.  The evidence
before him was that Mrs. Hamel had been legally incompetent since the late
1970s and that she placed blind trust in Mr. Filiatrault.  She would sign
anything he asked her to, when he did not simply forge her signature himself. 
Marx J.’s annulment of the deed of sale came too late for Mrs. Hamel, who
died earlier that year.  The court ordered Mr. Filiatrault to reimburse
the Hamel succession (the “succession”) over $1 million.  10                              
Predictably, Mr. Filiatrault was bankrupt.  He could not reimburse
the succession.  Mrs. Hamel’s heirs therefore looked to the Chambre.  Like
other professions in Quebec, notaries are under a statutory obligation to
establish an indemnity fund:  Professional Code, R.S.Q., c. C-26,
s. 89.  The Chambre’s fund was established by the Regulation respecting
the indemnity fund of the Chambre des notaires du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981,
c. N-2, r. 8 (the “Regulation”).  The succession claimed
reimbursement from this fund, both in respect of Mrs. Hamel’s house (a
claim of $900,000) and other misappropriations.  Following its ordinary
procedure, the Chambre’s Comité du fonds d’indemnisation (the “Indemnity
Committee”) studied the claim.  It recommended that certain amounts be repaid
to the succession, but recommended refusal of the claim in respect of
Mrs. Hamel’s house on the ground that Mr. Filiatrault was not acting
in the exercise of his profession when he swindled it from Mrs. Hamel and
therefore his actions did not come within the terms of the regulation governing
the indemnity fund.  The Indemnity Committee’s recommendations were later
adopted by the Administrative Committee on behalf of the Chambre.  11                              
Mr. Giguère, acting for the succession, sought judicial review of
the Administrative Committee’s decision.  Hurtubise J. of the Superior
Court refused the application.  He noted in particular that the privative
clause in s. 4.03 of the Regulation shielded the Administrative
Committee’s decisions from judicial review.  He concluded that the
Administrative Committee’s decision was reviewable on a standard of patent
unreasonableness, that the decision was not patently unreasonable, and that it
must therefore stand.  The succession’s appeal to the Quebec Court of Appeal
was dismissed.  That appeal, and the appeal to this Court, were brought by
Serge Giguère, who succeeded to the position of curator upon the death of
Jean-Paul Giguère.  II.  Standard of Review  12                              
The standard of review was not disputed before us.  The parties agree
that, given the privative clause in s. 4.03 of the Regulation, the
standard of review is patent unreasonableness.  The question at issue is
whether the decision not to indemnify the succession was patently unreasonable.  III.  Analysis  13                              
The Indemnity Committee’s decision not to indemnify the succession was
based on the Indemnity Committee’s interpretation of s. 2.01 of the
Regulation, which interpretation was adopted by the Administrative Committee. 
Section 2.01 reads:  The Bureau shall establish an indemnity fund to be used to reimburse
the sums of money or other securities used by a notary for purposes other than
those for which they had been delivered to him in the practice of his
profession.  The two
committees agreed that Mrs. Hamel’s home was not delivered to
Mr. Filiatrault in the practice of his profession.  They characterized
Mr. Filiatrault’s defrauding of Mrs. Hamel as a personal rather than
a professional act, and found that only professional acts may be indemnified
out of the indemnity fund.  With respect, I am of the view that this decision
betrays a misunderstanding of the relationship between Mrs. Hamel and
Mr. Filiatrault, the duties of notaries, and the nature of the indemnity
fund, and that this Court cannot permit it to stand.  The analysis of the relationship
between Mrs. Hamel and Filiatrault is patently unreasonable and leads to a
result which is also patently unreasonable.  I would quash the decision and
order the Chambre to indemnify the succession.  A.  Notaries and the Indemnity Fund  14                              
The law governing notaries at the time the events of this appeal took
place was the Notarial Act, R.S.Q., c. N-2. Section 2(1) of that
Act described notaries as “legal practitioners and public officers whose chief
duty is to draw up and execute deeds and contracts to which the parties are
bound or desire to give the character of authenticity attached to acts of the
public authority and to assure the date thereof”. Section 15(b)
provided that one of the “chief duties of every notary” shall be “to observe in
the practice of his profession the rules of the most scrupulous honesty and
impartiality”.  The Notarial Act has now been largely repealed and
replaced by the Notaries Act, R.S.Q., c. N-3.  Yet the characterization
of notaries as both legal advisers and public officers, and the notary’s duty
of impartiality, are restated in the new legislation at ss. 10 and 11,
respectively.  15                              
Complementing the Notarial Act was the Code of ethics of
notaries, R.R.Q. 1981, c. N-2, r. 3 (the “Code”).  The Code has
since been repealed and replaced, but was in force at the time of the events at
issue in this appeal.  The Code affirmed the requirement of notarial
impartiality at several points.  Section 3.01.05 required a notary to give
to clients or to parties to an act “disinterested, frank and honest” advice.
Section 3.04.01 provided:  “A notary must subordinate his personal
interest to that of his client.”  Section 3.03.04 provided that a notary may
not cease to act for the account of a client unless he has “sound and
reasonable grounds”, such as “the fact that the notary is in a situation of
conflict of interest”.  These provisions of the Code are restated and, in some
cases, expanded upon, in the new Code of ethics of notaries, O.C.
921-2002, (2002) 134 O.G. II, 4561.  For instance, s. 30 of the new Code
provides that no notary may be in a situation of conflict of interest, and
defines a situation of conflict of interest as “where the interests are such
that [the notary] may be inclined to give preference to some of them, or his
judgment or loyalty may be unfavourably affected”.  16                              
The requirement of impartiality governs the duty of notaries to advise
their clients and the parties to acts they prepare.  As Roy explains:  [translation] “[n]otaries maintain their
impartiality by informing each party to the act of the scope of the rights and
obligations that may result from it”:  A. Roy, Déontologie et procédure
notariales (2002), at p. 16.  This duty to advise was found in Code
s. 3.02.04, and is now declared in s. 11 of the Notaries Act,
but it found its earliest expression in Quebec law in the judgment of this
Court in Ayotte v. Boucher (1883), 9 S.C.R. 460.  Mr. Ayotte
fraudulently procured the signature by Dr. Boucher’s children of a deed
that made them responsible for their dead father’s debts.  The deed was drawn
up by a notary who, having prepared it, refused to receive it because he
believed that Dr. Boucher’s children would not sign it if they knew its
true effect.  Mr. Ayotte therefore sent for another notary.  This second
notary passed and executed the deed without giving Dr. Boucher’s children
any explanation of its legal effect.  This Court annulled the deed and held
that it is the duty of a notary to advise his clients of the legal consequences
of their acts.  Both notaries, Fournier J. explained, at p. 476, acted
unlawfully,  [translation]  but the
more blameworthy of the two is without doubt the one who, knowing perfectly
well that the Appellant intended to commit an act of fraud, said and did
nothing to stop him.  In executing this deed drawn up in advance, the other
notary could claim that he was under the impression that the parties had
thoroughly discussed everything before he arrived.  This apparently well
documented explanation would clear him of any involvement in the fraud
committed by the Appellant, but he nevertheless breached his professional
duties by failing to ascertain for himself the nature of the agreements he was
to authenticate.  If a notary’s duties were understood and practised in this
manner, the profession would be a dangerous institution rather than one that is
judge-like and so useful for society in general.  17                              
Abuses of notarial power such as this are not, sadly, a thing of the
past.  For this reason, the Chambre (like all professional bodies in Quebec) is
required by the Professional Code to establish an indemnity fund.  The
purpose of this fund, and indeed the purpose of the Professional Code
more generally, is the protection of the public:  Comité administratif de
l’Ordre des comptables agréés du Québec v. Schwarz, [2001] R.J.Q. 920
(C.A.), at paras. 112 and 117-18, per Fish J.A. (dissenting); Hinkova
v. Ordre des pharmaciens du Québec, [2000] Q.J. No. 1445 (QL) (C.A.). 
The need for such a fund arises in part from the limits of professional
liability insurance. Such insurance may protect professionals and their clients
from the consequences of professional mistake, inadvertence and negligence, but
generally does not cover intentional acts of misconduct.  In this sense,
statutory indemnity funds pick up where private insurance leaves off.  This is
not to say that malice or fraud are necessary preconditions of reimbursement
from the indemnity fund.  However, where such factors are present, professional
liability insurance will generally be of no assistance.  The only recourses
left to victims in such cases will be lawsuits against the notary himself (who
may be bankrupt or missing) and claims against the indemnity fund.  18                              
As I have noted, the notarial indemnity fund was established by the
Regulation, s. 2.01 of which reads:  The Bureau shall establish an indemnity fund to be used to reimburse
the sums of money or other securities used by a notary for purposes other than
those for which they had been delivered to him in the practice of his
profession.  This provision
is notably similar to s. 4.02.01(b) of the Code, which described as
“derogatory to the dignity of the profession” an act of “misappropriating or
using for purposes other than those authorized by the client the monies or
securities entrusted to the notary in the practice of his profession”.  In my
view, these two provisions must be read together.  Section 4.02.01(b)
of the Code establishes the ethical norm.  Section 2.01 of the Regulation
establishes the fund out of which violations of the ethical norm are remedied. 
The two provisions operate in tandem.  See Schwarz, supra, at
para. 92.  B.  The Administrative Committee’s Decision  19                              
I have noted that the Administrative Committee adopted the decision of
the Indemnity Committee not to indemnify the succession in respect of
Mrs. Hamel’s home.  This decision was pronounced in two stages.  20                              
First, on May 3, 1996, the Administrative Committee made the
following declaration:  [translation] THAT the
Administrative Committee note the recommendation that there be partial refusal
of this claim for $900,000.00 representing the value of the property sold by
Marie-Rose Hamel to Nolan Filiatrault, which sale was annulled pursuant to a
judgment rendered by the Honourable Herbert Marx J.S.C. on December 4, 1995,
since Nolan Filiatrault, whatever the nature of any actions he may have taken,
in relation to the property concerned, was not acting in the practice of his
profession within the meaning of the Regulation respecting the indemnity fund.  Following this
pronouncement, Mr. Giguère applied for judicial review of the
Administrative Committee’s decision.  21                              
Next, on December 13, 1996, the Administrative Committee made a
second declaration, which read in part as follows:  [translation] WHEREAS
Nolan Filiatrault was not acting “in the practice of his profession” within the
meaning of the Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the Chambre des
notaires du Québec;                                                                     . . .  WHEREAS the property was not, in any way, “delivered” to Nolan
Filiatrault “in the practice of his profession” within the meaning of the
Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the Chambre des notaires du Québec;  WHEREAS the property was not “used” by Nolan Filiatrault “for purposes
other than those for which [it] had been delivered to him” within the meaning
of the Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the Chambre des notaires
du Québec;  WHEREAS the Indemnity Fund Committee, in its recommendation, and the
Administrative Committee took into account that witnesses could have been
called to testify to what is alleged in Jean-Paul Giguère’s application for
mandamus, evocation and judicial review of November 1, 1996 and, in
particular, the allegations made at paragraphs 10, 28, 31 and 42(1) through (5)
of that application;  Upon motion duly made and seconded, IT IS HEREBY UNANIMOUSLY RESOLVED:  THAT the Administrative Committee ratify the recommendation of the Indemnity
Fund Committee and consequently refuse the claim for the sum of $900,000
representing the value of the property sold by Marie-Rose Hamel to Nolan
Filiatrault, that sale having been annulled pursuant to a judgment rendered by
the Honourable Herbert Marx J.S.C. on December 4, 1995.  22                              
The reference to Mr. Giguère’s judicial review application is
illuminating. The passages referred to by the Administrative Committee indicate
that Mr. Giguère was prepared to prove to the Indemnity Committee, by way
of witness testimony, several matters concerning Mrs. Hamel’s mental
competence and Mr. Filiatrault’s professional conduct.  In particular,
Mr. Giguère was prepared to prove:  that Mrs. Hamel, in signing the
deed of sale, relied on her notary in his role as an impartial legal counsel;
that a syndic of the Chambre des notaires had in his possession an
authorization from Mrs. Hamel, dating from 1983, which he had failed to
disclose and which had convinced him that the Hamel-Filiatrault transaction was
outside of the scope of Mr. Filiatrault’s notarial practice; that
Mrs. Hamel had been notoriously mentally incompetent since at least 1975;
and that Mrs. Hamel had absolute confidence in her notary.  The
Administrative Committee’s decision makes clear that it considered the
availability of this evidence in arriving at its conclusion.  Yet it
nevertheless refused the succession’s claim.  23                              
The Administrative Committee’s decision to refuse the succession’s claim
turned on its view that Mr. Filiatrault was not in the exercise of his
profession when he advised and acted for Mrs. Hamel on the sale of her
home.  In the words of the Indemnity Committee (which were substantially
repeated by the Administrative Committee in its decision of May 3, 1996),
[translation] “whatever the
nature of any actions he may have taken in relation to that property, Nolan
Filiatrault was acting in his personal capacity and not in the practice of his
profession”: minutes of the review meeting of the Indemnity Committee held at
the head office of the Chambre des notaires du Québec, April 3-4, 1996;
see also minutes of the 57th meeting of the Administrative Committee,
May 3, 1996.  The supposedly personal nature of Mr. Filiatrault’s act
demands scrutiny.   25                              
The professional, rather than personal, nature of the relationship is
not only true as a matter of fact but required as a matter of law.  I have
already noted the statutory and ethical responsibilities of notaries to advise
their clients impartially. Mr. Filiatrault’s professional duty impartially
to advise Mrs. Hamel was engaged by this transaction.  In Fortin v.
Chrétien, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 500, 2001 SCC 45, I had occasion to comment on
the other branch of the Quebec legal profession, namely advocates.  I said (at
para. 17):  “As persons in whom public trust is invested, advocates play a very
special role in the community when they perform . . . acts reserved
to them”.  The same is true of the role of notaries in the performance of acts
reserved to them.  It should go without saying that this role is a professional
not a personal one.  Personal transactions between legal professionals and
their clients are not to be encouraged.  If they occur, these transactions must
be conducted with great caution by lawyers and notaries in order to avoid
conflicts between their obligations arising from the position of trust they
hold with their clients and their personal interests.  The principles
established by the Canadian Bar Association are instructive:  (a)  The lawyer should not enter into a business transaction with the
client or knowingly give to or acquire from the client an ownership, security
or other pecuniary interest unless:  (i)    the transaction is a fair and reasonable one
and its terms are fully disclosed to the client in writing in a manner that is
reasonably understood by the client;  (ii)    the client is given a reasonable
opportunity to seek independent legal advice about the transaction, the onus
being on the lawyer to prove that the client’s interests were protected by such
independent advice; and  (iii)   the client consents in writing to the
transaction.  (b)  The lawyer shall not enter into or continue a business transaction
with the client if:  (i)    the client expects or might reasonably be
assumed to expect that the lawyer is protecting the client’s interests;  (ii)    there is a significant risk that the
interests of the lawyer and the client may differ.  (Canadian Bar Association, Code of Professional Conduct, c. VI)  While the
CBA’s Code of Professional Conduct is not directly applicable to all
notaries in Quebec, the principles enunciated here should nevertheless be borne
in mind whenever a notary contemplates a business transaction with his client.  26                              
The fact that the transaction in question took the form of private
writing must not obscure the issue.  It has sometimes been suggested that a
notary who proceeds by private writing, rather than by an authentic act, no
longer acts in a professional capacity and is therefore not under the usual
duty to give advice.  Thus a note in the September 1911 volume of La Revue
du Notariat explained:  [translation] 
The case law is consistent in confirming that even if a notary, in the capacity
of an adviser, takes part in the drafting of a private writing, this in no way
changes the essential character of the writing. The notary is no longer acting
in his or her professional capacity, but rather as a mere adviser or agent of
the parties; consequently, the act does not take on the character, status or
effects of an authentic act.  The fee for a notarial deed is not charged for
drawing up the writing, and the notary assumes no responsibility for the form
or substance of the writing.  From a legal standpoint, the effects of the
document are and remain those of a private writing.  (Anonymous,
“Rôle du notaire dans l’acte sous seing privé” (1911), 14 R. du N. 56) 
I agree, of course, that the mere fact that a notary has drawn up the private
writing does not render it an authentic act for the purposes of the Civil
Code.  But I cannot agree with the assertion that a notary may evade all
professional responsibility simply by electing one form of writing over
another.  Indeed, the duty of an independent legal advisor remains the same in
these circumstances regardless of the form of the writing.  This conclusion
follows from the principle animating this Court’s decision in Ayotte v.
Boucher, supra. It is also consistent with the doctrine, as
Professor Marquis has demonstrated:  P.-Y. Marquis, La responsabilité civile
du notaire (1999), at pp. 168-69. I consider his conclusion on this
point irrefutable:  [translation]
We do not believe that, in principle, the notary’s duty to act as legal adviser
should be associated exclusively with the particular form an act takes.
. . . This informational obligation is an integral part of the
profession.  In all likelihood it cannot necessarily be set aside so easily.  We are also of the opinion that even if a notary, of
his or her own accord or at a client’s request, prefers to use a private
writing instead of an authentic act, the notary is not thereby inevitably and
automatically relieved of the duty to advise . . . We must instead
take into account the specific circumstances of each case, the importance of
the notary’s contribution to the drafting of the act and the degree of trust
that the client demonstrably placed in the notary.  In short, the
fact that this transaction occurred by private writing does not in any sense
render it a personal act rather than an act done by Mr. Filiatrault in the
exercise of his profession. In this transaction as in all others,
Mr. Filiatrault had a professional duty impartially to advise his client. 
To think otherwise is not only mistaken. It is a serious misunderstanding of
notaries’ duties as described in the Notarial Act, the doctrine, and the
jurisprudence.  27                              
Any characterization of the Hamel-Filiatrault transaction as personal
rather than professional must also be considered in the light of the purposes of
the indemnity fund.  As I have explained, one of those purposes is to protect
clients from misdeeds by notaries that, due to their intentional nature, will
not be covered by professional liability insurance.  The case at bar is a
perfect example: the Indemnity Committee acknowledged the unrefuted evidence of
Mr. Filiatrault’s numerous false representations to Mrs. Hamel.  Yet
by characterizing the transaction as personal, the two Committees took
Mr. Filiatrault’s fraud outside the scope of the fund, thus revoking the
very protection the fund is intended to give.  This decision opens a gap
between notaries’ ethical obligations, as set out in s. 4.02.01(b)
of the Code, and the remedy for breach of those obligations, which is supposed
to be provided, in the last resort, by the indemnity fund.  Not only is
Mrs. Hamel left unprotected, but the purpose of the fund itself is
frustrated.  28                              
To conclude, the transaction by which Mrs. Hamel unwittingly sold
her home to her notary for the derisory sum of $1 cannot in any sense be
reasonably characterized as personal rather than professional.  In accepting
the Indemnity Committee’s conclusion that Mr. Filiatrault’s acts were
personal rather than professional, and were therefore beyond the scope of the
indemnity fund, the Administrative Committee made a fundamental error.  One
might object that it is a legal error and is shielded by the privative clause
in Regulation s. 4.03.  But it is so gross an error, predicated on such a
basic misunderstanding of the professional responsibilities of notaries in
Quebec law, the relationship between Mrs. Hamel and Mr. Filiatrault,
and the purposes of the indemnity fund that this Court cannot permit it to
stand.  It is a patently unreasonable result.  C.  Remedy  29                              
Given the patent unreasonableness of the Administrative Committee’s
decision, I would quash it.  The only reason the Chambre gave for not
indemnifying the succession was its patently unreasonable conclusion that
Mr. Filiatrault was acting in a personal capacity when he defrauded Mrs. Hamel. 
If that was the only bar to indemnifying the succession, then it is clear the
succession must now be indemnified.  30                              
In oral argument before this Court, counsel for the Chambre raised a new
argument. Instead of seeking to defend the Administrative Committee’s decision
solely on its own terms, he raised a further argument to the effect that no
indemnity was payable to the succession because Mrs. Hamel’s house does
not come within the terms of the Regulation.  It is not, in the words of the
Regulation, a sum of money or other security.  Thus, even if the Chambre had
not made its patently unreasonable decision, it would still not have been able
to indemnify the succession.  31                              
There is no reason to believe that this limited understanding of “other
security” advanced now by the respondent actually informed the Administrative
Committee’s decision (or, for that matter, the Indemnity Committee’s
decision).  To the contrary, there is every reason to presume that the decision
was taken entirely on the basis of the unreasonable characterization of
Mr. Filiatrault’s acts as personal rather than professional, for that is
the only reason which the two Committees themselves gave.  32                              
In any case, this submission disregards the judgment of December 4,
1995 annulling the contract of sale between Mr. Filiatrault and
Mrs. Hamel.  The relevant portions of this order are as follows.  [translation] FOR THESE
REASONS, THE COURT  ANNULS the deed of sale . . . insofar as the parties to this case
are concerned . . . such that the Plaintiff [Mr. Giguère] ès qualités
be substituted for the Defendant as creditor of the proceeds from later sales
made in respect of the same property, without prejudice to the rights of third
parties, including the purchasers;  ORDERS the Defendant to pay the Plaintiff ès qualités the sum of
$900,000, plus interest and additional indemnities provided for under the Civil
Code; .
. .  33                              
The legal consequences of annulling a contract are set out in the Civil
Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64.  Article 1422 C.C.Q. provides:  “A
contract that is null is deemed never to have existed.” Thus, as between
Mrs. Hamel and Mr. Filiatrault, the deed of sale of October 25,
1989 is void and must be treated as having never occurred.  Seen in the light
of arts. 1422 and 1701, it is clear that our concern is not with
Mrs. Hamel’s house but with its value and at least the proceeds
Mr. Filiatrault earned from selling it to third party purchasers.  There
is no disputing that those proceeds are sums of money.  34                              
It has been argued that this Court, having quashed the Administrative
Committee’s decision, should send the matter back for reconsideration of the
“other security” point.  Under the circumstances, I cannot agree with this
approach.  There is no dispute as to quantum (other than the questions of
interest at the legal rate and additional indemnity, which I address below).  This
is the first time since these proceedings began in 1995 that the Chambre,
either in its Committees or in the courts below, has raised an argument on the
meaning of “other security”.  Indeed, the argument and the request that the
matter be sent back for reconsideration could not have been raised any later
than it was, for it came to us for the first time in oral argument at the
hearing.  This Court does not favour issues being raised for the first time in
an appeal to this Court: R. v. Potvin, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 880, at
p. 916.  Such belatedly raised arguments deprive the Court of the benefit
of consideration by the courts below, and may have other undesirable
consequences.  Here, to send the matter back to the Chambre on this point would
serve to reward it for the tardiness with which it has raised this argument. 
And of course it would delay matters even further.  The succession has been
seeking indemnity for eight years.  It should not be made to wait any longer. I
adopt as my own the words of LeBel J. (dissenting in part) in Blencoe
v. British Columbia (Human Rights Commission), [2000]
2 S.C.R. 307, 2000 SCC 44, at para. 140:  Unnecessary delay in judicial and administrative
proceedings has long been an enemy of a free and fair society.  At some point,
it is a foe that has plagued the life of almost all courts and administrative
tribunals.  It’s a problem that must be brought under control if we are to
maintain an effective system of justice, worthy of the confidence of
Canadians.  The tools for this task are not to be found only in the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms , but also in the principles of a flexible
and evolving administrative law system.  35                              
Given the circumstances of this appeal, I would exercise this Court’s
discretion not to send the matter back for reconsideration by the Chambre.  D.  Quantum  36                              
It remains to determine the amount of the indemnity. Section 4.04 of the
Regulation (as amended by O.C. 645-86, May 14, 1986) provides, “[t]he
maximum indemnity payable from the fund is established at 300 000 $
for the total claims against the same notary.”  The succession has already
received $112,535.96 out of these funds. This leaves a difference of
$187,464.04.  The parties do not dispute that the value of Mrs. Hamel’s
property and the proceeds from it exceed that figure.  The succession is
therefore entitled to the entire amount.  37                              
The succession is also claiming interest at the legal rate as provided
for by art. 1617 C.C.Q. plus the additional indemnity as provided for by
art. 1619 C.C.Q.  The Chambre contends that the $300,000 ceiling imposed by
s. 4.04 of the Regulation excludes any award of interest or additional
indemnity under the Civil Code.  It submits that the indemnity funds are
intended to reimburse misappropriated funds and not to pay interest on these
funds.  The Chambre cites no authority for either of these propositions.  38                              
The Chambre’s distinction between reimbursement and the payment of
interest is erroneous.  Interest is itself a form of reimbursement.  It
reimburses the creditor for the period in which she did not have possession of
the funds that were owed to her.  As Rand J. explained in Reference as to
the Validity of Section 6 of the Farm Security Act, 1944 of Saskatchewan,
[1947] S.C.R. 394, at p. 411, “[i]nterest is, in general terms, the return
or consideration or compensation for the use or retention by one person of a
sum of money, belonging to, in a colloquial sense, or owed to, another.”  39                              
The right to be reimbursed or compensated for the retention of one’s
money by another is of great importance.  Without it, a person in possession of
another person’s funds would have an incentive not to restore the funds to
their rightful owner in a timely fashion.  Instead, it would be in his interest
to delay repayment and invest the funds for his own purposes.  When, for
whatever reason, he could no longer tarry, he could return the capital to its
owner and keep the accrued interest for himself.  This is obviously an unjust
and undesirable situation.  The Civil Code attempts to prevent this
outcome by means of art. 1617.  Accepting the Chambre’s argument would
amount to permitting it to rely on s. 4.04 of the Regulation to engage in
just the sort of unjust delay I have described. I do not say that this is what
the Chambre has done; I do not doubt its good faith.  My point is simply that
to accept the Chambre’s argument would open the way to potential abuse.  I
refuse to do so.  40                              
As I read s. 4.04 of the Regulation, the $300,000 limit is not a
constraint on awards of interest at the legal rate under art. 1617 C.C.Q. 
Rather, it is a constraint on the award of indemnity that the Chambre itself
may grant for the total claims against the same notary.  That constraint
applies not only to the Chambre but also to the remedy this Court is permitted
to grant the succession.  Although Mrs. Hamel’s property was worth far
more than $300,000, we may not order the Chambre to grant an indemnity greater
than that amount.  Section 4.04 does not prevent us, however, from
granting the succession an award of interest at the legal rate.  41                              
Nor does s. 4.04 of the Regulation oust this Court’s power under
art. 1619 C.C.Q. to award an additional indemnity.  Articles 1617 and
1619 both seek to compensate creditors for not having access to their funds and
to encourage debtors to restore such funds promptly.  In short, the additional
indemnity represents compensation for the damage due to delay:  Travelers
Insurance Co. of Canada v. Corriveau, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 866, at
p. 875; Laurentide Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1 S.C.R.
705, at p. 834.  The need for an additional indemnity arises when the
legal rate of interest fails adequately to compensate the creditor because it
is lower than the going rates.  As Baudouin and Deslauriers explain,  [translation] [i]n times
of inflation, a legal rate of 5% was unrealistic, as it fell well short of the
commercial rate or the rate that could be obtained on the open market.  It was
therefore not in the interest of a would-be debtor to pay the debt owed to his
or her victim.  It would take several years before the debtor would finally be
ordered to pay the full amount, plus 5% interest.  In the meantime, that money
could instead be invested at a much higher rate, a rate that was often more
than twice the legal rate of 5%.  (J.-L. Baudouin and P. Deslauriers, La responsabilité civile
(6th ed. 2003), at p. 419)  To deny the
availability of additional indemnity on the ground of s. 4.04’s $300,000
limit would give rise to the same potential abuses as I have already described
in respect of the legal rate of interest.  42                              
I therefore conclude that the succession is entitled to the amount of
$187,464.04 out of the indemnity fund plus interest at the legal rate and
additional indemnity, both payable from the date of default.  That date is
May 3, 1996, being the date on which the Administrative Committee rendered
its patently unreasonable decision not to indemnify the succession.  The
succession will also have its costs throughout.  English version of the reasons delivered by  43                              
Deschamps J. (dissenting) — There is no question that the
notary, Mr. Filiatrault, behaved reprehensibly and shamefully abused his
victim.  However, our sympathy for the victim should not cause us to forget
that the issue before the Court is limited to determining whether, according to
a standard of review requiring great judicial deference, the lower courts erred
in refusing to intervene and quash the decision of the Comité administratif de
la Chambre des notaires (the “Committee”).  44                              
With respect for the opinion of my colleagues, I am of the view that it
would not be appropriate for the Court to intervene.  In my view, s. 2.01
of the  Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the Chambre des notaires
du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981, c. N-2, r. 8 (the “Regulation”), lends
itself to more than one reasonable interpretation, and the interpretation
adopted by the tribunal of competent jurisdiction is not unreasonable.  45                              
Even if I agreed with the majority that it would be appropriate for the
Court to intervene, I would refer the case back to the Committee in order for
it to deal with aspects of the claim it has not yet ruled on.  I believe that
the majority position oversteps the boundaries of judicial review, which
permits judges to examine the legality of a decision but only allows them to
rule on the merits in limited cases.  I.  More Than One Possible Interpretation of Section 2.01 of the
Regulation  46                              
To determine the scope of the protection afforded by the Regulation, it
is useful to recall the requirements which give rise to the application of
s. 2.01 of the Regulation.  The section reads as follows:  2.01.  The Bureau shall establish an indemnity fund to be used
to reimburse the sums of money or other securities used by a notary for
purposes other than those for which they had been delivered to him in the
practice of his profession.  Four elements
must therefore be established in order to give rise to the protection:  (1)
there must be sums of money or other securities; (2) they must have been
delivered to the notary; (3) they must have been delivered in
the practice of his profession; and (4) the notary must have used
them for purposes other than those for which they had been delivered to
him.  47                              
Contrary to the majority’s analysis, I cannot conclude that the
Committee’s decision was founded solely on its opinion that the notary was not
acting in the practice of his profession.  48                              
Although brief, the December 13, 1996 decision of the Committee
addresses three of the four elements in s. 2.01.  These three elements are
emphasized in the decision:                                                                     .
. .  [translation] WHEREAS
Nolan Filiatrault was not acting “in the practice of his profession” within the
meaning of the Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the Chambre des
notaires du Québec;                                                                     .
. .  WHEREAS the property was not, in any way, “delivered” to Nolan
Filiatrault “in the practice of his profession” within the meaning of the
Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the Chambre des notaires du Québec;  WHEREAS the property was not “used” by Nolan Filiatrault “for purposes
other than those for which [it] had been delivered to him” within the meaning
of the Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the Chambre des notaires
du Québec;                                                                     . . .  49                              
Thus, even if I were of the opinion that the victim would never have had
any dealings with Mr. Filiatrault had he not been her notary and,
consequently, that he was acting in the practice of his profession, I could not
conclude, because of the deference owed to administrative tribunals in a case
such as this, that the Committee’s decision justified the Court’s
intervention.  There are other factors at play here.  50                              
The Committee concluded that the property had not been delivered to
Mr. Filiatrault in the practice of his profession, and that he had not
used it for purposes other than those for which it had been delivered.  This
conclusion is founded on several cumulative conditions.  Consequently, even if,
in the opinion of a court, one of the conditions was met, that does not mean
that the victim must be indemnified.  Assuming that the notary
acted in the practice of his profession, the other three conditions still have
to be examined before ruling on the entitlement to  indemnification.  51                              
A notary’s use of property for a purpose other than that contemplated by
the client upon delivery presupposes, on the one hand, that the client has
voluntarily delivered the property for a specific purpose and, on the other,
that the client has given instructions for its custody, management and
disposition.  Such delivery and instructions do not fit neatly in a case in
which the client’s property has been taken without his or her knowledge,
through extortion or fraud, for example.  Since the requirements are difficult
to reconcile with these reprehensible acts, one could perhaps conclude that
such acts are not covered by the Regulation and that an interpretation excluding
them would be neither incorrect nor unreasonable.  These observations apply to
two of the requirements under s. 2.01 of the Regulation that the Committee
ruled on, but there is more.  52                              
The Committee did not consider the meaning of the words “sums of money or
other securities”.  The respondent raised a new argument before this Court,
submitting that the property cannot be characterised as “sums of money or other
securities”.  My colleagues for the majority find that this argument comes too
late and is without foundation.  They reason that, since the contract of sale
between the notary and the victim was annulled, our concern is not with the
property, but rather the proceeds received by the notary when it was sold.  The
proceeds would then unquestionably constitute “sums of money” within the
meaning of the Regulation (see para. 33 of the majority opinion).  I find
this approach inappropriate for a number of reasons.  53                              
First, this approach assumes that the argument necessarily had to be
raised before the Committee and addressed by it.  I cannot accept this
position.  Indeed, in the Committee’s opinion, the claim should have been
refused because three of the prerequisites to protection were not met.  We must
consider whether the Committee necessarily had to rule on the fourth
prerequisite.  Administrative tribunals cannot be expected to conduct an
exhaustive examination of all possible grounds that could potentially support
their decision in order to protect themselves against the intervention of a court
of law.  Such a requirement would considerably increase the scope of a
tribunal’s obligation to give reasons for its decisions.  54                              
Second, equating the property with a sum of money imposes an ex post
facto analysis of the nature of the property delivered.  This
interpretation does not square well with the context of the Regulation, which
calls for the property to be characterized upon its delivery, rather than after
its conversion or disposition.  This meaning results from reading s. 2.01
of the Regulation together with s. 89 of the Professional Code,
R.S.Q., c. C-26, which requires professional orders to establish an indemnity
fund.  The first paragraph of this section reads as follows:  89.  The Bureau of an order whose members are called upon to
hold sums of money or other securities for the account of their clients must,
subject to the provisions of the Public Curator Act (chapter C-81) pertaining
to unclaimed property, determine by regulation the terms, conditions and
standards for receipt, custody and disposition of the sums of money and
securities so held, and the terms, conditions and standards relating to the
keeping and auditing of trust accounts, books and registers of such members. 
The regulation shall establish an indemnity fund to be used to repay the
amounts of money or other securities used by a professional for purposes other
than those for which they had been delivered to him in the practice of his
profession and it shall fix the rules of administration and of investment of
the sums of money making up the fund.  Under this
section, a professional order must first establish the conditions for the
reception, custody and disposition of sums of money or securities held by a
professional, and then establish an indemnity fund.  It would therefore appear
that the property should be considered at its reception, rather than at the
time of sale, as the regulation establishes the conditions for the reception,
custody and disposition of property.  I do not claim that this is the only reasonable
interpretation, but it could, at the very least, have been the interpretation
given by a duly constituted administrative tribunal.  55                              
Furthermore, since s. 2.01 of the Regulation has a considerable
impact in Quebec, the administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction must,
first of all, consider how to interpret it.  All professional orders in Quebec
that are subject to s. 89 of the Professional Code have established
identical coverage (see for example the Regulation in question here; the Regulation
respecting the indemnity fund of the Barreau du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981, c.
B-1, r. 6, s. 1.01; the Regulation respecting the indemnity fund
of the Ordre des comptables agréés du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981, c. C-48, r.
6, s. 2.01; the Regulation respecting the indemnity fund of the
Corporation professionnelle des administrateurs agréés du Québec, R.R.Q.
1981, c. C-26, r. 12, s. 2.01; the Regulation respecting the
indemnity fund of the Corporation professionnelle des comptables généraux
licenciés du Québec, R.R.Q. 1981, c. C-26, r. 33, s. 2.01; and
the Regulation respecting trust accounting by bailiffs and the indemnity
fund of the Chambre des huissiers de justice du Québec, O.C. 153-99, (1999)
131 O.G. II, 220, s. 21).   57                              
Upon reading these other Quebec statutes, it becomes apparent that a
regulation explicitly specifying that coverage extends to sums of money or
other securities delivered to a notary and used for purposes other than those
authorized by the client can be interpreted differently from one that protects
against any dishonest transaction, whatever form it might take.  58                              
In some provinces, the scope of coverage is broader than in Quebec. 
Such is the case with lawyers in Alberta and British Columbia.  Section 31(4)
of the Legal Profession Act, S.B.C. 1998, c. 9, lists three
requirements governing eligibility for compensation:  “(a) money or other
property was entrusted to or was otherwise received by a lawyer in the
lawyer’s capacity as a barrister and solicitor, (b) the lawyer misappropriated
or wrongfully converted the money or other property, and (c) a person
sustained a pecuniary loss as a result of that misappropriation or
wrongful conversion” (emphasis added).  Section 89(2) of the Legal Profession
Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. L-8, provides that “[i]f a member misappropriates
or wrongfully converts money or other property entrusted to or received
by a member in the member’s capacity as a barrister and solicitor and in the
course of the member’s practice as a barrister and solicitor, a person entitled
to the money or other property may submit a claim to the Society for
compensation from the Assurance Fund” (emphasis added).  In Ontario, the
differences from the Quebec plan are even more apparent.  Section 51(5) of the Law
Society Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.8, reads as follows:  “Convocation in
its absolute discretion may make grants from the Compensation Fund in order to
relieve or mitigate loss sustained by any person in consequence of
dishonesty on the part of any member in connection with such member’s law
practice or in connection with any trust of which the member was or is a
trustee. . . .” (emphasis added).  The eligibility
requirements of these plans are more flexible than those of the funds governed
by s. 89 of the Professional Code.  The contrast serves to highlight the
distinctively less generous nature of the Quebec plan at issue here.  59                              
Moreover, it is far from certain that the meaning of the expression “or
other securities” in the English version of s. 2.01 of the Regulation would be
sufficiently broad to include immovable property.  60                              
Finally, the approach and conclusion adopted by the majority mean that
administrative tribunals are left no margin for interpretation.  This is a case
in which we are not concerned about the opinion of a specialized
decision-maker.  According to the majority, the words “sums of money or other
securities” could have only one meaning, only one reasonable or correct
interpretation. In other words, this would be another case in which the
correctness standard has been confused with standards requiring a greater
degree of deference.  As I believe I have shown, the words “sums of money or
other securities” could very well designate the property as it was characterized
upon delivery.  Neither the analysis nor the conclusion made is in keeping with
the strong privative clause, the expertise of the Committee’s members, the
nature of the issue, which is a simple claim for indemnification, or the
purpose of the Regulation, which has its origins in s. 89 of the Professional
Code.  61                              
In my analysis, I have been careful to look to this Court’s case law on
the standard of review for guidance.  According to the elements of the
pragmatic and functional approach to which I alluded earlier, there can be no
question that the decision is central to the Committee’s jurisdiction and,
consequently, that the Committee has a wide margin for interpretation. 
Moreover, the parties agreed that the applicable standard was one of the
greatest deference.  62                              
In my opinion, it was not unreasonable for the Committee to conclude
that the property was not delivered to the notary and that he did not use it
for purposes other than those for which it had been delivered to him.  This is
not a case in which the Committee’s decision has no rational basis, nor is it a
case in which an error is apparent on the face of the record.  In other words,
it is not unreasonable to conclude that the unlawful act committed by
Mr. Filiatrault is more properly characterized as fraud, a dishonest
transaction or a fraudulent tactic than as a misappropriation of funds, and
that only a misappropriation of funds gives rise to indemnification under the
fund. It is far from obvious that the “escroquerie” (swindle),
as the Court of Appeal called it, perpetrated by Mr. Filiatrault would
fall within [translation] “the
scope of the right to indemnification” under s. 89 of the Professional
Code and s. 2.01 of the Regulation.  II.  Role of the Court in Judicial Review  63                              
As I have already mentioned, even if I had concluded that the decision
was unreasonable, I would still have referred the case back to the Committee so
that it could render a decision on the aspects of the case it had not yet ruled
on.  64                              
I have difficulty conceiving how the Court could, without usurping the
function of the Committee, substitute its own judgment for that of the
Committee with respect to the meaning of “sums of money or other securities”. 
There is no question that the Superior Court has very limited powers to review
decisions that are central to the jurisdiction of an administrative tribunal. 
The appellant entitled his application [translation]
“application for mandamus, issuance of an order for evocation and judicial
review”.  This is plainly not a case of mandamus.  Evocation and judicial
review are an exercise of the Superior Court’s supervisory power over
administrative tribunals.  This power is based on art. 846 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, R.S.Q., c. C-25.  LeBel J.A. (as he then was)
defined the scope and limits of judicial review in Guilde des employés de
Super Carnaval (Lévis) v. Tribunal du travail, [1986] R.J.Q. 1556 (C.A.),
at p. 1558:  [translation]
As fundamental and broad as this jurisdiction [the superintending and reforming
power of the Superior Court] may be, it  nevertheless remains  limited to
reviewing the activities of lower tribunals and administrative bodies to ensure
their regularity and legality and to uphold fundamental justice.  A higher
court will intervene to the extent required, but no more.  The court may not
assume the functions of lower tribunals.  Evocation is an appeal to the general
jurisdiction of the Superior Court to correct an irregularity or injustice.  It
is not a substitution of the Superior Court for the body or tribunal subject to
judicial review.  To conceive of judicial review as an instrument for
substituting the Superior Court for lower tribunals would violate the limits of
the Court’s role and impinge upon the jurisdictional autonomy of entities
subject to judicial review, as confirmed in recent case law of the Supreme
Court of Canada. [Emphasis added.]  See also Pelletier
v. Cour du Québec, [2002] R.J.Q. 2215 (C.A.); Gardner v. Air Canada,
J.E. 99-1143 (C.A.); Panneaux Vicply inc. v. Guindon, J.E. 98-109
(C.A.).  65                              
Consequently, once it has been determined that an administrative
tribunal has exceeded its jurisdiction by rendering an unreasonable decision on
a matter within its jurisdiction, the case must, in theory, be sent back to it:
Guilde, supra; Guindon, supra; Commissaire à la
déontologie policière v. Bourdon, [2000] R.J.Q. 2239 (C.A.); Comité de
déontologie policière v. Millette, J.E. 2000-591 (C.A.); Compagnie des
transformateurs Philips Ltée v. Métallurgistes unis d’Amérique, local 7812,
[1985] C.A. 684.   67                              
This rule is not enshrined in any statute.  Nevertheless, throughout
Canada, judicial review is founded on reviewing courts’ deference to the
expertise and discretion of administrative tribunals.  In Judicial Review of
Administrative Action in Canada (2003), authors D. J. M. Brown
and J. M. Evans make the following comments on the role of a
reviewing court (at para. 5:2210):   This Court
generally follows this rule (Nova Scotia (Workers’ Compensation Board) v.
Martin, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 504, 2003 SCC 54).  I see no reason to depart from
it here.  68                              
None of the exceptions that would allow a court to substitute its
opinion for that of the administrative tribunal applies here.  On the contrary,
everything weighs in favour of remitting the case to the Committee, since the
Committee has not ruled on an issue, has the legal authority and necessary
expertise to make a decision, and was not obliged to rule on this issue when it
considered the case, as it had already given three reasons for refusing the
claim.  Finally, the fact that a considerable amount of time has passed since
the Committee rendered its decision is not in my view an exceptional
circumstance that would warrant not remitting the case to the Committee. The
delay is inherent to the judicial process. If this delay were considered
exceptional, all appeals to the Supreme Court, and perhaps all appeals to the
Court of Appeal as well, would place the parties in exceptional circumstances.  69                              
There is another ground for remitting the present case.  There is no
special reason that would justify having the Court award compensation or
determine the outcome of the claim.  Such a conclusion would put us outside the
boundaries of judicial review.  The Court is not asked to consider the claim
itself; the Court’s function is limited to reviewing the legality of the
Committee’s decision.  The task of examining the case in its entirety and
reaching a decision is left to the administrative decision-maker.  III.  Conclusion  70                              
To sum up, sympathy for the victim cannot in my view result in a
casting aside of the rules of administrative law.  When a tribunal acts within
the limits of its jurisdiction, the reviewing court must show deference and
accept that a regulatory provision may have more than one interpretation.  In
the present case, the Committee could have provided more detailed reasons, but
that cannot be used as a pretext for having this Court substitute its judgment
for that of the Committee.  The importance of the provision to be interpreted
militates in favour of remitting the case to the tribunal.  It is not the place
of this Court to dictate to legislatures the extent of the protection clients
of professionals should enjoy.  ANNEX  Relevant Legislation  Professional
Code, R.S.Q., c. C-26    2.01.  The Bureau shall establish an indemnity fund to be used
to reimburse the sums of money or other securities used by a notary for
purposes other than those for which they had been delivered to him in the
practice of his profession.  4.03.  The Administrative Committee, upon the recommendation of
the committee, shall decide whether it is expedient to allow a claim in whole
or in part and, where necessary, shall fix the indemnity.  Its decision is
final.  4.04.  The maximum indemnity payable from the fund is
established at 300 000 $ for the total claims against the same
notary. . . .  Notarial
Act, R.S.Q., c. N-2  2. (1)  Notaries are legal practitioners and public officers
whose chief duty is to draw up and execute deeds and contracts to which the
parties are bound or desire to give the character of authenticity attached to
acts of the public authority and to assure the date thereof.  4. (1)  Every notary shall be called “notary” and his official
signature shall include the word “notary” following his usual signature.
. . .  15.  The chief duties of every notary, in addition to those
required of him by this Act, shall be:  .
. .  (b) to observe in the practice of his
profession the rules of the most scrupulous honesty and impartiality;   3.01.05.  A notary must give disinterested, frank and honest
advice to his clients or parties.  3.03.04.  Unless he has sound and reasonable grounds therefor, a
notary may not cease to act for the account of a client. The following shall,
in particular, constitute sound and reasonable grounds:  (a) loss of the client’s confidence;  (b) the fact that the notary is in a
situation of conflict of interest or in a situation such that his professional
independence could be called in question;  (c) inducement by the client to perform
illegal, unfair and fraudulent acts.  3.04.01.  A notary must subordinate his personal interest to
that of his client.  4.02.01.  In addition to those referred to in sections 57 and 58
of the Professional Code, the following acts are derogatory to the dignity of
the profession:  .
. .  (b)  misappropriating or using for purposes
other than those authorized by the client the monies or securities entrusted to
the notary in the practice of his profession;  Notaries
Act, R.S.Q., c. N-3  10.  A notary is a public officer and takes part in the
administration of justice. A notary is also a legal adviser.  The mission of a notary, in his or her capacity as a
public officer, is to execute acts which the parties wish or are required to
endow with the authenticity attaching to acts of public authority, to provide
such acts with a fixed date, and to keep all acts executed en minute in
his or her notarial records and issue copies of or extracts from them.   Code of
ethics of notaries, (2002) 134 O.G. II, 4561  18.  No notary shall use for his own purposes the monies,
securities, or other property entrusted to him in the practice of his
profession. In particular, he shall not use them as a personal loan or
security, or invest them to his own advantage, whether in his name, through an
intermediary, or on behalf of a legal person in which he owns an interest.  30.  No notary may be in a situation of conflict of interest.  A notary is in a situation of conflict of interest
where the interests are such that he may be inclined to give preference to some
of them, or his judgment or loyalty may be unfavourably affected.  As soon as the notary finds himself in a conflict of
interest, he shall cease to perform his duties.  Civil Code
of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64  1422.  A contract that is null is deemed never to have existed.  In such a case, each party is bound to restore to
the other the prestations he has received.  1617.  Damages which result from delay in the
performance of an obligation to pay a sum of money consist of interest at the
agreed rate or, in the absence of any agreement, at the legal rate.  The creditor is entitled to the damages from the
date of default without having to prove that he has sustained any injury.  A creditor may stipulate, however, that he will be
entitled to additional damages, provided he justifies them.  1619.  An indemnity may be added to the
amount of damages awarded for any reason, which is fixed by applying to the
amount of the damages, from either of the dates used in computing the interest
on them, a percentage equal to the excess of the rate of interest fixed for claims
of the State under section 28 of the Act respecting the Ministère du Revenu
over the rate of interest agreed by the parties or, in the absence of
agreement, over the legal rate.  1701.  In the case of total loss or
alienation of property subject to restitution, the person liable to make the
restitution is bound to return the value of the property, considered when it
was received, or at the time of its loss or alienation, or at the time of its
restitution, whichever value is the lowest, or, if the person is in bad faith
or if the restitution is due to his fault, whichever value is the highest.  If the property has perished by superior force,
however, the debtor is exempt from making restitution, but he shall then assign
to the creditor, as the case may be, the indemnity he has received for the loss
of the property or, if he has not already received it, the right to the
indemnity. If the debtor is in bad faith or if the restitution is due to his
fault, he is not exempt from making restitution unless the property would also
have perished if it had been in the hands of the creditor.   Appeal allowed with costs, Deschamps
J. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Duquette & Closson-Duquette,
Sainte-Thérèse, Quebec.  Solicitors for the respondent and the intervener:  Joli-Cœur,
Lacasse, Geoffrion, Jetté, Saint-Pierre, Montréal.    