Lewis (Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. 1145  Paula Leeann Lewis and Shannon Lee Lewis, Infants by their Guardian ad litem, Diana Holt, and Shayne Calvert Holt, Infants by their Guardian ad litem, Gail Nachbar, and the said Diana Holt and Jeffrey David Holt                              Appellants  v.  Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia                                                            Respondent  Indexed as:  Lewis (Guardian ad litem of) v.
British Columbia  File No.:  24999.  1997:  October 7; 1997:  December 11.  Present:  Sopinka,* Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci
and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia  Rocks fell from the cliff face at the side of a
highway in British Columbia, and one crashed through the windshield of a car,
fatally injuring the driver.  The provincial Ministry of Transportation and
Highways was aware that the cliff face required scaling to prevent rocks
falling on the highway and engaged a contractor to perform the work.  The work
was done negligently and rocks which should have been removed remained on the
cliff face.  The trial judge found that the contractor was negligent in failing
to remove the protruding rocks, and that its failure to maintain the highway
pursuant to its contractual duties gave rise to liability on the part of the
respondent provincial Crown for a corresponding breach of its own duty to
maintain the highway reasonably.  He concluded as a result that the respondent
was liable for the contractor’s negligence and rejected its submissions that
either s. 3 of the Crown Proceeding Act or s. 8(2) of the Occupiers
Liability Act limited the Crown’s liability.   The Court of Appeal reversed
this decision and directed a new trial.  Held:  The appeal
should be allowed and the trial judgment restored.  Per Cory, Iacobucci and
Major JJ.:  The British Columbia Highway Act and Ministry of
Transportation and Highways Act explicitly grant the Minister of
Transportation and Highways a measure of discretion over the maintenance of the
highways.  The private law duty of care established by the Anns test
therefore stands alongside this statutory authority and is applicable once the
Ministry makes a policy decision to undertake maintenance work on the highways,
as it clearly did here.   Pursuant to the Anns test, the duty to use
reasonable care was owed to the driver if there was a sufficient relationship
of proximity between the Ministry and him “such that, in the reasonable
contemplation of the former, carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage
to the latter”.  That was clearly the case here.  When the Ministry undertook
these operations, it knew or ought to have known that failure to perform the
stabilization work with due care would result in harm to the users of the
highway.   There are further policy factors which support the
finding that the Ministry should be responsible for the negligence of its
independent contractor.  The particular vulnerability of the travelling public
should be a significant factor in reaching that conclusion.  The vast majority
of highway travellers are in no position to assess the extent or nature of the construction
and maintenance work which should be done, the competence of those undertaking
the work or the financial responsibility of any independent contractor
performing the work.  They should be entitled to look to the respondent as the
entity responsible for taking reasonable care in carrying out the repairs and
maintenance of the roads.  Other practical considerations favour imposing
liability on the respondent for the negligence of its independent contractors. 
A person injured on the road as a result of the negligence of an independent
contractor should not have to seek out the identity of the contractor
responsible in order to bring an action and trust to luck that that contractor
is financially responsible.  Moreover, the Crown can always stipulate whatever
form of indemnification for negligently performed work that it requires from an
independent contractor as a condition of entering into the contract for repair
or maintenance.  As well, the pertinent statutes may always be amended so as to
absolve the respondent from any liability in the performance of construction,
repairs or maintenance of highways.  Sections 3(2)(b) and 3(2)(f) of the Crown
Proceeding Act do not restrict the scope of the Crown’s liability in this
case.  Nor does s. 8 of the Occupiers Liability Act reduce the
Crown’s liability as an occupier of the highway.   Cases Cited  By Cory J.   By McLachlin J.  Applied:  Kondis v.
State Transport Authority (1984), 154 C.L.R. 672; referred to:  Pickard
v. Smith (1861), 10 C.B. (N.S.) 470, 142 E.R. 535; Dalton v. Angus
(1881), 6 App. Cas. 740.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Crown
Proceeding Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 86, ss. 2,
3.  Highway Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 167, ss. 8(1) [am. 1990, c. 58, s.
10], 28(1) “maintenance”, 33(1).  Ministry of Transportation and
Highways Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 280,
ss. 14, 48.  Occupiers Liability Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 303, s. 8.  Authors Cited  Atiyah, P. S.  Vicarious
Liability in the Law of Torts.  London:  Butterworths, 1967.  Restatement (Second) of Torts § 418 (1965).   Williams, Glanville.  “Liability
for Independent Contractors”, [1956] Cambridge L.J. 180.  APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (1995), 12 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1, [1996] 1 W.W.R. 489, 63 B.C.A.C. 241, 104
W.A.C. 241, 16 M.V.R. (3d) 161, [1995] B.C.J. No. 1962 (QL), reversing a
decision of the British Columbia Supreme Court (1994), 91 B.C.L.R. (2d) 365,
[1994] 6 W.W.R. 737, [1994] B.C.J. No. 274 (QL), allowing the plaintiffs’
action against the provincial Crown.  Appeal allowed. John N. Laxton, Q.C.,
and Robert D. Gibbens, for the appellants.  Willliam A. Pearce, Q.C.,
and J. Douglas Eastwood, for the respondent.  The judgment of Cory, Iacobucci and Major JJ. was
delivered by  1                                  
Cory J. -- The respondent
was aware that the rock face bordering Highway 99 in the Province of British
Columbia required scaling to prevent rocks falling on the highway.  The
Ministry of Transportation and Highways engaged a contractor (Cerka Contract
Management Ltd. (“Cerka”)) to perform the work.  The work was done negligently
and rocks which should have been scaled or removed remained on the cliff face. 
Unfortunately one of those rocks fell and killed Robert Holt as he was driving
north on the highway.  If the work had been done by employees of the respondent
there is no doubt that it would be liable for the damages resulting from the
demise of Mr. Holt.  The sole issue to be resolved is whether by engaging an
independent contractor to do the work, the respondent is absolved from
liability.  Factual Background  2                                  
This is one of those rare tort cases where little needs to be said about
the facts.  Rocks fell from the cliff face at the side of the highway, and one
crashed through the windshield of the car driven by Mr. Holt and fatally
injured him.  The respondent was aware of the potential dangers presented by
the condition of the rock face.  It contracted with Cerka to scale, that is to
say, to remove dangerous rocks from that rock face.  When Cerka completed its
work in 1988, two rocks protruded dangerously from the cliff face.  In the
words of a former employee of Cerka, they “stuck out like a sore thumb”.  It
was apparent from photographs of the rock face taken before and after Mr.
Holt’s injury that one of those rocks fell and struck Mr. Holt.  3                                  
The trial judge found Cerka was negligent in failing to remove the
protruding rocks.  There is ample evidence to support that finding and indeed
it is not contested.  This action was brought against the respondent, who
contends that it was absolved from liability as a result of retaining the
independent contractor Cerka to do the work.  Although there might be some
doubt as to whether or not the respondent adequately supervised the work of
Cerka, issue was joined only on the question as to whether the Crown was exempt
from liability as a result of engaging the independent contractor.  Decisions Below  The Supreme Court of British Columbia (1994), 91 B.C.L.R. (2d)
365  4                                  
The trial judge relied upon the principle put forward in Tucker
(Public Trustee of) v. Asleson (1993), 78 B.C.L.R. (2d) 173 (C.A.), that “a
failure by an independent contractor to maintain the highway reasonably may
give rise to an original liability on the part of the Crown if it amounts to a
breach of the Crown’s duty” (p. 378).  Accordingly, the trial judge
determined that Cerka’s failure to maintain the highway pursuant to its
contractual duties gave rise to liability on the part of the respondent for a
corresponding breach of its own duty to maintain the highway reasonably.  He
concluded as a result that the respondent was liable for Cerka’s negligence and
rejected its submissions that either s. 3 of the Crown Proceeding Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 86, or s. 8(2) of the Occupiers Liability Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 303, limited the Crown’s liability.  The Court
of Appeal of British Columbia (1995), 12 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1   6                                  
The majority went further and found that even though the Crown could not
delegate its duty to reasonably maintain its highways, it should not be held
automatically liable for every failure of maintenance causing injury on the
highway since “[s]uch a conclusion would constitute the Province an insurer”
(p. 16).  The view was expressed that “notwithstanding the failure to
scale the rock, the evidence must be examined ‘in its entirety’ to determine
whether the Province discharged its duty to reasonably maintain the highway”
(p. 15).  7                                  
In separate concurring reasons, the minority of the court held that the
Crown had a duty to take reasonable care to maintain and repair its highways. 
It was held that in order to decide whether the Crown had fulfilled its duties,
it was necessary to determine whether the Crown took reasonable care when it
selected Cerka as its independent contractor and whether it appropriately
supervised Cerka’s work.  Like the majority, the minority concluded that a new
trial must be directed in order to determine whether the Crown had fulfilled
its obligations of selection and supervision.  Statutory Provisions  8                                  
The following is the legislation which must be considered in this case. 
The Highway Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 167, s. 8 provides for the
construction and maintenance of highways in these words:  8. (1)  The minister may construct, keep
open and maintain a highway across any land taken under the powers conferred by
this Act and no person shall, on any pretext or claim, hinder, delay or
obstruct the construction, keeping open and maintenance of a highway.  Section 33(1)
of the same Act reads:  33. (1)  The control of the construction and
maintenance of every arterial highway is vested in the ministry.  Section 28(1)
of the Highway Act defines maintenance to mean “the work, subsequent to
the construction of a highway, of preserving and keeping it in repair,
including . . . other works necessary to keep open and maintain the
highway for the use by the traffic for which it is required”.  9                                  
The Ministry of Transportation and Highways Act, R.S.B.C. 1979,
c. 280, s. 14 provides:  14.  The minister has the management, charge
and direction of all matters relating to the acquisition, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, improvement and operation of government buildings,
highways and public works, except as provided by law or by order of the
Lieutenant Governor in Council.  Section 48
of that same Act provides  48.  The minister shall direct the
construction, maintenance and repair of all . . . highways . . . .  10                              
The liability of the Crown in relation to the exercise of these powers
is qualified by ss. 2 and 3 of the Crown Proceeding Act in this
manner:  2.  Subject to this Act,                                                                     . . .  (c)   the Crown is subject to all those
liabilities to which it would be liable if it were a person; . . .  3.  . . .  (2)  Nothing in section 2                                                                     . . .  (f)    subjects the Crown, in its capacity as a
highway authority, to any greater liability than that to which a municipal
corporation is subject in that capacity.  The Occupiers
Liability Act, s. 8 provides:  8. (1) Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (2), the Crown and its agencies are bound by this Act.  (2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), this
Act does not apply to the Crown in right of the Province or in right of Canada
or to a municipality where the Crown or the municipality is the occupier of a
public highway or public road or a road under the Forest Act or the Private
Roads Act, 1963, or to an industrial road as defined in the Highway
(Industrial) Act.  Analysis  Duty of Care  11                              
The question of the Crown’s duty to users of its highways has been
considered in three recent cases.  See Just v. British Columbia, [1989]
2 S.C.R. 1228, Brown v. British Columbia (Minister of Transportation and
Highways), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 420, and Swinamer v. Nova Scotia (Attorney
General), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 445.  12                              
In Just, the applicable principles and the manner in which they
should be applied were set out in this way (at pp. 1244-45):  It may be convenient at this stage to summarize
what I consider to be the principles applicable and the manner of proceeding in
cases of this kind.  As a general rule, the traditional tort law duty of care
will apply to a government agency in the same way that it will apply to an
individual.  In determining whether a duty of care exists the first question to
be resolved is whether the parties are in a relationship of sufficient
proximity to warrant the imposition of such a duty.  In the case of a
government agency, exemption from this imposition of duty may occur as a result
of an explicit statutory exemption.  Alternatively, the exemption may arise as
a result of the nature of the decision made by the government agency.  That is,
a government agency will be exempt from the imposition of a duty of care in
situations which arise from its pure policy decisions.   13                              
In each of these appeals, the test set out by Lord Wilberforce in Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.), at pp. 751-52,
was utilized to determine whether the Crown owed a duty to users of the highway
in the particular circumstances of each appeal.  It is described in this way:    (1)   statutes conferring powers to interfere with
the rights of individuals in which case an action in respect of damage caused
by the exercise of such powers will generally not lie except in the case where
the local authority has done what the legislature authorized but has done it
negligently;  (2)   statutes conferring powers but leaving the
scale on which they are to be exercised to the discretion of the local
authority.  Here there will be an option to the local authority whether or not
to do the thing authorized but, if it elects to do it and does it negligently,
then the policy decision having been made, there is a duty at the operational
level to use due care in giving effect to it.  15                              
This case falls within the second category.  The enabling statutes
explicitly grant the Minister of Transportation and Highways a measure of
discretion over the maintenance of the highways.  The Highway Act states
that:  8. (1)  The minister may construct,
keep open and maintain a highway across any land taken under the powers
conferred by this Act and no person shall, on any pretext or claim, hinder,
delay or obstruct the construction, keeping open and maintenance of a highway.  33. (1) The control of the construction and
maintenance of every arterial highway is vested in the ministry.  The Ministry
of Transportation and Highways Act also provides that:  14. The minister has the management, charge
and direction of all matters relating to the acquisition, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, improvement and operation of government buildings,
highways and public works, except as provided by law or by order of the
Lieutenant Governor in Council.  The private
law duty established by the Anns test therefore “stands alongside” this
statutory authority and is applicable once the Ministry makes a policy decision
to undertake maintenance work on the highways.  The Ministry clearly made the
requisite policy decision when it decided to stabilize the rock slope adjacent
to the highway.  The Crown conceded at trial that the maintenance work undertaken
by Cerka involved only operational activities capable of attracting liability
in negligence.  This exercise of statutory discretion thus gave rise to a duty
on the Ministry to use due care at the “operational level” in performing this
stabilization work.  16                              
Pursuant to the Anns test, the duty to use reasonable care was
owed to the appellant if there was a sufficient relationship of proximity
between the Ministry and Mr. Holt “such that, in the reasonable contemplation
of the former, carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage to the
latter”.  There could not be a clearer case of proximity.  When the Ministry
undertook these operations, it knew or ought to have known that failure to
perform the stabilization work with due care would result in harm to the users
of the highway.  In fact, the very basis of the Ministry’s duty to use due care
at the operational level is to ensure the safety of users of the highway.  The
trial judge found that the Ministry’s duty to the users of the highway was
breached when Cerka, the Ministry’s independent contractor, negligently failed
to scale the rock that struck Mr. Holt.  The question that remains to be
resolved is whether the Ministry is liable for Cerka’s negligence.  In my
opinion, it is.  Delegation of Duties  17                              
Whether the duty of care owed by a defendant may be discharged by
exercising reasonable care in the selection of an independent contractor will
depend upon the nature and the extent of the duty owed by the defendant to the
plaintiff.  Therefore, the extent and nature of the duty owed by the respondent
Ministry of Transportation and Highways to members of the travelling public
must be considered.  It is clear that a party upon whom the law has imposed a
strict statutory duty to do a positive act cannot escape liability simply by
delegating the work to an independent contractor.  Rather a defendant subject
to such a duty will always remain personally liable for the acts or omissions
of the contractor to whom it assigned the work.  See for example Hole v.
Sittingbourne and Sheerness Railway Co. (1861), 6 H. & N. 488, 158 E.R.
201.  See also Kitchener (City of) v. Robe and Clothing Co., [1925]
S.C.R. 106.  This must follow because an absolute statutory duty requires the
performance of a positive obligation that is imposed on a particular entity
which will always remain responsible for the performance of that duty.    20                              
The strict duty to perform a particular act imposed by statute and the
common law duty to take reasonable care if an act is undertaken reflect two
divergent positions on a spectrum of liability.  Within that spectrum there are
a variety of legal obligations which may, depending on the circumstances, lead
to a principal’s liability for the negligence of an independent contractor. 
Whether or not there will be liability for the negligence of the acts of the
independent contractor will depend to a large extent upon the statutory
provisions involved and the circumstances presented by each case.  Where then
does the duty of the respondent to users of the provincial highways fall within
this spectrum?  Respondent’s Liability for the Negligence of its Contractor   (i)  Statutory Provisions  22                              
It will be recalled that pursuant to s. 33(1) of the Highway Act,
the Ministry is vested with the “control of the construction and maintenance of
every arterial highway”.  Section 48 of the Ministry of Transportation
and Highways Act provides that the Minister “shall direct the
construction, maintenance and repair” of all highways (emphasis added).  Section
14 of the same Act provides that the Minister has the “management, charge and
direction of all matters relating to the acquisition, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, improvement and operation” of highways.  These
sections clearly indicate that the Ministry has the management and direction of
all matters relating to construction, repair and maintenance of the highways
and must direct those operations.  23                              
The paramount authority and direction for repairs and maintenance thus
lies with the Ministry.  That statutory authority, when exercised, gives rise
to a duty to perform that work with reasonable care.  In the absence of a
specific statutory exclusion from that duty, it must arise from, and proceed in
tandem with, the authority to manage, control and direct the repair and
maintenance of the highways.  That duty to reasonably perform the maintenance
work would of course require the employees of the Ministry who undertook the
work to perform it with reasonable care.  The same responsibility to exercise
reasonable care in performing the authorized work that is applicable to the
Ministry extends to independent contractors engaged by the Ministry to perform
the work.  This is the appropriate interpretation and application of the authorizing
statutory provisions.  24                              
It is but fair that when a public authority exercises the statutory
authority and power granted to it in circumstances which may have serious
consequences for the public interest that it be held liable for a breach of
duty occasioned by the negligent acts of its contractor.  In those
circumstances, it is both appropriate and just to hold a public body ultimately
responsible for ensuring that reasonable care is taken in the work necessary to
carry out its authority.  This was the view expressed by Finch J., as he then
was, in Tucker v. Asleson, B.C.S.C., Vancouver Reg. No. B871616,
April 25, 1991, [1991] B.C.J. No. 954 (QL), Crown appeal dismissed,
(1993), 78 B.C.L.R. (2d) 173 (C.A.).  This too was a case involving the
Ministry of Transportation and Highways.  Finch J. set out the applicable
principle in this way:  In cases where the legislature has entrusted a
certain body with the power to do something, and that body delegates
performance of the work to a third party, the law requires the body entrusted
by the legislature with the power to discharge the duty of seeing that the work
is performed with reasonable care. The arm of government owes the duty of care
in exercising its powers, whether it does so by means of servants or contractors.  On that view of the law, it is clear that in this
case the Crown cannot escape liability for the negligence of its contractor’s
employee. It is the Minister who is authorized and empowered by statute to
maintain highways. The Minister may delegate the work involved in doing so, but
he may not delegate the duty. That duty accompanies the power, and not the
doing of the work.  That I think
is the appropriate approach to statutes which authorize governmental
authorities to perform certain work.  25                              
The validity of this approach is confirmed by the provisions of the
applicable legislation.  Here the legislature, in conferring control over the
highways on the Minister, imposed certain express obligations on the Ministry. 
Significantly, it was careful to ensure that the Ministry should remain very
closely involved in all aspects of highway maintenance.  Section 48 of the
Ministry of Transportation and Highways Act provides that:  48.  The minister shall direct the
construction, maintenance and repair of all government buildings, highways and
public works in progress, or constructed or maintained at the expense of the
Province, and which are under his control.  [Emphasis added.]   26                              
Nevertheless, s. 48 of the Ministry of Transportation and
Highways Act clearly demonstrates that the legislature intended to
foreclose any possibility of the Ministry delegating work to a contractor and
thereafter abandoning any responsibility for the execution of the work.  The
imposition of personal liability on the Ministry for its contractor’s failure
to discharge the duty to take due care ancillary to the Ministry’s statutory
power flows from this section and the overall general scheme of the applicable
statutes, particularly the Highway Act and the Ministry of Transportation
and Highways Act.   28                              
In Vancouver Power, the entity exercising the statutory authority
did so for its own benefit.  As a result, it was found that it should accept
and be personally responsible for the burdens associated with the statutory
authority granted to it.  It is true that in the case at bar, the Ministry has
no personal stake and can achieve no personal benefit from its statutory
authority to perform work on the highways.  Nevertheless, the powers conferred
on the Ministry are correlative to the duty resting on the Ministry to take
reasonable care in the exercise of those powers.  The sole beneficiary of the
Ministry’s statutory power to construct and maintain the roads are those
members of the public who travel upon them.  The basic reason for the Ministry
exercising its statutory authority over highway maintenance must be to provide
the travelling public with increased highway safety.  If a private entity is
found to be liable for its contractor’s negligence as a result of the benefit
derived from the statutory authority, then in the situation presented in this
case where the public entity’s statutory authority and its ancillary duty to
take reasonable care in carrying out maintenance and repairs are specifically
designed to benefit the safety of the public, the basis for the imposition of
liability for an independent contractor’s negligence is even stronger.  It
follows that Duff J.’s reasoning should be, and I believe must be, applicable
to this case.    If . . . the legislature authorises the construction and
maintenance of a work which will be safe or dangerous to the public according
as reasonable care is or is not taken in its construction or maintenance, as
the case may be, the fact that no duty to take such care is expressly imposed
by the statute cannot be relied on as showing that no such duty exists.  It is
not to be expected that the legislature will go out of its way to impose
express obligations or restrictions in respect of matters which every
reasonably minded citizen would take for granted.  31                              
Thus the applicable statutes and authorities indicate that the
respondent’s duty to take reasonable care cannot be satisfied by delegating the
work to an independent contractor.  This conclusion would be sufficient to
resolve the appeal.  Yet there are further policy factors which support the
finding that the Ministry should be responsible for the negligence of its
independent contractor.  (ii)  The Policy Aspect  (a)  Reasonable Expectations of
Users of the Highway  32                              
To begin with, it seems both logical and reasonable to assume that
members of the travelling public would look to the respondent to take
reasonable care in the construction and maintenance of the provincial highways. 
It can be reasonably assumed that those who travel provincial highways have a
reasonable expectation that the province will be responsible for the negligent
acts of its employees or independent contractors which occur in the course of
repairing and maintaining those highways.  This, in my view, is a further
factor which indicates that liability for the negligence of its independent
contractors should rest with the respondent.  This approach has been considered
with approval in two decisions of the Australian High Court.  In Kondis v.
State Transport Authority (1984), 154 C.L.R. 672, Mason J. stated (at p.
687):  [I]t appears that there is some element in the relationship between the
parties that makes it appropriate to impose on the defendant a duty to ensure
that reasonable care and skill is taken for the safety of the persons to whom
the duty is owed. . . .  In these situations the special duty arises because the person on whom
it is imposed has undertaken the care, supervision or control of the person
or property of another or is so placed in relation to that person or his
property as to assume a particular responsibility for his or its safety, in
circumstances where the person affected might reasonably expect that due
care will be exercised.  [Emphasis added.]    If a statute confers a power on a government department, or a local
authority, e.g., to enter private land or premises, for their own
purposes, and the authority chooses to exercise that power by delegating the
work to a contractor, it is not unreasonable that the landowner should be
entitled to look to the person authorised by statute to do the work, rather
than to the contractor who does it, in the case of negligence or the like.  The
statute is unlikely to confer such powers on bodies which are financially
incapable of meeting any liability for negligence, but a local authority or a
government department may well employ a small contractor who is incapable of
doing so.  (b)  General Policy Considerations  35                              
There are other practical policy reasons that favour imposing liability
on the respondent for the negligence of its independent contractors.  On
occasion, a number of contractors may be employed to work on different sections
of a road or highway.  Why should a person, injured on the road as a result of
the negligence of an independent contractor, have to seek out the identity of
the contractor responsible in order to bring an action and trust to luck that
that contractor is financially responsible?  The matter could be complicated
still further if an accident occurred right at the border of the area to be
worked upon by two different contractors.  36                              
Further, it cannot be forgotten that the Ministry is in complete control
of this work.  It is the Ministry that lets contracts for the work to be
performed.  For those in the business of road construction and maintenance, the
Ministry is the only customer.  It would be easy for the respondent to require
as a term of the contract the provision of adequate insurance to provide
compensation for injuries occasioned to the travelling public as a result of
negligently performed work by an independent contractor.  37                              
The majority of the Court of Appeal expressed the concern that if the
Crown is found liable in this case, the result will be to constitute the Crown
as an insurer for every failure of maintenance on the highways.  This concern
cannot be sustained.  It cannot be forgotten that before the Crown can be found
liable for the actions either of its own employees or of an independent
contractor, a court must determine that there has been negligence.  In those
circumstances, the Crown is certainly not an insurer.  Nor is it unreasonable
to expect that the Crown will take appropriate care in the performance of its
work and will be responsible for the damages flowing from negligently performed
work, whether undertaken by its employees or its contractor.  The Crown can
always stipulate whatever form of indemnification for negligently performed
work that it requires from an independent contractor as a condition of entering
into the contract for repair or maintenance.  Indeed, the pertinent statutes
may always be amended so as to absolve the respondent from any liability in the
performance of construction, repairs or maintenance of highways.  For all these
policy reasons, the Crown should be responsible for the negligent acts of its
independent contractors.  38                              
In summary, in light of the statutory provisions applicable in this
case, for the policy reasons set out, and because of the reasonable
expectations of those using the highways, the respondent cannot escape
liability for negligence in maintaining and repairing roads by delegating that
work to independent contractors.  Are There Any Statutory Limitations on the Crown’s Liability?  39                              
Finally, in accordance with the second part of the Anns test, it
is necessary to consider whether any limits have been placed on the liability
of the Ministry.  The respondent has argued that there are statutory provisions
which restrict its liability.  40                              
First, the respondent relies upon ss. 2 and 3 of the Crown
Proceeding Act, which provide as follows:  2.  Subject to this Act,                                                                     . . .  (c)   the Crown is subject to all those
liabilities to which it would be liable if it were a person; . . .  3. . . .  (2)  Nothing in section 2                                                                     . . .  (b)   subjects the Crown to greater liability for
the acts or omissions of an independent contractor employed by the Crown than
that to which the Crown would be subject for those acts or omissions if it were
a person;                                                                     . . . (f)    subjects the Crown, in its capacity as a
highway authority, to any greater liability than that to which a municipal
corporation is subject in that capacity.  41                              
Section 3(2)(b) of the Crown Proceeding Act is of no avail to the
respondent.  This Court’s decision in Vancouver Power, supra,
determined that even a private entity exercising a statutory authority may be
held liable for the negligence of independent contractors hired to perform the
authorized work.  It follows that the Crown’s liability for Cerka’s negligence
in this case should be no different than would be the liability of any other
person exercising a similar statutory power.  42                              
The applicability of s. 3(2)(f) of the Crown Proceeding Act
was considered in Just, supra.  There it was held that this section
and s. 2, when read in conjunction with s. 8 of the Highway Act
and s. 14 of the Ministry of Transportation and Highways Act, “do
not appear to absolve the respondent from its duty of care to maintain the
highways reasonably.  Rather, by inference they appear to place an obligation
on the province to maintain its highways at least to the same extent that a
municipality is obligated to repair its roads” (p. 1237).  In my view,
these provisions do not restrict the scope of the Crown’s liability in this case.  43                              
Finally, the respondent submits that s. 8 of the Occupiers
Liability Act may limit the scope of its liability in this case. 
Section 8 provides:  8. (1)  Except as otherwise
provided in subsection (2), the Crown and its agencies are bound by this Act.  (2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1), this Act
does not apply to the Crown in right of the Province or in right of Canada or
to a municipality where the Crown or the municipality is the occupier of a
public highway or public road or a road under the Forest Act or the Private
Roads Act, 1963, or to an industrial road as defined in the Highway
(Industrial) Act. 44                              
There is no basis for invoking the provisions of the Occupiers
Liability Act to exempt the Crown from liability.  In Brown, supra,
at p. 440, this argument was rejected.  There this Court did not accept
that the Occupiers Liability Act “was passed with a view to exempting
the Department of Highways from liability for its negligent acts. . .
.  To achieve that result a clear exemption would have to be found in the Highway
Act.  There is no such exemption here.”  It was found that “the Occupiers
Liability Act simply has no place in a consideration of the obligations of
the Department of Highways for the repair and maintenance of its highways”.   46                              
I cannot accept that s. 8 of the British Columbia Occupiers
Liability Act somehow reduces the Crown’s liability as an occupier of the
highway.  To do so would be to give it an interpretation or meaning that goes
far beyond the plain meaning of the words of the section.  In the absence of a
clear provision the Occupiers Liability Act should not and cannot be
reasonably expected to determine the extent of the liability of the Ministry of
Transportation and Highways in repairing and maintaining highways.  Disposition  47                              
In the result, the appeal is allowed, the order of the Court of Appeal
is set aside, the judgment at trial is restored and the appellants will have
their costs throughout.  The following are the reasons delivered by  48                              
McLachlin J. -- I have
read the reasons of my colleague Justice Cory.  I agree with his conclusion and
substantially with his reasons.  I wish only to add the following comments.  49                              
The issue is whether the Crown’s duty to users of its highways is
non-delegable.  The phrase “non-delegable” refers to the inability of the
employer of an independent contractor to escape liability for the negligence of
the contractor.  The general rule at common law is that a person who employs an
independent contractor will not be liable for loss flowing from the
contractor’s negligence.  This rule for a long time admitted only three
exceptions:  (1) where the employer was negligent in hiring the contractor; (2)
where the employer was negligent in supervising the contractor; and (3) where the
employer hired the independent contractor to do something unlawful.  A fourth
exception crystallized in Pickard v. Smith (1861), 10 C.B. (N.S.) 470,
142 E.R. 535.  Lord Blackburn stated the rule as: “a person causing something
to be done, the doing of which casts on him a duty, cannot escape from the
responsibility attaching on him of seeing that duty performed by delegating it
to a contractor” (Dalton v. Angus (1881), 6 App. Cas. 740 (H.L.), at p.
829).  This exception is referred to as the “non-delegable duty” rule.  50                              
In essence, a non-delegable duty is a duty not only to take care, but to
ensure that care is taken.  It is not strict liability, since it requires
someone (the independent contractor) to have been negligent.  But if it
applies, it is no answer for the employer to say, “I was not negligent in
hiring or supervising the independent contractor.”  The employer is liable for
the contractor’s negligence.  The employer already has a personal duty at
common law or by statute to take reasonable care.  The non-delegable duty
doctrine adds another obligation -- the duty to ensure that the independent
contractor also takes reasonable care.  51                              
While the nature of the exception is clear, when it applies is not. 
Some courts have held that it applies only in certain categories of cases, such
as harm done by inherently dangerous objects or activities, harm done in the
course of the exercise of statutory powers and duties, or in the United States,
harm caused by failure to maintain highways and other public places in a
reasonably safe condition:  see the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 418
(1965).  The problem with the category approach is that the existing categories
have evolved for reasons that may not be acceptable under modern theories of
tort liability:  J. P. Swanton, “Non-delegable Duties:  Liability for the
Negligence of Independent Contractors (Part I)” (1991), 4 J. Contract L.
183, at pp. 192 and 201-2.  Thus Glanville Williams writes that “the courts
have extended, seemingly without any reference to considerations of policy, the
liability for independent contractors” (“Liability for Independent
Contractors”, [1956] Cambridge L.J. 180, at p. 180).  52                              
       Rather than confirm or add to a hodgepodge of categories, we
should seek the underlying principles that justify the imposition of a
non-delegable duty on a person who hires an independent contractor to have work
done.  This is the approach that Cory J. takes.  Whether a non-delegable duty
arises “will depend upon the nature and the extent of the duty owed by the
defendant to the plaintiff” (para. 17).  “In some circumstances, the duty to
take reasonable care may well be discharged by hiring and, if required,
supervising a competent contractor to perform the particular work” (para. 19).  There
is no categorical rule that common law duties arising from the exercise of a
statutory power are never non-delegable.  Rather, “[w]hether or not there will
be liability for the negligence of the acts of the independent contractor will
depend to a large extent upon the statutory provisions involved and the
circumstances presented by each case” (para. 20).  Cory J. goes on to conclude
that in this particular case, the wording of the statute, combined with policy
considerations, imposes on the Crown, not only a duty to be careful in hiring
or supervising independent contractors, but an additional non-delegable duty to
ensure that the work of its contractors is done without negligence.  53                              
I agree with this analysis.  I am not so sure as my colleague that s. 48
of the Ministry of Transportation and Highways Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c.
280, which provides that the Ministry “shall direct the construction,
maintenance and repair” of all highways, demonstrates clearly that the Ministry
must “personally direct” and supervise these works in all their aspects (para.
26).  It seems to me that those words are also consistent with a basic
direction that works be undertaken.  Yet I am satisfied in this case that the
circumstances, taken together with the statutory provisions, suffice to
establish a non-delegable duty of care on the Ministry with respect to highway
maintenance.  To determine whether a non-delegable duty should be imposed, the
Court should examine the relationship between the parties and ask whether that
relationship possesses elements that make it appropriate to hold the defendant
liable for the negligence of its independent contractor.  In the case at bar,
the fact that road maintenance is entirely within the power of the Ministry is
an important element to consider.  So is the correlative fact that this renders
the public, who often have no choice but to use the highway, totally vulnerable
as to how, and by whom, road maintenance is performed.  Finally, the fact that
safety and lives are at issue is of critical importance.  Cory J. correctly
stresses these factors in concluding that the Ministry cannot discharge its
duty in this case merely by proving that it exercised reasonable care in hiring
and supervising the contractor.  The Ministry must go further and ensure that
the contractor’s work was carried out without negligence.  54                              
The facts of this case, in my respectful view, fall within the test set
out by Mason J. (as he then was) in Kondis v. State Transport Authority
(1984), 154 C.L.R. 672 (Aust. H.C.).  Like the Court in this case, in Kondis,
Mason J. (for the majority) adopted a principled approach dependent on the
circumstances of the case at hand, to determine when a non-delegable duty should
be imposed.  After surveying the range of cases and categories in which such a
duty had been found, Mason J. summed up the underlying principles in the
following passage, with which I agree (at p. 687):  ... when we look to the classes of case in which the existence of a
non-delegable duty has been recognized, it appears that there is some element
in the relationship between the parties that makes it appropriate to impose on
the defendant a duty to ensure that reasonable care and skill is taken for the
safety of the persons to whom the duty is owed.  As I said in Introvigne
“the law has, for various reasons imposed a special duty on persons in certain
situations to take particular precautions for the safety of others”.  That
statement should be expanded by adding a reference to safeguarding or
protecting the property of other persons, a matter which did not present itself
for consideration in Introvigne.  The element in the relationship between the parties
which generates a special responsibility or duty to see that care is taken may
be found in one or more of several circumstances.  The hospital undertakes the
care, supervision and control of patients who are in special need of care.  The
school authority undertakes like special responsibilities in relation to the
children whom it accepts into its care.  If the invitor be subject to a special
duty, it is because he assumes a particular responsibility in relation to the
safety of his premises and the safety of his invitee by inviting him to enter
them.  And in Meyers v. Easton the undertaking of the landlord to renew
the roof of the house was seen as impliedly carrying with it an undertaking to
exercise reasonable care to prevent damage to the tenant’s property.  In
these situations the special duty arises because the person on whom it is
imposed has undertaken the care, supervision or control of the person or
property of another or is so placed in relation to that person or his property
as to assume a particular responsibility for his or its safety, in
circumstances where the person affected might reasonably expect that due care
will be exercised.  [Emphasis added.]   55                              
I would dispose of the appeal as proposed by Cory J.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Laxton & Company,
Vancouver.  Solicitor for the respondent:  The Ministry of the
Attorney General, Victoria.   * Sopinka J. took no part in the judgment.  