Winnipeg Child and Family Services (Northwest Area) v. G.
(D.F.), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 925  Winnipeg Child and Family Services (Northwest Area)                  Appellant  v.  D.F.G.                                                                                                 Respondent  and  The Attorney General of Manitoba, the Government of Yukon, the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada, the Christian Medical and Dental Society, the Catholic Group for Health, Justice and Life, the Alliance for Life, the Association des Centres jeunesse du Québec, the Southeast Child and Family Services, the West Region Child and Family Services, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association, the Canadian Abortion Rights Action League, the Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund, the Women’s Health Clinic Inc., the Metis Women of Manitoba Inc., the Native Women’s Transition Centre Inc. and the Manitoba Association of Rights and Liberties Inc.            Interveners  Indexed as:  Winnipeg Child and Family Services (Northwest
Area) v. G. (D.F.)  File No.:  25508.  1997:  June 18; 1997:  October 31.   on appeal from the court of appeal for manitoba    In August 1996, the respondent was five months
pregnant with her fourth child.  She was addicted to glue sniffing, which may
damage the nervous system of the developing fetus.  As a result of her
addiction, two of her previous children were born permanently disabled and are
permanent wards of the state. On a motion by the appellant,  a superior court
judge ordered that the respondent be placed in the custody of the Director of Child
and Family Services and detained in a health centre for treatment until the
birth of her child.  One of the grounds for the order was the court’s parens
patriae jurisdiction.  The superior court judge, while acknowledging that
the courts have never exercised this power on behalf of an unborn child, saw no
reason why the power should not be extended to protect unborn children.  The
order was later stayed and ultimately set aside on appeal.  The Court of
Appeal held that the existing law of tort and of parens patriae did not
support the order and, given the difficulty and complexity entailed in 
extending the law to permit such an order, the task was more appropriate for
the legislature than the courts. Held (Sopinka and Major JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be
dismissed.   As well, courts do not have parens patriae
jurisdiction over unborn children.  The power of the court in parens patriae,
as it stands, does not therefore support an order for the detention and
treatment of a pregnant woman for the purpose of preventing harm to the unborn
child.   Similarly, to extend the court’s parens patriae
jurisdiction to permit protection of unborn children would  require a major
change to the law of parens patriae.  The same problems encountered in
relation to extending tort law to the unborn arise in relation to extending the
parens patriae jurisdiction of the court.  The ramifications of the
change would be significant and complex, since such change involves conflicts
of fundamental rights and interests and difficult policy issues.  A pregnant
woman and her unborn child are one and to make orders protecting fetuses would
radically impinge on the fundamental liberties of the mother, both as to
lifestyle choices and how and as to where she chooses to live and be. The
invasion of liberty involved in making court orders affecting the unborn child
is far greater than the invasion of liberty involved in court orders relating
to born children. In the latter case, the only liberty interest affected is the
parent’s interest in making decisions for his or her child.  By contrast,
extension of the parens patriae jurisdiction of the court to unborn
children has the potential to affect a much broader range of liberty interests
since the court cannot make decisions for the unborn child without inevitably
making decisions for the mother herself.  Such a change would not be an incremental
change but a generic change of major impact and consequence.  It would
seriously intrude on the rights of women.  If anything is to be done, the
legislature is in a much better position to weigh the competing interests and
arrive at a solution that is principled and minimally intrusive to pregnant
women.  Per Sopinka and Major
JJ. (dissenting): The superior court judge was within his jurisdiction under parens
patriae to order the respondent to refrain from the consumption of
intoxicating substances, and to compel the respondent to live at a place of
safety until the birth of her child.  The jurisdiction available under parens
patriae to act in the best interests of a child should include the power to
act in the best interests of a fetus. The parens patriae jurisdiction
exists for the stated purpose of doing what is necessary to protect the
interests of those who are unable to protect themselves.  A fetus suffering
from its mother’s abusive behaviour is particularly within this class and
deserves protection.  The “born alive” rule is a legal anachronism and
should be set aside, at least for the purposes of this appeal.  This
common law rule, which  requires a fetus to be born alive before any legal
rights of personhood can accrue, is an evidentiary presumption  rooted in
rudimentary medical knowledge not a substantive rule of law. The limited
medical knowledge of the past could not determine whether a child in utero
was alive at the time it was subjected to an injury unless the child was also
born alive, suffering from that injury.  Today’s medical technology has
improved to the point of eliminating nearly all of the evidentiary problems
from which the “born alive” rule sprang, and it no longer makes sense to retain
the rule where its application would be perverse.    Cases Cited  By McLachlin J.  Referred to:  F (in
utero), Re, [1988] 2 All E.R. 193; Tremblay v. Daigle, [1989] 2
S.C.R. 530; Montreal Tramways Co. v. Léveillé, [1933] S.C.R. 456; Paton
v. British Pregnancy Advisory Service Trustees, [1979] Q.B. 276; Elliot
v. Lord Joicey, [1935] A.C. 209; Dehler v. Ottawa Civic Hospital
(1979), 101 D.L.R. (3d) 686, aff’d (1980), 117 D.L.R. (3d) 512; Medhurst v.
Medhurst (1984), 9 D.L.R. (4th) 252; Diamond v. Hirsch, [1989] M.J.
No. 377 (QL); Watkins v. Olafson, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 750; R. v. Salituro,
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 654; Duval v. Seguin, [1972] 2 O.R. 686, aff’d (1973), 1
O.R. (2d) 482; Cherry (Guardian ad litem of) v. Borsman, [1992] 6 W.W.R.
701; Watt v. Rama, [1972] V.R. 353; Paton v. United Kingdom (1980),
3 E.H.R.R. 408; Dobson (Litigation Guardian of) v. Dobson (1997), 148
D.L.R. (4th) 332; Lynch v. Lynch (1991), 25 N.S.W.L.R. 411; Kamloops
(City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; E. (Mrs.) v. Eve, [1986] 2
S.C.R. 388; A., Re (1990), 28 R.F.L. (3d) 288; New Brunswick
(Minister of Health and Community Services) v. Hickey, N.B.Q.B., November
4, 1996, unreported; B. (R.) v. Children’s Aid Society of Metropolitan
Toronto, [1995] 1 S.C.R. 315.  By Major J. (dissenting)   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms . Congenital Disabilities (Civil
Liability) Act 1976 (U.K.), 1976, c. 28,
ss. 1, 2. Court of Queen’s Bench Act, C.C.S.M., c. C280. Court of Queen’s Bench Rules, Man. Reg. 553/88. Declaration of the Rights of
the Child (1959), preamble.  Authors Cited  Canada.
Health Canada. Joint Statement:  Prevention of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS)
and Fetal Alcohol Effects (FAE) in Canada. Ottawa:  Health Canada, October
1996.  Canada. Parliament. House of
Commons. Standing Committee on Health and Welfare, Social Affairs, Seniors and
the Status of Women. Report. Foetal Alcohol Syndrome:  A Preventable Tragedy. 
Ottawa:  Queen’s Printer, June 1992.  Canada. Royal Commission on
Aboriginal Peoples. Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, vol.
3, Gathering Strength. Ottawa:  The Commission, 1996.  Canada. Royal Commission on New
Reproductive Technologies. Final Report. Proceed with Care, vol. 2.
Ottawa:  The Commission, 1993.  Forsythe, Clarke D. “Homicide of
the Unborn Child:  The Born Alive Rule and Other Legal Anachronisms” (1987), 21
Val. U. L. Rev. 563.  Hanigsberg, Julia E. “Power and
Procreation:  State Interference in Pregnancy” (1991), 23 Ottawa L. Rev.
35.  Holmes, Oliver Wendell.  “The Path
of the Law” (1897), 10 Harv. L. Rev. 457.  Johnsen, Dawn E. “The Creation of
Fetal Rights:  Conflicts with Women’s Constitutional Rights to Liberty,
Privacy, and Equal Protection” (1986), 95 Yale L.J. 599.  Kyres, Catherine A. “A ‘Cracked’
Image of My Mother/Myself?  The Need for a Legislative Directive Proscribing
Maternal Drug Abuse” (1991), 25 New Eng. L. Rev. 1325.  Manitoba. Children and Youth
Secretariat. Strategy Considerations for Developing Services for Children
and Youth. Winnipeg:  Children and Youth Secretariat, March 1997.   University of Washington School of
Medicine. Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences.  Understanding
the Occurrence of Secondary Disabilities in Clients with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
(FAS) and Fetal Alcohol Effects (FAE).  Prepared by Ann
P. Streissguth, Helen M. Barr, Julia Kogan and Fred L. Bookstein. Seattle,
Wash.:  University of Washington School of Medicine, August 1996.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Manitoba Court of Appeal
(1996), 113 Man. R. (2d) 3, 131 W.A.C. 3, 138 D.L.R. (4th) 254, [1996] 10
W.W.R. 111, [1996] M.J. No. 398 (QL), setting aside an order of Schulman J.
(1996), 111 Man. R. (2d) 219, 138 D.L.R. (4th) 238, [1996] 10 W.W.R. 95, [1996]
M.J. No. 386 (QL), requiring the respondent to enter a treatment program for
her substance addiction until the birth of her child. Appeal dismissed, Sopinka
and Major JJ. dissenting.  Heather Leonoff, Q.C.,
and Norman Cuddy, for the appellant.  David A. W. Phillips, Joe
Aiello and Darren Sawchuk, for the respondent.  Shawn Greenberg, for
the intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba.  Howard Kushner and Thomas
Ullyett, for the intervener the Government of Yukon.  David M. Brown and Danielle
Shaw, for the interveners the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada and the
Christian Medical and Dental Society.  William J. Sammon, for
the intervener the Catholic Group for Health, Justice and Life.  Angela M. Costigan and Marcelle
Crouse, for the intervener the Alliance for Life.  Hugues Létourneau and Viviane
Primeau, for the intervener the Association des Centres jeunesse du Québec.  Jeffrey F. Harris and Edward
J. Gilson, for the interveners the Southeast Child and Family Services and
the West Region Child and Family Services.  John B. Laskin and Cynthia
L. Tape, for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association.  Beth Symes and Lucy
K. McSweeney, for the intervener the Canadian Abortion Rights Action
League.  Sheilah Martin and Sharon
McIvor, for the intervener the Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund.  Arne Peltz and John
A. Myers, for the interveners the Women’s Health Clinic Inc., the Metis
Women of Manitoba Inc., the Native Women’s Transition Centre Inc. and the
Manitoba Association of Rights and Liberties Inc.  //McLachlin J.//  The judgment of Lamer C.J. and La Forest,
L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin and Iacobucci was delivered by  1                                  
McLachlin J. -- In August
1996, a judge of the Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench ordered that the
respondent, five months pregnant with her fourth child, be placed in the
custody of the Director of Child and Family Services and detained at the Health
Sciences Centre until the birth of her child, there to follow a course of
treatment prescribed by the Director.   The purpose of the order was to protect
the respondent’s unborn child.  The respondent was addicted to glue sniffing
which may damage the nervous system of the developing fetus.  2                                  
The order was stayed two days later and ultimately set aside on appeal. 
The respondent voluntarily remained at the Health Sciences Centre until
discharged August 14.  She stopped sniffing glue and in December gave birth to
an apparently normal child, which she is now raising.  3                                  
While the problem that gave rise to these proceedings has been
resolved,  the legal issues it raised have not.  Hence this appeal.  Winnipeg
Child and Family Services (the “agency”) asks this Court to overturn the order
of the Manitoba Court of Appeal striking  down the original order for
detention.  The respondent argues that the courts have no power to order a
mother into custody against her will for the purpose of protecting her unborn
child, and that such a radical departure from the existing law is best made, if
it is to be made at all, by the legislature.  4                                  
I would dismiss the appeal on the ground that an order detaining a pregnant
woman for the purpose of protecting her fetus would require changes to the law
which cannot properly be made by the courts and should be left to the
legislature.  I.  History
of Proceedings  5                                  
Since the outcome of this case has been resolved by events and the
passage of time, there is little point in minutely canvassing the facts and
allegations.  The agency stresses that of the three children that the
respondent had previously given birth to, two had been injured by her
glue-sniffing addiction, and that in these circumstances it felt driven to take
steps to protect her fourth unborn child.  The respondent  points out that
damage to the fetal nervous system occurs in the early stages of pregnancy long
before the order was sought or made, that at an earlier stage of her pregnancy
she had voluntarily sought treatment but had been turned away due to lack of
facilities, that when asked to take treatment she agreed and only later refused
because she had fallen into a state of intoxication, and that once taken to
hospital, she remained until discharged, although the custodial order requiring
her to remain had been stayed.  This is not a story of heros and villains.  It
is the more prosaic but all too common story of people struggling to do their
best in the face of inadequate facilities and the ravages of addiction.  This
said, the legal question remains: assuming evidence that a mother is acting in
a way which may harm her unborn child, does a judge, at the behest of the
state, have the power to order the mother to be taken into custody for the
purpose of rectifying her conduct?  It is on this footing that I approach the
case.  6                                  
Schulman J. based the order for detention on two grounds.  The first, 
that the respondent was suffering from a mental disorder within the meaning of
the Manitoba Mental Health Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. M110, was not pursued in
this Court.  The second ground for the order was the court’s parens patriae
jurisdiction  -- that is, the power of the court to act in the stead of a parent
for the protection of a child.   Schulman J. acknowledged that the courts have
never exercised this power on behalf of an unborn child.  However, he saw no
reason why the power should not be extended to the protection of the child
prior to birth:  (1996), 111 Man. R. (2d) 219, 138 D.L.R. (4th) 238, [1996] 10
W.W.R. 95, [1996] M.J. No. 386 (QL).  7                                  
The Court of Appeal held that the evidence did not establish
incompetency under the Mental Health Act.  The trial judge had wrongly
relied on the court’s parens patriae jurisdiction in lunacy.  This power
exists only where a finding of incompetency is made on the evidence, and exists
moreover only for the purpose of benefiting the patient.  Nor, in the view of
the court, could the order be supported on the ground of an extension of the
court’s parens patriae jurisdiction to protect the child.  At common
law, the court’s parens patriae jurisdiction is only exercisable after
the child is born: Re F (in utero), [1988] 2 All E.R. 193 (C.A.). 
Finally, the order could not be supported as an injunction to restrain tortious
conduct.  Tort law recognizes that an action brought by or on behalf of a child
once born may vest prior to birth.  But it does not recognize an unborn child
as a legal person.  There is thus no one at common law who can sue to restrain
the mother from a course of action potentially harmful to the child.  Having
concluded that the existing law of judicial parens patriae powers and
tort did not support the order, the Court of Appeal asked whether it could or
should extend the law.  Citing a host of difficulties, it concluded that it
could not.  Any restraint would involve moral choices and difficult conflicts
between the rights of the mother and the interests of the unborn child. 
Extending the power of the courts to make this sort of order could have adverse
effects; for example expectant mothers fearing state intervention might avoid
detection by not seeking desirable prenatal care.  The difficulty of
enforcement and incompleteness of the remedy presented obstacles.  Given the
difficulty and complexity entailed in extension of the law, the task was more
appropriate for the legislature than the courts.  For these reasons, the Court
of Appeal set aside the order  for detention.  8                                  
The agency asks this Court to reverse the decision of the Court of
Appeal and restore the order for detention.   II.  Issues  9                                  
This appeal raises two legal issues:  (1) Does tort law, as it exists or may properly be
extended by the Court, permit an order detaining a pregnant woman against her
will in order to protect her unborn child from conduct that may harm the child?  (2) Alternatively, does the power of a court to
make orders for the protection of children (its parens patriae
jurisdiction), as it exists or may properly be extended by the Court, permit an
order detaining a pregnant woman against her will in order to protect her
unborn child from conduct that may harm the child?  10                              
The appellant agency does not request that the order for mandatory
treatment be upheld.   At the same time, treatment, at least in the minimal
sense of abstention from  substance abuse, emerged as the only justification
for the order for detention.  Without mandatory treatment, the order for
detention would lack any foundation.  Thus the question of whether a judge may
order detention of a pregnant woman at the request of the state encompasses the
issue of whether a judge may make an order for mandatory treatment.  III.  Analysis  A.                Does the Law of Tort Permit an
Order for the Detention and Treatment of a Pregnant Woman for the Purpose of 
Preventing Harm to the Unborn Child?  1. Does the Existing Law of Tort Support the Order?  11                              
Before dealing with the cases treating the issue in tort law, I turn to
the general proposition that the law of Canada does not recognize the unborn
child as a legal or juridical person.  Once a child is born, alive and viable,
the law may recognize that its existence began before birth for certain limited
purposes.  But the only right recognized is that of the born person.  This is a
general proposition, applicable to all aspects of the law, including the law of
torts.  12                              
By way of preamble, two points may be made.  First, we are concerned
with the common law, not statute.  If  Parliament or the legislatures wish to
legislate legal rights for unborn children or other protective measures, that
is open to them, subject to any limitations imposed by the Constitution of
Canada.  Further, the fact that particular statutes may touch on the interests
of the unborn need not concern us.  Second, the issue is not one of biological
status, nor indeed spiritual status, but of legal status.  As this Court put it
in  Tremblay v. Daigle, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 530, at p. 553:  The task of properly classifying a foetus in law and in science are
different pursuits.  Ascribing personhood to a foetus in law is a fundamentally
normative task.  It results in the recognition of rights and duties -- a matter
which falls outside the concerns of scientific classification.  In short, this
Court’s task is a legal one.  Decisions based  upon broad social, political,
moral and economic choices are more appropriately left to the legislature.  13                              
What then is the status of the fetus at common law?  In Tremblay v.
Daigle, the father of a fetus sought an injunction to prevent the mother
from terminating the pregnancy.  He argued that a fetus was a “human being”
entitled to the “enjoyment of life” under s. 1 of the Charter of Human
Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q., c. C-12.  This Court unanimously rejected that
contention on the ground that neither the Quebec civil law nor the common law
of England and Canada recognize the fetus as a juridical person.  While injury
to a fetus due to the negligence of third parties is actionable, the right to
sue does not arise until the infant is born.  See  Montreal Tramways Co. v.
Léveillé, [1933] S.C.R. 456; Paton v. British Pregnancy Advisory Service
Trustees, [1979] Q.B. 276, at p. 279, citing Lord Russell of Killowen in Elliot
v. Lord Joicey, [1935] A.C. 209 (H.L.), at p. 233; Dehler v. Ottawa
Civic Hospital (1979), 101 D.L.R. (3d) 686 (Ont. H.C.), aff’d (1980), 117
D.L.R. (3d) 512 (Ont. C.A.); Medhurst v. Medhurst (1984), 9 D.L.R. (4th)
252 (Ont. H.C.); and Diamond v. Hirsch, [1989] M.J. No. 377 (Q.B.).  14                              
The Court summarized the law at p. 569 and concluded that the Quebec Charter
confers no rights on the unborn child:  The treatment of a foetus in tort law, property law
and family law reveals a similar situation as found under the Civil Code,
namely, that the foetus has no rights in private law.  In the field of tort, it
is in fact the Quebec case of Montreal Tramways, supra, which is
most often relied upon for authority in other jurisdictions in Canada (see,
e.g., Duval v. Seguin, [1972] 2 O.R. 686 (H.C.); Steeves v.
Fitzsimmons (1975), 66 D.L.R. (3d) 203 (Ont. H.C.)).  As stated earlier,
the Montreal Tramways decision does not recognize foetuses as legal
persons.  In the field of property law, Anglo-Canadian law, like Quebec law,
has allowed a foetus to be a beneficiary of a will or a donation but it has
only protected a foetus’ interests where the foetus has been born alive and
viable (see Earl of Bedford’s Case (1587), 7 Co. Rep. 7b, 77 E.R. 421; Thellusson
v. Woodford (1805), 11 Ves. Jun. 112, 32 E.R. 1030, and Elliot v. Lord
Joicey, [1935] A.C. 209).  In family law, a foetus appears to receive some
protection, but, as elsewhere in the law, the rights take effect and are
perfected by birth (see K. v. K., [1933] 3 W.W.R. 351 (Man. K.B.), and Solowan
v. Solowan (1953), 8 W.W.R. 288 (Alta. S.C.)).  15                              
The position is clear.  Neither the common law nor the civil law of
Quebec recognizes the unborn child as a legal person possessing rights.  This
principle applies generally, whether the case falls under the rubric of family
law, succession law or tort.  Any right or interest the fetus may have remains
inchoate and incomplete until the birth of the child.  16                              
It follows that under the law as it presently stands, the fetus on whose
behalf the agency purported to act in seeking the order for the respondent’s
detention  was not a legal person and possessed no legal rights.  If it was not
a legal person and  possessed no legal rights at the time of the application,
then there was no legal person  in whose interests the agency could act or in
whose interests a court order could be made.  17                              
Putting the matter in terms of tort, there was no right to sue, whether
for an injunction or damages, until the child was born alive and viable.  The
law of tort as it presently stands might permit an action for injury to the
fetus to be brought in the child’s name after its birth.  But there is
no power in the courts to entertain such an action before the child’s birth. 
The action at issue was commenced and the injunctive relief sought  before the
child’s birth.  It follows that under the law as it presently stands, it must
fail.  2.  Should the Law of Tort Be Extended to Permit the Order?  18                              
It is necessary at the outset to consider the principles that govern
judicial extension of common law principles.  As a general rule, judicial
change is confined to  incremental change “based largely on the mechanism of
extending an existing principle to new circumstances”; courts will not extend
the common law “where the revision is major and its ramifications complex”:  Watkins
v. Olafson, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 750, at pp. 760-61;  approved in R. v.
Salituro, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 654, at pp. 668-69, per Iacobucci J.   As
I stated in Watkins:  There are sound reasons supporting this judicial
reluctance to dramatically recast established rules of law.  The court may not
be in the best position to assess the deficiencies of the existing law, much
less problems which may be associated with the changes it might make.  The 
court has before it a single case; major changes in the law should be
predicated on a wider view of how the rule will operate in the broad generality
of cases.  Moreover, the court may not be in a position to appreciate fully the
economic and policy issues underlying the choice it is asked to make.  Major
changes to the law often involve devising subsidiary rules and procedures
relevant to their implementation, a task which is better accomplished through
consultation between courts and practitioners than by judicial decree. 
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, there is the long-established principle
that in a constitutional democracy it is the legislature, as the elected branch
of government, which should assume the major responsibility for law reform.  Considerations such as these suggest that major
revisions of the law are best left to the legislature.  Where the matter is one
of a small extension of existing rules to meet the exigencies of a new case and
the consequences of the change are readily assessable, judges can and should
vary existing principles.  But where the revision is major and its
ramifications complex, the courts must proceed with great caution.  19                              
The changes which the agency asks this Court to make to the law of tort
may be summarized as follows:  1.  Overturn the rule that rights accrue to a person only at birth (the
           “live-birth” rule);  2.  Recognize a fetal right to sue the mother
carrying           the fetus;  3. Recognize a cause of action for lifestyle choices which may        adversely
affect others;  4.  Recognize an injunctive remedy which deprives a defendant of  important
liberties, including her involuntary confinement.  20                              
The proposed changes to the law of tort are major, affecting the rights
and remedies available in many other areas of tort law.  They involve moral
choices and would create conflicts between fundamental interests and rights. 
They would have an immediate and drastic impact on the lives of women as well
as men who might find themselves incarcerated and treated against their will
for conduct alleged to harm others.  And, they possess complex ramifications
impossible for this Court to fully assess, giving rise to the danger that the
proposed order might impede the goal of healthy infants more than it would promote
it.  In short, these are not the sort of changes which common law courts can or
should make.  These are the sort of changes which should be left to the
legislature.  (a) Overturning the Rule that Rights Accrue only at Birth  21                              
A child may sue in tort for injury caused before birth.  However, only
when the child is born does it have the legal status to sue and damages are
assessed only as of the date of birth:  see Montreal Tramways, supra;
Duval v. Seguin, [1972] 2 O.R. 686 (H.C.), aff’d (1973), 1 O.R. (2d) 482
(C.A.); Cherry (Guardian ad litem of) v. Borsman, [1992] 6 W.W.R. 701
(B.C.C.A.).  22                              
The rule that a fetus does not have a cause of action for prenatal
injuries until “born alive” also governs in other common law countries such as
England and Australia.  In England, the Congenital Disabilities (Civil
Liability) Act 1976 (U.K.), 1976, c. 28, s. 1, creates the basis of civil
liability where a child is born disabled in consequence of tortious action of
some person before the child’s birth.  In Australia, the Supreme Court of
Victoria in Watt v. Rama, [1972] V.R. 353 (Full Ct.), in permitting a
claim for a prenatal injury resulting from an accident to the mother during
pregnancy, explained why the right to sue does not exist before birth as follows
(at pp. 360-61):  On the birth the relationship crystallized and out of it arose a
duty on the defendant in relation to the child.  On the facts which for present
purposes must be assumed, the child was born with injuries caused by the act or
neglect of the defendant in the driving of his car.  But as the child could not
in the very nature of things acquire rights correlative to a duty until it
became by birth a living person, and as it was not until then that it could
sustain injuries as a living person, it was, we think, at that stage that the
duty arising out of the relationship was attached to the defendant, and it was
at that stage that the defendant was, on the assumption that his act or
omission in the driving of the car constituted a failure to take reasonable
care, in breach of the duty to take reasonable care to avoid injury to the
child.  On this view the fact that damage was done to the embryo or foetus
before birth, if such was sought to be established, was not an independent
element in the plaintiff’s cause of action, but merely an evidentiary fact
relevant to the issue of causation.  [Emphasis added.]   23                              
To permit intervention prior to birth in recognition of a duty of care
owed to the fetus in utero would constitute a major departure from the
common law as it has stood for decades.  It would reverse the long-standing
principle of tort law that  remedies for negligent behaviour cannot be pursued
until a cause of action is brought by a juridical person.  24                              
This change to the law of tort is fraught with complexities and
ramifications, the consequences of which cannot be precisely foretold.  At what
stage would a fetus acquire rights?  Could women who choose to terminate a
pregnancy face injunctive relief prohibiting termination, relief which this
Court rejected in Tremblay v. Daigle?  Alternatively, could they face an
action for damages brought on behalf of the fetus for its lost life?  If a
pregnant woman is killed as a consequence of negligence on the highway, may a
family sue not only for her death, but for that of the unborn child?  If it is
established that a fetus can feel discomfort, can it sue its mother (or perhaps
her doctor) and claim damages for the discomfort?  If the unborn child is a
legal person with legal rights, arguments can be made in favour of all these
propositions.  Some might endorse such changes, others deplore them.  The point
is that they are major changes attracting an array of consequences that would
place the courts at the heart of a web of thorny moral and social issues which
are better dealt with by elected legislators than by the courts.  Having broken
the time-honoured rule that legal rights accrue only upon live birth, the
courts would find it difficult to limit application of the new principle to
particular cases.  By contrast, the legislature, should it choose to introduce
a law permitting action to protect unborn children against substance abuse,
could limit the law to that precise case.  25                              
Two arguments are made in favour of this Court abolishing the rule that
no legal rights accrue before live birth.  The first is that there is no
defensible difference between a born child and an unborn child.  This is
essentially a biological argument.  As noted above, the inquiry before this
Court is not a biological one, but a legal one: Tremblay v. Daigle,
supra.  The common law has always distinguished between an unborn child and
a child after birth.  The proposition that biologically there may be little
difference between the two is not relevant to this inquiry.  For legal purposes
there are great differences between the unborn and the born child, differences
which raise a host of complexities.  26                              
The second argument is that the court should overturn the “live-birth”
rule because the present law does not provide a remedy for situations like the
case at bar.  This argument suffers from two flaws.  First, it can be made in
every case where a court is asked to make a major and complex change to the
law.  If there were a remedy, the major change would not be required.  The
Court rejected this argument in Watkins v. Olafson, supra, and Salituro,
supra.  Nor can it avail in this case.  Second, the argument begs the
questions of whether a remedy is required, and if so, what remedy and how
finely tailored a remedy is best able to achieve the desired social
consequence.  It is not every evil which attracts court action; some evils
remain for the legislature to correct.  (b) Recognizing a Fetal Right to Sue the Mother Carrying the Fetus  27                              
Before birth the mother and unborn child are one in the sense that
“[t]he ‘life’ of the foetus is intimately connected with, and cannot be
regarded in isolation from, the life of the pregnant woman”:  Paton v.
United Kingdom (1980), 3 E.H.R.R. 408 (Comm.), at p. 415, applied in Re
F (in utero), supra.  It is only after birth that the fetus assumes
a separate personality.  Accordingly, the law has always treated the mother and
unborn child as one.  To sue a pregnant woman on behalf of her unborn fetus
therefore posits the anomaly of one part of a legal and physical entity suing
itself.  28                              
It is therefore not surprising that no case has been cited to us from
any jurisdiction in the world where a pregnant woman has been sued on behalf of
her fetus.  A few cases have accepted that a child, once born, may bring an
action against his/her mother for prenatal injuries: Dobson (Litigation
Guardian of) v. Dobson (1997), 148 D.L.R. (4th) 332 (N.B.C.A.); Lynch v.
Lynch (1991), 25 N.S.W.L.R. 411 (C.A.), at p. 415.  But none have accepted
the proposition that a fetus might sue the woman carrying it.  On the contrary,
courts which have considered the notion have rejected it: Paton,
supra; Re F (in utero), supra.  29                              
To permit an unborn child to sue its pregnant mother-to-be would
introduce a radically new conception into the law; the unborn child and its
mother as separate juristic persons in a mutually separable and antagonistic
relation.  Such a legal conception, moreover, is belied by the reality of the
physical situation; for practical purposes, the unborn child and its
mother-to-be  are bonded in a union separable only by birth.  Such a dramatic
departure from the traditional legal characterization of the relationship between
the unborn child and its future mother is better left to the legislature than
effected by the courts.  (c) Recognizing a Cause of Action for Lifestyle Choices Which May            Adversely
Affect Others  30                              
If the problem of permitting an unborn child to sue its future mother
could be surmounted, a further difficulty presents itself:  could the unborn
child sue her for lifestyle choices?  The difficulty of this question may be
discerned from the cases considering the right of born children to sue their
mothers for prenatal injuries.  To date, courts and legislatures have confined
the right to the child suing its mother for prenatal injuries to injuries due
to motor vehicle accidents.  31                              
In the only Canadian appellate-level case to consider the issue, Dobson,
supra,  Hoyt C.J.N.B., speaking for the court, stated, “the narrow
issue here concerns pre-natal injuries received by a child as a result of a
mother’s negligent driving of her motor vehicle and not injuries occasioned as
a result of a mother’s lifestyle choices” (p. 336 (emphasis added)).  In
Australia, the same approach was taken: Lynch v. Lynch, supra.  32                              
In England, the right of infants to sue their mothers for injuries
inflicted before birth is confined by statute to injuries resulting from motor
vehicle accidents. The same section of the Congenital Disabilities (Civil
Liability) Act 1976, that allows children to sue for prenatal injuries
specifically excludes the child’s own mother as a defendant except in cases
where the alleged negligence relates to the operation of a motor vehicle (s.
2).  33                              
Behind the refusal of the courts and at least one legislature to permit
a child to sue its mother for prenatal injuries related to her lifestyle, lies
the fear that such suits would take the courts into the difficult policy issue
of the extent to which a mother’s lifestyle is actionable.  Leaving the special
relationship between mother and unborn child aside for the moment, there is
little precedent for suing any defendant in tort for damages one has suffered
as a consequence of  his or her lifestyle.  While it is not inconceivable that
the courts, proceeding properly in their incremental law-making capacity, may
one day recognize such claims, the appellant agency faces the difficulty that
on this point too it is asking this Court to break new ground in a
controversial area.  Once again, the consequences for the law of tort generally
might be great.  Are children to be permitted to sue their parents for
second-hand smoke inhaled around the family dinner table?  Could any cohabitant
bring  such an action?  Are children to be permitted to sue their parents for
spanking causing psychological trauma or poor grades due to alcoholism or a
parent’s undue fondness for the office or the golf course?  If we permit lifestyle
actions, where do we draw the line?  34                              
The difficulties multiply when the lifestyle in question is that of a
pregnant woman whose liberty is intimately and inescapably bound to her unborn
child.  One faces, to borrow the words of Hoyt C.J.N.B. in Dobson,
supra, the “spectre of mothers being sued by their children for various
activities or lifestyle choices, such as smoking, drinking and the taking or
refusal of medication, during pregnancy that injure the child, with the result
that mothers will be unable to control their own bodies and make autonomous
choices” (p. 336).  There is no authority in Canada, England or Australia for
the proposition that a mother can be sued for negligent behaviour relating to
lifestyle choices made during pregnancy.  To recognize a duty of care in such
situations would constitute yet another marked extension of the common law
which would affect a large segment of society.  It follows that the Court must
approach the issue with great caution.  35                              
Before imposing a duty of care in a new situation, the court must be
satisfied:  (1) that there is a sufficiently close relationship between the
parties to give rise to the duty of care; and (2) that there are no
considerations which ought to negative or limit the scope of the duty, the
class of persons to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach of it may
give rise:  City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2.  36                              
The first criterion is met in the present case.  The relationship
between a woman and her fetus (assuming for the purposes of argument that they
can be treated as separate legal entities) is sufficiently close that in the
reasonable contemplation of the woman, carelessness on her part might cause
damage to the fetus.  The more difficult questions arise within the second
branch of the test.  A host of policy considerations may be raised against the
imposition of tort liability on a pregnant woman for lifestyle choices that may
affect her unborn child.  37                              
Most obviously, recognizing a duty of care owed by a mother to her child
for negligent prenatal behaviour may create a conflict between the pregnant
woman as an autonomous decision-maker and her fetus.  As the Royal Commission
on New Reproductive Technologies in its final report Proceed with Care
(1993), vol. 2, eloquently puts it (at pp. 957-58):  From the woman’s perspective, . . . considering the
interests of her fetus separately from her own has the potential to create
adversary situations with negative consequences for her autonomy and bodily
integrity, for her relationship with her partner, and for her relationship with
her physician.  Judicial intervention is bound to precipitate crisis and
conflict, instead of preventing them through support and care.  It also ignores
the basic components of women’s fundamental human rights -- the right to bodily
integrity, and the right to equality, privacy, and dignity.   The potential
for intrusions on a woman’s right to make choices concerning herself is
considerable.  The fetus’ complete physical existence is dependent on the body
of the woman.  As a result, any intervention to further the fetus’ interests
will necessarily implicate, and possibly conflict with the mother’s interests. 
Similarly, each choice made by the woman in relation to her body will affect
the fetus and potentially attract tort liability.  38                              
The appellant agency argues that the potential intrusions would be
minimal because the duty of care could be defined very narrowly.  It submits
that the duty of care should be to refrain from activities that have no
substantial value to a pregnant woman’s well-being or right of
self-determination and that have the potential to cause grave and irreparable
harm to the child’s life, health and ability to function after birth.  39                              
The problem with this test lies in the terms “substantial value” and
“well-being or right of self-determination”.  They are vague and broad and may
not be adequate by themselves to narrowly confine the duty of care.   What does
substantial value to a woman’s well-being mean?  What does a woman’s well-being
include?  What is involved in a woman’s right of self-determination -- all her
choices, or merely some of them?  And if some only, what is the criterion of
distinction?  Although it may be easy to determine that abusing solvents does
not add substantial value to a pregnant woman’s well-being and may not be the
type of self-determination that deserves protection, other behaviours are not
as easily classified.  At what point does consumption of alcohol fail to add
substantial value  to a pregnant woman’s well-being?  Or cigarette smoking?  Or
strenuous exercise?  No bright lines emerge to distinguish tortious behaviour
from non-tortious once the door is opened to suing a pregnant mother for lifestyle
choices adversely affecting the fetus.  As one writer suggests:  [A woman] could . . . be held liable for any behavior during her
pregnancy having potentially adverse effects on her fetus, including failing to
eat properly, using prescription, nonprescription and illegal drugs, smoking,
drinking alcohol, exposing herself to infectious disease or to workplace
hazards, engaging in immoderate exercise or sexual intercourse, residing at
high altitudes for prolonged periods, or using a general anesthetic or drugs to
induce rapid labor during delivery.  (See: D. E. Johnsen, “The Creation of Fetal Rights: Conflicts with
Women’s Constitutional Rights to Liberty, Privacy, and Equal Protection”
(1986), 95 Yale L.J. 599,  at pp. 606-7.)  40                              
These difficulties would be complicated by the fact that determining
what will cause grave and irreparable harm to a fetus  -- the threshold for
injunctive relief -- is a difficult endeavour with which medical researchers
continually struggle.  The difference between confinement and freedom, between
damages and non-liability, may depend on a grasp of the latest research and its
implications.  The pregnant women most likely to be affected by such a
“knowledge” requirement would be those in lower socio-economic groups. Minority
women, illiterate women, and women of limited education will be the most likely
to fall afoul of the law and the new duty it imposes and to suffer the
consequences of injunctive relief and potential damage awards.  41                              
A further problem arises from the fact that lifestyle “choices” like
alcohol consumption, drug abuse, and poor nutrition may be the products of
circumstance and illness rather than free choice capable of effective
deterrence by the legal sanction of tort.  As J. E. Hanigsberg writes in “Power
and Procreation:  State Interference in Pregnancy” (1991), 23 Ottawa L. Rev.
35, at p. 53:   [W]omen do not abuse drugs out of a lack of care for their fetuses. 
Drug abusing pregnant women, like other drug abusers, are addicts.  People do
not want to be drug addicts.  In addition, a product of addiction is the
inability to control in-take of the substance being abused. . . .                                                                     .
. .  Treating pregnant substance  abusers as fetal
abusers ignores the range of conditions that contribute to problems like drug
addiction and lack of nutrition, such as limited quality pre-natal care, lack
of food for impoverished women, and lack of treatment for substance abusers.  While the law
may properly impose responsibility for the consequences of addictive behaviour,
like drunkenness, the policy question remains of whether extending a duty of
care in tort in this particular situation as the remedy for redressing problems
which are caused by addiction is a wise option. Given the lack of control
pregnant women have over many of these harmful behaviours, it is doubtful
whether recognizing a duty of care to refrain from them will significantly
affect their choices.  As a result, the general deterrent value of the proposed
new duty of care is questionable.  42                              
Recognizing a duty of care in relation to the  lifestyle of the pregnant
woman would also increase the level of outside scrutiny that she would be
subjected to.  Partners, parents, friends, and neighbours are among the
potential classes of people who might  monitor the pregnant woman’s actions to
ensure that they remained within the legal parameters.  Difficulty in
determining what conduct is and is not permissible might be expected to give
rise to conflicts between the interested persons and the pregnant woman or even
between the interested persons themselves.  This raises the possibility of
conflict which may  exacerbate the pregnant woman’s condition (and thus the
fetus’) rather than improve it.  43                              
If it could be predicted with some certainty that all these negative
effects of extending tort liability to the lifestyle choices of  pregnant women
would in fact diminish the problem of injured infants, the change might
nevertheless arguably be justified.  But the evidence before this Court fails
to establish this.  It is far from clear that the proposed tort duty will
decrease the incidence of substance-injured children.  Indeed, the evidence suggests
that such a duty might have negative effects on the health of infants.  No
clear consensus emerges from the debate on the question of whether ordering
women into “places of safety” and mandating medical treatment provide the best
solution or, on the contrary, create additional problems.  44                              
Indeed, changing tort law to make a pregnant mother liable for
lifestyle-related fetal damage may be counterproductive in at least two ways. 
First, it may tend to drive the problems underground.  Pregnant women suffering
from alcohol or substance abuse addictions may not seek prenatal care for fear
that their problems would be detected and they would be confined involuntarily
and/or ordered to undergo mandatory treatment.  As a result, there is a real possibility
that those women most in need of proper prenatal care may be the ones who will
go without and a judicial intervention designed to improve the health of the
fetus and the mother may actually put both at serious health risk.  Second,
changing the law of tort as advocated by the agency might persuade women who
would otherwise choose to continue their pregnancies to undergo an abortion. 
Women under the control of a substance addiction may be unable to face the
prospect of being without their addicting substance and may find terminating
the pregnancy a preferable alternative.  In the end, orders made to protect a
fetus’ health could ultimately result in its destruction.  45                              
It is not necessary for the purposes of this appeal to decide whether
(assuming the difficulties discussed above involved in treating the pregnant
woman and her fetus as separate entities could be overcome) the policy
objections to the proposed extension of tort liability for lifestyle-related
fetal damage to pregnant women, would negate the prima facie duty of
care which arises under the test in City of Kamloops v. Nielsen,  supra. 
It suffices to note that serious policy concerns to such an extension of
the law exist.  The proposed change to the law of tort has the potential to
produce considerable uncertainty and affect many peoples’ lives adversely,
without any assurance of reducing the problem of damage to unborn children from
substance abuse.  These considerations, as well as the problems associated with
assigning separate legal status to pregnant woman and fetus,  militate in
favour of leaving it to the legislature to address the proper remedy for the
problem.  (d) The Extension of Injunctive Relief in Civil Cases to Detention
of the                Person  46                              
In Canada, tort law permits injunctions to detain goods (the Mareva
injunction), to restrain activities such as unlawful picketing, and sometimes
to mandate certain positive action to prevent the occurrence of serious
damage.   But the principles of tort law have never been used to justify the
forcible detention and mandatory treatment of a person.  The order at issue on
this appeal can be upheld only by a radical extension of civil remedies into
the most sacred sphere of personal liberty -- the right of every person to live
and move in freedom.  There exist only two ways in which the state may lawfully
involuntarily confine a person: (1) by the criminal law, whose proper concern
is the incarceration of those found guilty of criminal offences against society;
and (2) by an order made under a provincial Mental Health Act that a
person is not competent to manage his or her own affairs.  It is open to
Parliament and the legislature to enact new grounds for involuntary
confinement, subject to compliance with the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms .  But to suggest that judges at common law should do so is
unprecedented.  To describe such a change as “major” is to understate the
matter; to predict that it would have important ramifications is to state the
obvious.  This final change is one which, if it is to be made, must be left to
Parliament or the legislature.  (e)  Conclusion as to Whether the Law of Tort Should Be Extended as                    Proposed  47                              
Taken together, the changes to the law of tort that would be required to
support the order for detention at issue are of such magnitude, consequence,
and policy difficulty that they exceed the proper incremental law-making powers
of the courts.  Whether such changes should be made, and if so, how far the law
should go in making them, is a task more appropriate to the legislatures than
the courts.  48                              
I conclude that the order for detention cannot be upheld as an
application of tort law.  B.                Does the Power of the Court in
Parens Patriae Support an Order for the Detention and Treatment of a Pregnant
Woman for the Purpose of Preventing Harm to the Unborn Child?  49     
Alternatively, the appellant agency seeks to sustain the order for the
detention of the respondent by an extension of the court’s parens patriae
jurisdiction to permit protection of unborn children.  Courts have the power to
step into the shoes of the parent and make orders in the best interests of the
child:  E. (Mrs.) v. Eve, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 388.  The agency argues that
this power should be extended to orders on behalf of unborn children.  50                              
I would reject this submission for reasons similar to those enunciated
in connection with the submission that the law of tort should be extended to
the unborn.  The submission requires a major change to the law of parens
patriae.  The ramifications of the change would be significant and
complex.  The change involves conflicts of fundamental rights and interests and
difficult policy issues.  Not surprisingly these difficulties have led all
appellate courts that have considered the extension to reject it.  I share
their view.  51                              
The law as it stands is clear: the courts do not have parens patriae
or wardship jurisdiction over unborn children.  This is the law in the European
Community, Great Britain and Canada.  In Canada, all courts which have
considered the issue, save for the trial judge in this case, appear to have
rejected the proposition that the parens patriae jurisdiction of the
court extends to unborn children.  In Re A. (1990), 28 R.F.L. (3d) 288
(Ont. U.F.C.), the Children’s Aid Society of Hamilton-Wentworth brought an
action for a supervision order to ensure that a pregnant woman seek appropriate
prenatal care deemed necessary for the welfare of the fetus.  Steinberg
U.F.C.J., having concluded that there was no jurisdiction to make the order
under the Child and Family Services Act, S.O. 1984, c. 55, considered
whether the parens patriae jurisdiction was broad enough to force the
confinement of a pregnant woman to protect her fetus.  He held it was not broad
enough.  At p. 298, he concluded:  The essence of the parens patriae power is that the court is empowered
to take steps to protect the child or the fetus in the place of the parent. 
But here the child is actually inside of the mother.  It is, therefore,
impossible in this case to take steps to protect the child without ultimately
forcing the mother, under restraint if necessary, to undergo medical treatment
and other processes against her will.  I believe that the parens patriae
jurisdiction is just not broad enough to envisage the forceable confinement of
a parent as a necessary incident of its exercise.  Even if it were, however,
the court should be very wary about using its powers in such instances, as its
routine exercise could possibly lead to some abuse of pregnant mothers.
[Emphasis in original.]  Similarly, the
New Brunswick Court of Queen’s Bench has also held that the parens patriae
jurisdiction does not extend to protection of the unborn:  New Brunswick
(Minister of Health and Community Services) v. Hickey, N.B.Q.B. (Fam.
Div.), November 4, 1996, unreported, per Young J.  52                              
The English Court of Appeal has taken the same view:  Re F (in utero),
supra.   The local authority sought a wardship order over the unborn
child of a severely mentally disabled woman given to roaming and periodic
disappearance.  In separate judgments, all members of the court agreed that the
wardship power could not be used in the manner requested.  May L.J. emphasized
the effect such an order would have on the liberty of the pregnant woman and
the incompatibility of a wardship order with those interests (at p. 194):  In wardship proceedings the court is exercising a parental jurisdiction
in which the paramount consideration is the child’s welfare.  But in the case
of an unborn child the only orders to protect him or her which the court could
make would be with regard to the mother herself.  Thus in the first place there
would have to be an order authorising the local authority to find the mother. 
Then perhaps an order that she should live in a certain place and probably
attend a certain hospital.  All of these would be restrictive of the mother’s
liberty.  Further, there could well be medical problems which would have to be
solved:  the mother might wish one course of action to be taken; it might be in
the interests of the child that an alternative procedure should be followed. 
Until the child is actually born there must necessarily be an inherent
incompatibility between any projected exercise of wardship jurisdiction and the
rights and welfare of the mother. May L.J.  gave
four reasons for limiting the court’s jurisdiction to born children.  First, a
fetus does not attain legal personhood until birth and therefore, the order
would be contrary to that principle:  Paton, supra.  Second,
applying the principle that the interests of the child are to be predominant
would create conflict between the existing legal interests of the mother and
those of the unborn child.  Third, there could be difficulties in enforcing
against the mother any order in respect of an unborn child. And finally, he
held that under the Supreme Court Act 1981 only “minors” could be made
wards of the court and that in light of the Family Law Reform Act 1969,
a “minor” could only be a person, in the sense that he or she had been born.  53                              
Balcombe L.J. also emphasized the incompatibility between wardship of
the unborn and the pregnant woman’s freedom.  He pointed out that (as in
Canada) the Mental Health Acts regulate and limit when a person may be
confined against her will.  If a pregnant woman was to be subject to controls
for the benefit of her unborn child, Parliament should so legislate, as it had
in the case of mentally incompetent persons. At pp. 200-201, he stated:  Approaching the question as one of principle, in my
judgment there is no jurisdiction to make an unborn child a ward of court. 
Since an unborn child has, ex hypothesi, no existence independent of its
mother, the only purpose of extending the jurisdiction to include a foetus is
to enable the mother’s actions to be controlled.  Indeed, that is the purpose
of the present application.  In the articles already cited Lowe gives examples
of how this might operate in practice (96 LQR 29 at 30):  ‘It would mean, for example, that the mother would be unable to leave
the jurisdiction without the court’s consent.  The court being charged to
protect the foetus’ welfare would surely have to order the mother to stop
smoking, imbibing alcohol and indeed any activity which might be hazardous to
the child.  Taking it to the extreme were the court to be faced with saving the
baby’s life or the mother’s it would surely have to protect the baby’s.’  Another possibility is that the court might be asked to order that the
baby be delivered by Caesarian section: in this connection see Fortin ‘Legal
Protection for the Unborn Child’ (1988) 51 MLR 54 at 81 and the US cases cited
in note 16, in particular Jefferson v Griffin Spalding County Hospital
Authority (1981) 274 SE 2d 457.  Whilst I do not accept that the priorities
mentioned in the last sentence of the passage cited above are necessarily
correct, it would be intolerable to place a judge in the position of having to
make such a decision without any guidance as to the principles on which his
decision should be based.  If the law is to be extended in this manner, so as
to impose control over the mother of an unborn child, where such control may be
necessary for the benefit of that child, then under our system of parliamentary
democracy it is for Parliament to decide whether such controls can be imposed
and, if so, subject to what limitations or conditions.  Thus, under the Mental
Health Act 1983, to which we were also referred, there are elaborate provisions
to ensure that persons suffering from mental disorder or other similar
conditions are not compulsorily admitted to hospital for assessment or
treatment without proper safeguards: see ss 2, 3 and 4 of that Act.  If
Parliament were to think it appropriate that a pregnant woman should be subject
to controls for the benefit of her unborn child, then doubtless it will
stipulate the circumstances in which such controls may be applied and the
safeguards appropriate for the mother’s protection.  In such a sensitive field,
affecting as it does the liberty of the individual, it is not for the judiciary
to extend the law.  54                              
Staughton L.J., in rejecting the authority’s application, emphasized the
inseparability of the fetus from the mother, citing the European Commission on
Human Rights (at p. 201):  When the wardship jurisdiction of the High Court is
exercised, the rights, duties and powers of the natural parents are taken over
or superseded by the orders of the court.  Until a child is delivered it is
not, in my judgment, possible for that to happen.  The court cannot care for a
child, or order that others should do so, until the child is born; only the
mother can.  The orders sought by the local authority are not by their nature
such as the court can make in caring for the child; they are orders which seek
directly to control the life of both mother and child.  As was said by the
European Commission of Human Rights in Paton v UK (1980) 3 EHRR 408 at
415 (para 19): ‘The “life” of the foetus is intimately connected with, and
cannot be regarded in isolation from, the life of the pregnant woman.’    55                              
As the English Court of Appeal’s reasons eloquently attest, the same
problems encountered in relation to extending tort jurisdiction to the unborn,
surface in relation to extending the parens patriae jurisdiction of the
court.  The law sees birth as the necessary condition of  legal personhood. 
The pregnant woman and her unborn child are one.  Finally, to make orders
protecting fetuses would radically impinge on the fundamental liberties of the
pregnant woman, both as to lifestyle  choices and how and as to where she
chooses to live and be.  56                              
It is argued that the parens patriae jurisdiction over children
necessarily involves overriding the liberty of parents, and that there is
nothing new in this.  This argument overlooks the fact that the invasion of
liberty involved in making court orders affecting the unborn child, is of a
different order than the invasion of liberty involved in court orders relating
to born children.  The parens patriae power over born children permits
the courts to override the liberty of the parents to make decisions on behalf
of their children where a parental choice may result in harm to a child:  B.
(R.) v. Children’s Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto, [1995] 1 S.C.R.
315.  The only liberty interest affected is the parent’s  interest in making
decisions for his or her child.  By contrast, extension of the parens
patriae jurisdiction of the court to unborn children has the potential to
affect a much broader range of liberty interests.  The court cannot make
decisions for the unborn child without inevitably making decisions for the
mother herself.  The intrusion is therefore far greater than simply limiting
the mother’s choices concerning her child.  Any choice concerning her child
inevitably affects her.  For example, to sustain the order requested in the
case at bar would interfere with the pregnant woman’s ability to choose where
to live and what medical treatment to undergo.  The parens patriae
jurisdiction has never been used to permit a court to make such decisions for
competent women, whether pregnant or not.  Such a change would not be an
incremental change within Watkins v. Olafson, supra, but a
generic change of major impact and consequence.  It  would seriously intrude on
the rights of women.  If anything is to be done, the legislature is in a much
better position to weigh the competing interests and arrive at a solution that
is principled and minimally intrusive to pregnant women.  57                              
I conclude that the law of parens patriae does not support the
order for the detention of the respondent.  C.  Constitutional
Concerns  58                              
The parties did not put the constitutionality of the order in issue;
although some interveners raised constitutional concerns.  In view of my
conclusion that the common law of tort and parens patriae provide no
support for the order at issue, the question of the constitutionality of the
order and the procedures which gave rise to it does not arise.  Of course, in
the event that the legislature chooses to address the problem, its legislation
in substance and procedure would fall to be assessed against the provisions of
the Charter.  IV.  Conclusion  59                              
I conclude that the common law does not clothe the courts with power to
order the detention of a pregnant woman for the purpose of preventing harm to
her unborn child.  Nor, given the magnitude of the changes and their potential
ramifications, would it be appropriate for the courts to extend their power to
make such an order.  The changes to the law sought on this appeal are best left
to the wisdom of the elected legislature.  I would dismiss the appeal.  The
respondent is entitled to her costs on a party and party basis in this Court
and in the courts below.  //Major J.//  The reasons of Sopinka and Major JJ. were delivered by  60                              
Major J. (dissenting) -- I
respectfully disagree with the conclusion of McLachlin J. that an order detaining
a pregnant woman addicted to glue sniffing for which she has rejected abortion
and/or medical treatment and decided to carry her child to term, would require
a change to the law which cannot be properly made other than by legislation.  61                              
To the extent that a change in the law in the circumstances of this case
is required, the much admired flexibility of the common law has proven
adaptable enough over centuries to meet exigent circumstances as they arise. 
That flexibility is surely needed in the appeal.  62                              
Under existing Canadian law the expectant respondent at her sole
discretion could have chosen an abortion.  Instead she chose to continue her
pregnancy and to continue her glue sniffing which in the past had resulted in
two serious and permanently handicapped children being born who are now
permanent wards of the state.  63                              
There are three questions that arise in this appeal.  What are the
rights of the pregnant woman?  Does the unborn foetus have independent rights? 
Does the state also have a separate right to intervene to prescribe proper
medical treatment in the hope of achieving the birth of a healthy child as
opposed to standing idly by and watching the birth of a permanently and
seriously handicapped child who has no future other than as a permanent ward of
the state?  64                              
The respondent, a young woman, was pregnant for the fourth time.  She
was addicted to the inhalation of solvent fumes over a long period.  Two of her
previous children were born permanently disabled as a result of her addiction and
are permanent wards of the state.  65                              
The respondent, on becoming pregnant for the fourth time, made the
decision not to have an abortion.  She chose to remain pregnant, deliver the
child, and continue her substance abuse.  66                              
In my opinion, the state has an enforceable interest in ensuring, to the
extent practicable, the well-being of the unborn child and the appeal should be
allowed.  67                              
Historically, it was thought that damage suffered by a foetus could only
be assigned if the child was born alive.  It was reasoned that it was only at
that time that  damages to the live child could be identified.  The logic for
that rule has disappeared with modern medical progress.  Today by the use of
ultrasound and other advanced techniques, the sex and health of a foetus can be
determined and monitored from a short time after conception.  The sophisticated
surgical procedures performed on the foetus before birth further belies the
need for the “born alive” principle.  I.                 Facts  A.                Of
the Present Case  68                              
The respondent mother D.F.G. first became a client of Winnipeg Child and
Family Services (“C.F.S.”) in December of 1990, at 16 years of age and pregnant
with her first child.  She was abusing solvents and had an unstable lifestyle.  C.F.S.
deemed D.F.G. “a child in need of protection” and placed her in a residential
youth treatment facility.  In March of 1991, following the birth of her child,
she was placed in a residential facility specifically planned to assist young
mothers with the care of infants.  69                              
D.F.G. was unable to stabilize her lifestyle.  C.F.S. obtained a
permanent order of guardianship of the child in April of 1992.  C.F.S.
continued to offer services to D.F.G. to help her ongoing addiction problem and
general instability.  Social workers visited her regularly between June and
August of 1992.  On many occasions there was a strong smell of glue in her
apartment and D.F.G. showed obvious signs of impairment.  70                              
D.F.G. was 18 years of age and still addicted to solvents when her
second child was born permanently disabled on August 6, 1992.  She consented to
a permanent order of guardianship of this child in favour of C.F.S. on February
24, 1993.  71                              
D.F.G.’s third child was born on November 5, 1993.  She was still using
solvents and the baby was born jittery and showed symptoms of drug withdrawal. 
Again C.F.S. took custody of the child who was also permanently disabled.  72                              
D.F.G. met with C.F.S. social workers on December 8, 1993.  She smelt of
solvent and admitted to continuing her addictive use of them.  C.F.S. received
a permanent order of guardianship with respect to the third child in February
1994.  73                              
In addition to C.F.S., Winnipeg Social Services had a social worker
assigned to work with D.F.G.  This worker’s affidavit evidence confirmed that
from 1992 to date D.F.G. has been under the influence of solvents on many
occasions.  She stated that she had seen dried glue on D.F.G.’s face and had
detected a strong odour of glue when visiting her at her home.  As well D.F.G.
had consistently refused all offers of treatment to deal with her addiction
problem.  74                              
Developmental assessments performed on D.F.G.’s second and third
children while in the custody of C.F.S. showed that both displayed signs of
global developmental delay, a birth defect found in children exposed in
utero to solvents.  75                              
On May 28, 1996, D.F.G. went to the hospital.  She complained of extreme
difficulty walking, loss of balance, weakness and nausea.  She was thirteen and
one half weeks pregnant with her fourth child.  She had not received any
prenatal care.  D.F.G. was admitted to the Chemical Withdrawal Unit with a
diagnosis of “solvent abuse with cerebellar disease and probable cognitive impairment”. 
She was discharged from the hospital on June 6, 1996.  76                              
D.F.G. was again admitted to hospital on June 27, 1996.  She had been
brought to hospital by ambulance as she had lost her coordination due to glue
sniffing.  77                              
After the last visit, the hospital advised C.F.S. that D.F.G. was
pregnant and would deliver in December of 1996.  A C.F.S. social worker met
with D.F.G. at her home on July 18, 1996.  D.F.G. said at that time that she
would enter a residential treatment program for substance abuse.  The worker
returned to D.F.G.’s home on July 23, 1996 to facilitate her transport to the
treatment facility.  The worker’s efforts were unsuccessful because when she
arrived D.F.G. was obviously intoxicated, smelled strongly of solvent and
refused to attend the treatment program.  78                              
On August 1, 1996, C.F.S. brought a motion before Schulman J. of the
Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench for an order compelling D.F.G. to live at a
place of safety and to refrain from consuming any intoxicating substance or
drug.  Schulman J. heard viva voce evidence from three witnesses and
C.F.S. filed five other supporting affidavits.  79                              
Ms. R., D.F.G.’s sister, testified that D.F.G. visited with her and
stayed at her home from time to time.  During the past six years D.F.G. had
been sniffing solvents, and after having “sniffed up” she was dazed and smelt
of solvent.  Ms. R. testified about her concern for D.F.G.’s health.  In her
view, D.F.G. was getting worse, and could not resist glue sniffing.  She was
afraid that continued sniffing would kill her sister.  80                              
Another of D.F.G.’s sisters, Ms. F., gave evidence similar to that of
Ms. R.  She testified that D.F.G. had recently lost a lot of weight, and went
days without eating.  Ms. F. had recently seen D.F.G. in circumstances where
she could hardly walk or talk.  81                              
Sheryl Ferguson, Co-ordinator of Family Services at St. Norbert
Foundation, an alcohol and substance abuse treatment centre, testified that the
St. Norbert Foundation was willing to take D.F.G. into its program immediately. 
She described the program, and its strong cultural content for aboriginals.  82                              
Dr. Laurie E. Hoeschen, the Medical Director of the Chemical Withdrawal
Unit at the Health Sciences Centre in Winnipeg, testified by affidavit to the
effects of glue sniffing on the abuser.  She stated that substantial glue
sniffing causes a multitude of acute effects such as nausea, vomiting, tremors,
blurred vision, joint pain, chest pain, decreased level of consciousness, and
seizures.  The most severe effects are a progression to coma and respiratory or
cardiac arrest, leading to death.  Kidney, liver and bone marrow failure can
also result from chronic use.  The most important site of organ damage from
glue sniffing is the brain.  Substance abuse of the kind practised by D.F.G.
could cause a decrease in her intellectual capacity.   Dr. Hoeschen stated that
there is considerable evidence that solvent abuse causes damage to the
cerebellum, the part of the brain which controls motor co-ordination.  The
abuse could also cause peripheral neuropathy.  The peripheral nerves which
control the sensation and motor power in a person’s arms and legs can be
damaged to the point where there is loss of sensation and generalized muscle
weakness.  Dr. Hoeschen further deposed that solvents take a long time to leave
the body, particularly the brain.  She stated that substance abuse causes
considerable cognitive impairment, and it continues for some time after the
abuse stops.  83                              
Dr. Albert Chudley, Head of the Section of Genetics and Metabolism at
the Health Sciences Centre and a Professor of the Department of Pediatrics and
Child Health and the Department of Human Genetics, stated in his affidavit that
organic solvents used by chronic sniffers are neurotoxic to the brain of the foetus. 
Children exposed in utero to such substances may exhibit central nervous
system dysfunction, developmental delay, attention deficit disorder and
microcephaly.  Experimental studies have shown that chronic exposure to
solvents can lead to retardation of fetal growth and development and to fetal
death.  Dr. Chudley testified that the critical period for the development of
the central nervous system in humans is in the first 16 weeks after
conception.  The central nervous system is, however, sensitive to a variety of
toxic exposures until birth.  Dr. Chudley stated that any reduction of toxic
exposure during pregnancy would reduce the central nervous system damage.  84                              
Schulman J. granted C.F.S.’s motion, ordering that D.F.G. remain at a
place of safety and refrain from the use of intoxicating substances until the
birth of her child: (1996), 111 Man. R. (2d) 219, 138 D.L.R. (4th) 238, [1996]
10 W.W.R. 95, [1996] M.J. No. 386 (QL).  On August 6, 1996, D.F.G. entered the
hospital so that her withdrawal from solvents could be safely monitored.  The
order was stayed by Helper J.A. of the Manitoba Court of Appeal on August 8,
1996.  However, D.F.G. chose to voluntarily continue treatment in the hospital,
and remained there until she was discharged by her physician on August 14,
1996.  85                              
After her discharge, D.F.G. went to live with her sister, Ms. R. 
D.F.G.’s family and the child’s father all agreed to provide support and
encouragement in an effort to prevent D.F.G. from resuming solvent abuse. 
C.F.S. introduced a teaching homemaker to D.F.G. and arranged for a public
health nurse to visit regularly.  The teaching homemaker provided advice on
parenting skills and encouragement in the hope that D.F.G. would remain drug
free.  86                              
The appeal from Schulman J.’s order was heard by the Manitoba Court of
Appeal on August 20, 1996 and allowed on September 12, 1996: (1996), 113 Man.
R. (2d) 3, 131 W.A.C. 3, 138 D.L.R. (4th) 254, [1996] 10 W.W.R. 111, [1996]
M.J. No. 398 (QL).  87                              
On December 6, 1996, D.F.G. delivered a baby boy who appeared to be
physically healthy.  She and her child were discharged from the hospital on
December 18, 1996.  Since that date 24-hour in-home support has been provided
to assist her in parenting the child.  The evidence, at the date of this
hearing, was that D.F.G. no longer abused solvents.  B.                Additional
Facts  88                              
Several of the interveners submitted material on the prevalence of
mental and physical disabilities in children as a result of substance abuse by
their mothers while pregnant.  Some of this evidence focused on the “crisis
situation” in many aboriginal communities.  The following is a brief summary:  (i)                There is clear and overwhelming
evidence that abuse of substances (alcohol, solvents, gasoline, etc.) by
pregnant women can lead to fetal alcohol syndrome (“FAS”) or fetal alcohol
effects (“FAE”).  Moffatt et al. in Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, Fetal Alcohol
Effects and the Impact of Alcohol Exposure during Pregnancy on School Performance
and Behavior in School-age Children in a First Nation Community (November
1996 (the “Moffatt Report”)), comment, at p. 4, that:  Children of women who drink heavily during
pregnancy are at risk for a cluster of anomalies which include central nervous
system dysfunction leading to developmental and cognitive impairment, growth
deficiency and minor facial anomalies as well as a host of associated major and
minor anomalies of many different systems. . . .  The tragedy of the lives of FAS children is all too
well documented in the popular book “The Broken Cord” by Dorris.  They have
learning problems and difficulty with ordinary social relationships.  They have
special problems anticipating the consequences of their actions.  They
frequently have poor concentration and hyperactive behaviour. . . .  [T]he most
consistent cognitive defect is in the area of mathematical skills, but complex
reasoning and visual memory are also commonly affected. . . .  Their personalities
often lead them into situations where they are exploited sexually and in other
ways.   (ii)                The Manitoba Children and Youth
Secretariat in Strategy Considerations for Developing Services for Children
and Youth (March 1997), describes FAS, at p. 15, as “the leading
preventable cause of mental disability in the western world”.  It continues, at
p. 21:  It is estimated that worldwide, 2 of every 1,000 babies born are
affected by FAS.  Though there are no accurate figures for the incidence of
FAS/FAE [fetal alcohol effects] in Manitoba.  The estimate is anywhere from 2
to forty per 1,000 live births, with the highest incidence being among First
Nations children, where as many as 20% may be affected.  See also Joint Statement: Prevention of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS)
and Fetal Alcohol Effects (FAE) in Canada (October 1996), at p. 4; and, Foetal
Alcohol Syndrome: A Preventable Tragedy, Report of the Standing Committee
on Health and Welfare, Social Affairs, Seniors and the Status of Women (June
1992), at p. 2.  While most of the available studies on substance abuse during
pregnancy relate to alcohol abuse, the evidence is that compounds in other
substances, such as the solvents to which the respondent was addicted, are
known to be neurotoxic to both the adult and fetal brain.  (iii)               In addition to the direct
health implications that substance abuse has on the body and mind of the
foetus, there are many secondary disabilities associated with children born
suffering from their mother’s abuse.  The University of Washington School of
Medicine has documented these secondary disabilities during a recent study of
473 clients with FAS/FAE: A. Streissguth et al., Understanding the
Occurrence of Secondary Disabilities in Clients with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
(FAS) and Fetal Alcohol Effects (FAE) (August 1996).  They found that over
90 percent of the clients studied had mental health problems; 60 percent of
those 12 years or older had been suspended or expelled from school or had
dropped out of school; 60 percent of those 12 or over had been in trouble with
the law; 50 percent of those 12 or over had been in “confinement”, that is, for
mental health or alcohol problems or as incarceration for a crime; 50 percent
of those 12 or over had exhibited inappropriate sexual behaviour; and 30
percent of those 12 or over had alcohol or drug problems.  Another significant
finding of the study is that only 7 of the 90 adults (age 21 or over) were able
to live independently and were without employment problems.  It goes without
saying that the tragedy of FAS/FAE is felt not just by its immediate victims,
but is also born by society as a whole.  (iv)               The tragedy of FAS and FAE is
particularly felt in aboriginal communities.  The Manitoba Tribal Council NADAP
Coordinators and Treatment Directors Committee responded to the Moffatt Report
in part by stating that:         There is documented confirmation that the
FAS/E rates on Reserve - 17 in 179 . . . are disturbingly higher than the
provincial average of 1 in 600. . . .  The information is telling use [sic]
there is a crisis for these children and their families.  There is no
indication the rate will slow down.  The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples recorded the following
testimony, in vol. 3, Gathering Strength (1996), at pp. 132-33:  Children with FAS or FAE are often difficult babies, especially if they
are withdrawing from the alcohol that surrounded them in the (womb).  If the
mothers are still actively abusing alcohol, these children are often subject to
attachment breaks, abuse, and/or neglect, and they often become involved with
the child welfare system as foster or adopted children.                                                                    .
. .  They are hard to care for, their disability is not understood, there
are many peer and social pressures, no skills to fall back on. . . .  Currently
we believe many adults (who were born) with FAS/FAE are either on the street or
in jail.  The Manitoba Tribal Council NADAP Coordinators and Treatment Directors
Committee urged “strategies to intervene and prevent FAS/E”.  (v)               The interveners Southeast Child
and Family Services and West Region Child and Family Services are aboriginal
child and family service agencies responsible for delivering services to 18
First Nation communities in Manitoba.  These parties intervened, in part, to
urge upon this Court the creation of a legal remedy to use in their fight
against FAS/FAE.  These interveners submitted that such a remedy would be
consistent with the aboriginal world view, and that the common law should be
expanded to help alleviate what is particularly an aboriginal problem.  II.                Judgments
Below  89                              
The trial judge ordered the respondent detained for treatment first as
she was suffering from a medical disorder within the meaning of the Manitoba
Mental Health Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. M110, and second on the court’s parens
patriae power that permits it to act in place of the parent for the
protection of the child.  90                              
The Manitoba Court of Appeal reversed the trial judge for the reasons
carefully summarized in the reasons of McLachlin J.  III.               Analysis  A.                Introduction  91                              
The law of this country is consistent with the grant of a remedy in this
case.  The parens patriae jurisdiction of the superior courts is of
undefined and undefinable breadth.  This Court’s decision in E. (Mrs.) v.
Eve, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 388, indicates that inherent power resides in the
provincial superior courts to act on behalf of those who cannot act to protect
themselves.  A foetus suffering from its mother’s abusive behaviour is
particularly within this class and deserves protection.  92                              
It has been submitted, however, that a foetus acquires no actionable
rights in our law until it is born alive.  In my view, the “born alive” rule,
as it is known, is  a common law evidentiary presumption rooted in rudimentary
medical knowledge that has long since been overtaken by modern science and
should be set aside for purpose of this appeal.  93                              
This means that a superior court, on proper motion, should be able to
exercise its parens patriae jurisdiction to restrain a mother’s conduct
when there is a reasonable probability of that conduct causing serious and
irreparable harm to the foetus within her.  While the granting of this type of
remedy may interfere with the mother’s liberty interests, in my view, those
interests must bend when faced with a situation where devastating harm and a
life of suffering can so easily be prevented.  In any event, this interference
is always subject to the mother’s right to end it by deciding to have an
abortion.  94                              
The arguments against state intervention are that it improperly
interferes with the rights of the mother, that there are innumerable hazards to
safe pregnancies, and that the state should not impose health standards on
adults without consent.  Those arguments are answerable.  95                              
Once the mother decides to bear the child the state has an interest in
trying to ensure the child’s health.  What circumstances permit state
intervention?  The “slippery slope” argument was raised that permitting state
intervention here would impose a standard of behaviour on all pregnant women. 
Questions were raised about women who smoked, who lived with a smoker, who ate
unhealthy diets, etc.  In response to the query of where a reasonable line
should be drawn it was submitted that the pen should not even be lifted.  This
approach would entail the state to stand idly by while a reckless and/or
addicted mother inflicts serious and permanent harm on to a child she had
decided to bring into the world.  96                              
There can be no general formula and each case must be decided on its own
facts.  However, as a minimum to justify intervention the following thresholds
have to be met:  (1) The woman must have decided to carry the child to term.  (2) Proof must be presented to a civil standard that the abusive
activity will cause serious and irreparable harm to the foetus.  (3) The remedy must be the least intrusive option.  (4) The process must be procedurally fair.  These points
are expanded below.  B.                Breadth
of Parens Patriae Jurisdiction  97                              
The order made by Schulman J. was within the court’s inherent
jurisdiction in wardship matters, a subset of the parens patriae jurisdiction.  98                              
In Eve, supra, this Court faced a different issue, a
mother’s request for a court order authorizing the sterilization of her
mentally incompetent daughter.  In determining this question La Forest J.
examined the history and scope of the parens patriae jurisdiction.  His
reasons explain the undefined and undefinable breadth of the power of the court
in this area.  He approved of Wellesley v. Wellesley (1828), 2 Bli. N.S.
124, 4 E.R. 1078, a case that held the inherent jurisdiction over children
extended “as far as is necessary for protection and education” (p. 1083),  and
stated, at p. 411 that:  It continues to this day, and even where there is legislation in the
area, the courts will continue to use the parens patriae jurisdiction to
deal with uncontemplated situations where it appears necessary to do so for the
protection of those who fall within its ambit; see Beson v. Director of
Child Welfare (Nfld.), [1982] 2 S.C.R. 716.   99                              
La Forest J. noted the comments of both the motions judge and Lord
Denning, M.R., in the Court of Appeal in the case of Re X (a minor),
[1975] 1 All E.R. 697.  Their discussion of the parens patriae
jurisdiction in wardship matters is particularly lucid.  Latey J., the motions
judge, characterized the jurisdiction as follows (at p. 699):  On the first of the two questions already stated,
it is argued for the defendants, first, that because the wardship jurisdiction
has never been involved in any case remotely resembling this, the court, though
theoretically having jurisdiction, should not entertain the application, but
bar it in limine. I do not accept that contention. It is true that this
jurisdiction has not been invoked in any such circumstances. I do not know whether
they have arisen before or, if they have, whether anyone has thought of having
recourse to this jurisdiction. But I can find nothing in the authorities to
which I have been referred by counsel or in my own researches to suggest that
there is any limitation in the theoretical scope of this jurisdiction; or, to
put it another way, that the jurisdiction can only be invoked in the categories
of cases in which it has hitherto been invoked, such as custody, care and
control, protection of property, health problems, religious upbringing, and
protection against harmful associations. That list is not exhaustive. On the
contrary, the powers of the court in this particular jurisdiction have always
been described as being of the widest nature. That the courts are available to
protect children from injury whenever they properly can is no modern
development.  Latey J.
restated the proposition that an order under parens patriae could also
be made to forestall anticipated harm.  He relied upon Chambers of Infancy
(1842), at p. 20:  And the Court will interfere not merely on the
ground of an injury actually done, or attempted against the infant's person or
property; but also if there be any likelihood of such an occurrence, or even an
apprehension or suspicion of it.  Lord Denning,
in the Court of Appeal’s decision in the same case, agreed with Latey J.’s
statement of the law, at p. 703:  No limit has ever been set to the jurisdiction. It has been said to
extend ‘as far as necessary for protection and education’:  see Wellesley v
Wellesley by Lord Redesdale. The court has power to protect the ward from
any interference with his or her welfare, direct or indirect.  100                          
La Forest J. adopted these statements of the law, and considered in some
detail the case law surrounding the imposition of medical treatment,
particularly the forced sterilization of mental incompetents, under the parens
patriae jurisdiction.  In summarizing his opinion on the parens patriae
jurisdiction he stated, at pp. 425-27:  From the earliest time, the sovereign, as parens patriae, was
vested with the care of the mentally incompetent. This right and duty, as Lord
Eldon noted in Wellesley v. Duke of Beaufort, supra at 2 Russ.,
at p. 20, 38 E.R., at p. 243 is founded on the obvious necessity that the law
should place somewhere the care of persons who are not able to take care of
themselves. In early England, the parens patriae jurisdiction was
confined to mental incompetents, but its rationale is obviously
applicable to children and, following the transfer of that jurisdiction to the
Lord Chancellor in the seventeenth century, he extended it to children under
wardship, and it is in this context that the bulk of the modern cases on the
subject arise. The parens patriae jurisdiction was later vested in the
provincial superior courts of this country, and in particular, those of Prince
Edward Island.  The parens patriae jurisdiction is, as I
have said, founded on necessity, namely the need to act for the protection of
those who cannot care for themselves. The courts have frequently stated that it
is to be exercised in the “best interest” of the protected person, or again,
for his or her “benefit” or “welfare”.  The situations under which it can be exercised are
legion; the jurisdiction cannot be defined in that sense. As Lord MacDermott
put it in J. v. C., [1970] A.C. 668, at p. 703, the authorities are not
consistent and there are many twists and turns, but they have inexorably “moved
towards a broader discretion, under the impact of changing social conditions
and the weight of opinion. . . .”  In other words, the categories under which
the jurisdiction can be exercised are never closed.  Thus I agree with Latey J.
in Re X, supra, at p. 699, that the jurisdiction is of a very
broad nature, and that it can be invoked in such matters as custody, protection
of property, health problems, religious upbringing and protection against
harmful associations.  This list, as he notes, is not exhaustive.  What is more, as the passage from Chambers
cited by Latey J. underlines, a court may act not only on the ground that
injury to person or property has occurred, but also on the ground that such
injury is apprehended.  I might add that the jurisdiction is a carefully
guarded one. The courts will not readily assume that it has been removed by
legislation where a necessity arises to protect a person who cannot protect
himself.    101                          
While the breadth of the jurisdiction available under parens patriae
is apparent from La Forest J.’s reasons in Eve, what is unclear is
whether the jurisdiction to act in the best interests of a child can
also include the power to act in the best interests of a foetus.  102                          
It has been held to the contrary both in the Manitoba Court of Appeal’s
ruling in this case, and in the English Court of Appeal in Re F (in
utero), [1988] 2 All E.R. 193.  Both decisions relied on the common law
“born alive” rule.  This rule requires that a foetus achieve personhood before
it can acquire actionable rights.  The child must be born alive before any
rights can accrue or remedies can be sought.  In my view, the reliance on this
rule was misplaced.  The rule is a legal anachronism based on rudimentary
medical knowledge and should no longer be followed, at least for the purposes of
this appeal.  103                          
If a foetus is a “person” for purposes of the parens patriae
jurisdiction, he or she is in a particularly vulnerable position.  A foetus,
absent outside assistance, has no means of escape from toxins ingested by its
mother.  The parens patriae jurisdiction exists for the stated purpose
of doing what is necessary to protect the interests of those who are unable to
protect themselves.  Society does not simply sit by and allow a mother to abuse
her child after birth.  How then should serious abuse be allowed to occur
before the child is born?  C.                The
“Born Alive” Rule  104                          
The “born alive” rule, as its name suggests, requires a foetus to be
born alive before any legal rights of personhood can accrue.  The Court of
Appeal relied on this rule as one resolution to the present case, but no
inquiry was made into the genesis or purpose of the rule.  Once the purpose of
the rule is known, it becomes more apparent that it should not apply in this
case.  105                          
In a persuasive article on this topic, Clarke D. Forsythe has traced the
genesis of the “born alive” rule as evidentiary, rather than substantive; a
principle necessitated by the primitive medical knowledge and technology of the
time: “Homicide of the Unborn Child: The Born Alive Rule and Other Legal
Anachronisms” (1987), 21 Val. U. L. Rev. 563.  106                          
Until the early 19th century medical practitioners could not determine
with confidence before quickening (the first physical sensation by the mother
of the foetus in the womb) whether a woman was pregnant, or further, whether
the child in utero was alive.  Consequently, the common law adopted the
presumption that a child was first endowed with life at quickening.  Forsythe
cites, at pp. 572-73, a passage from An American Practitioner, London
Practice of Midwifery (6th ed. 1826), at p. 77, footnote (v),  which
expressed the near impossibility of determining the existence of pregnancy for
purposes of legal proof before the end of the sixth month:  We have taken a wide range in the examination of ‘authorities’ on the
subject, and the result is that we can find no one invariable sign, nor can
form any combination of symptoms so unequivocal, as to enable us to pronounce
its existence under oath, for all have occasionally proved deceptive. 
Before deciding, our examinations should be frequently repeated, and then, only
should a final decision be seldom hazarded ‘before the end of the sixth
month’.  [Emphasis in original.]   107                          
Limited medical knowledge also could not determine whether a child in
utero was alive at the time it was subjected to an injury unless the child
was also born alive, suffering from that injury.  Forsythe quotes, at p. 576,
from A. S. Taylor in Medical Jurisprudence (7th ed. 1861) who put the
rationale for the “born alive” rule as follows, at p. 411:  It is well known that in the course of nature, many children come into
the world dead, and that others die from various causes soon after birth.  In
the latter, the signs of their having lived are frequently indistinct.  Hence,
to provide against the danger of erroneous accusation, the law humanely
presumes that every newborn child has been born dead, until the contrary
appears from medical or other evidence.  The onus of proof is thereby thrown on
the prosecution; and no evidence imputing murder can be received, unless it be
made certain by medical or other facts, that the child survived its birth and
was actually living when the violence was offered to it.  Forsythe
summarizes the medical knowledge and the legal rule that evolved therefrom, at
p. 575:  As a result of this primitive knowledge of human
life in utero, the health of the child in utero could not be
established unless and until the child was observed outside the womb.  Writers
on medical jurisprudence noted that, even after quickening, it was extremely
difficult to determine whether the child died before or during labor and subsequent
expulsion from the womb.  Moreover, it was nearly impossible to attribute the
injury or death of the child to one cause or another and thus to distinguish
between natural causes and inflicted injuries.  As a result, live birth was
required to prove that the unborn child was alive and that the material acts
were the proximate cause of death, because it could not otherwise be
established if the child was alive in the womb at the time of the material
acts.  108                          
Forsythe examined the history of the “born alive” rule from its oldest
common law origins, considering among others the writings of Bracton, Coke and
Blackstone.  He concluded that the rule was always one of evidence, and not of
substance.  His analysis of the ancient authorities is found at pp. 580-92,
from which the following is extracted (at p. 589):  . . . the practical application of the born alive rule also
demonstrates that the rule was an evidentiary and not a substantive moral
definition of a human being at common law.  In practice, the born alive rule
was applied to proscribe as homicide the killing of a child even if the mortal
injuries were inflicted while the child was still in utero.  If the rule
was truly a substantive definition of human being, and a fetus only became a
human being at birth, then injuring an unborn child in utero would not
be injuring a human being.  In that case, the death of the child out of the
womb could not satisfy the corpus delicti, because the criminal agency
of the defendant -- the moral connection between the infliction of the injury
and the resulting death --would not exist.  The child would not be a
human being both at the time of the injury and the time of the death.  If the
born alive rule was a substantive rule, then homicide could only result from
injuries inflicted after birth, because only then would they be inflicted on “a
human being”.  The common law, however, did not adopt this proposition. 
Rather, the common law considered the injury of the child in utero to be
a constituent part of the homicide of the unborn child, as long as it died out
of the womb.  The law necessarily found the injury to the child in utero
to be an injury to a human being in order to find the subsequent death after
birth to be a homicide.  109                          
Present medical technology renders the “born alive” rule outdated and
indefensible.  We no longer need to cling to an evidentiary presumption to the
contrary when technologies like real time ultrasound, fetal heart monitors and
fetoscopy can clearly show us that a foetus is alive and has been or will be
injured by conduct of another.  We can gauge fetal development with much more
certainty than the common law presumed.  How can the sophisticated
micro-surgery that is now being performed on foetuses in utero be
compatible with the “born alive” rule?  110                          
However, there is the temptation to assume that the courts of the past
that treated the “born alive” rule as one of substantive law knew as much as is
known today about fetal development.  Since medical technology has improved to
the point of eliminating nearly all of the evidentiary problems from which the
“born alive” rule sprang, it no longer makes sense to retain the rule where its
application would be perverse.  The blind application of the “born alive” rule
in this context clearly runs afoul of Holmes’ dictum that:  It is revolting to have no better reason for a rule of law than that so
it was laid down in the time of Henry IV.  It is still more revolting if the
grounds upon which it was laid down have vanished long since, and the rule
simply persists from blind imitation of the past.  (Oliver
Wendell Holmes, “The Path of the Law” (1897), 10 Harv. L. Rev. 457, at
p. 469.)  111                          
In the United States many states still retain the “born alive” rule as a
substantive rule of law, usually without any assessment of its relevance in
modern society.  Some states, armed with today’s medical knowledge have stepped
forward and distinguished the rule.  In Hughes v. State of Oklahoma, 868
P.2d 730 (1994), the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals, following civil
precedent from its State Supreme Court, prospectively abandoned the “born
alive” rule for purposes of homicide cases.  In that case the accused was
charged with manslaughter arising out of a drunk driving accident which
resulted in the other driver’s foetus (which was in the eighth month of
gestation) being stillborn.  Lumpkin P.J. commented, at p. 736, that overruling
the “born alive” rule “allows us to sever the umbilical cord which has linked
our law of evidence with antiquity long after the light of medical knowledge
has dispelled the myths of the past”.  The court, however, pointed out that
while ruling the “born alive” rule inapplicable in homicide cases, they wished,
at pp. 734-35 to “make it absolutely clear that [the] holding shall not affect
a woman’s constitutional right to choose a lawful abortion”.  112                          
Hughes followed precedent from two other state appellate court
decisions: that of Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in Commonwealth
v. Cass, 467 N.E.2d 1324 (1984), and of the Supreme Court of South Carolina
in State v. Horne,  319 S.E.2d 703 (1984).  Both cases determined that
for purposes of state homicide statutes, the “born alive” rule should be
abandoned.  In Cass, Hennessey C.J. commented, at p. 1328, that:  The [born alive] rule has been accepted as the established common law
in every American jurisdiction that has considered the question.  But the
antiquity of a rule is no measure of its soundness. . . .  It is time to reexamine
the grounds upon which the ancient rule was laid down.  The Cass
court held that advances in medical science rendered the original purpose of
the “born alive” rule irrelevant, and it should no longer be followed in
homicide cases.  113                          
It is no great step for this Court to hold the “born alive” rule not
applicable when considering the parens patriae jurisdiction of a
provincial superior court.  While R. v. Sullivan, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 489,
held that the wording of s. 206  of the Criminal Code  adopts the “born
alive” rule for purposes of criminal law, this does not bar a re-assessment of
the rule in the context of this case.  Here we are dealing purely with the
common law, and no enactment of Parliament prevents a re-evaluation of the
premises of this rule.  114                          
Canadian courts have recognized the need to re-evaluate the “born alive”
rule with regard to advances in medical technology.  In Montreal Tramways
Co. v. Léveillé, [1933] S.C.R. 456, a right was created for a
child injured in utero to sue a tortfeasor; see p. 465:  There were two other matters to which our attention
was called; the first was that cases similar to the present one must have
arisen many times in the past, but that no decided case (or at most only one)
has been found in which the child’s right of action for pre-natal injuries has
been maintained.  The paucity of decided cases is far from conclusive, and may
be largely accounted for by the inevitable difficulty or impossibility of
establishing the existence of a causal relation between the fault complained of
and the injury to the child.  With the advance in medical science, however,
that which may have been an insuperable difficulty in the past may now be found
susceptible of legal proof.  Similarly, in Duval
v. Seguin, [1972] 2 O.R. 686 (H.C.), aff’d (1973), 1 O.R. (2d) 482  (C.A.),
Fraser J. observed (at p. 702):  Some of the older cases suggest that there should
be no recovery by a person who has suffered prenatal injuries because of the
difficulties of proof and of the opening it gives for perjury and speculation. 
Since those cases were decided there have been many scientific advances and it
would seem that chances of establishing whether or not there are causal
relationships between the act alleged to be negligent and the damage alleged to
have been suffered as a consequence are better now than formerly.  In any event
the Courts now have to consider many similar problems and plaintiffs should not
be denied relief in proper cases because of  possible difficulties of proof.  115                          
There are contrary authorities to the position adopted in these
reasons.  In Paton v. British Pregnancy Advisory Service Trustees,
[1979] Q.B. 276, the court cited the “born alive” rule as a bar to a husband
obtaining an injunction preventing his pregnant wife from undergoing an
abortion procedure.  This same reasoning was applied with respect to Quebec
civil law in Tremblay v. Daigle, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 530.  116                          
In my view, there is a distinction between abortion and the case under
appeal.  R. v. Morgentaler, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30, struck down this
country’s criminal prohibitions against abortion.  Nothing in these reasons
purports to interfere with the effect of that decision.  However, where a woman
has chosen to carry a foetus to term, the situation is  different.  Having
chosen to bring a life into this world, that woman must accept some
responsibility for its well-being.  In my view, that responsibility entails, at
the least, the requirement that the pregnant woman refrain from the abuse of
substances that have, on proof to the civil standard, a reasonable probability
of causing serious and irreparable damage to the foetus.  It is not
inconsistent to place restraints upon a woman’s abusive behaviour towards her
foetus that she has decided to carry to term yet continue to preserve her
ability to choose abortion at any time during her pregnancy.  It is not a
question of a woman making a “declaration” of her intentions.  Rather, the law
will presume that she intends to carry the child to term until such time as she
indicates a desire to receive, makes arrangements for or obtains an abortion.  117                          
Tremblay v. Daigle, supra, noted that the interests of a
foetus are legally protected in a number of circumstances, for example, tort
law, child welfare, and inheritance rights: pp. 569-70.  A child can sue to
recover for damage inflicted upon it while a foetus: Montreal Tramways, supra. 
A gift devised by will to a foetus will not fail if the testator dies before
birth.  The rationale of attributing rights to the foetus in these situations
is linked to protecting the interests of the child upon its birth.  In this
sense, the rationale of protecting the child/foetus by the exercise of the parens
patriae jurisdiction is no different, as it depends on the intention of the
mother to carry the child to term.  As was stated in Tremblay v. Daigle,
at p. 563:  A foetus is treated as a person only where it is necessary to do so in
order to protect its interests after it is born.  Protecting the
unborn child from having to live its life suffering from severe mental and
physical disabilities should meet the test of necessity to “protect its
interests after it is born”.  118                          
Precedent that states that a foetus is not a “person” should not be
followed without an inquiry into the purpose of such a rule.  In the
well-known case of  Edwards v. Attorney-General for Canada, [1930] A.C.
124, the Privy Council overruled precedent and a unanimous Supreme Court of
Canada, [1928] S.C.R. 276, and held that women were “persons” with respect to
s. 24 of the British North America Act, 1867.  Rigidly applying
precedents of questionable applicability without inquiry will lead the law to
recommit the errors of the past.  119                          
Moreover, Canada is a signatory to the United Nations Declaration of
the Rights of the Child (1959), which states in its preamble that:  . . . the child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs
special safeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection, before as
well as after birth. . . .  120                          
The “born alive” rule should be abandoned, for the purposes of this
case, as  it is  medically out-of-date.  It may be that the rule has continuing
utility in the context of other cases with their own particular facts.  The
common law boasts that it is adaptable.  If so, there is no need to cling for
the sake of clinging to notions rooted in rudimentary medical and scientific
knowledge of the past.  A foetus should be considered within the class of
persons whose interests can be protected through the exercise of the parens
patriae jurisdiction.  D.                Standard
for Exercising Jurisdiction  121                          
In my opinion, it is a modest expansion on La Forest J.’s statements in
Eve, supra, to include a foetus within the class of persons who can
be protected by the exercise of the parens patriae jurisdiction. 
However, clearly, the only person by law able to choose between an abortion or
carrying to term is the mother.  She too has the right to decide her lifestyle
whether pregnant or not. The court’s ability to intervene must therefore be
limited.  It will only be in extreme cases, where the conduct of the mother
has a reasonable probability of causing serious irreparable harm to the unborn
child, that a court should assume jurisdiction to intervene.  122                          
In the Court of Appeal, Twaddle J.A. grounded his decision denying
jurisdiction in part upon a type of “slippery slope” argument (at p. 260
D.L.R.):  The mother’s right to sniff solvents may not seem
of much importance, but I do not see how a court can select which conduct
harmful to an unborn child should be restrained and which not.  This concern
was expressed in a variety of ways at the appeal.  Serious substance abuse that
has a reasonable probability of causing serious and irreparable harm to the
foetus should be restrained.  Simply because there may be hard cases on other
facts not before the Court does not mean we should ignore what is obvious from
the evidence in this case.  The damage caused to children by serious substance
abuse is well documented.  It seems derelict to suggest that we should not
restrain this abuse because we can imagine some other cases that may not be as
clear.  123                          
Taking Twaddle J.A.’s argument to its logical extreme, we would be faced
with some strange results.  It is interesting speculation to wonder what the
result of this appeal might have been, had the state been trying to restrain a
pregnant mother from taking thalidomide to deal with her morning sickness.  124                          
Opposition to this intervention has been strenuously argued by the
respondent and her supporting interveners.  Exercise of the parens patriae
jurisdiction will necessarily involve an overriding of some rights possessed by
the mother in order to protect her foetus.  It is acknowledged that these are
serious impositions, accordingly, the test is set at such a very high
threshold.  We are not simply denying the mother her “right” to sniff solvents
but also possibly her liberty.  That is why a remedy of confinement should be
the final option.  Before a court takes the severe step of ordering
confinement, a condition precedent should be that it is certain on a balance of
probabilities that no other solution is workable or effective.  The least
rights-diminishing option should always be sought.  125                          
In cases such as this any remedy of confinement must be for purposes of
treatment, and not punishment.  It follows that the situs of the confinement
should be  a residential treatment facility or hospital which can offer a
treatment program.  The mother remains free to reject all suggested medical
treatment.  The confinement serves only to prevent her using toxins strong
enough to cause serious and permanent damage to the foetus.  126                          
The right of  a child to sue its mother for prenatal injuries was
recognized in Dobson (Litigation Guardian of) v. Dobson (1997), 148
D.L.R. (4th) 332 (N.B.C.A.).  The extension of the parens patriae doctrine
in the case on appeal should not be viewed as an implicit sanctioning of a
child’s right to sue its mother for “lifestyle choices” made during pregnancy. 
A child initiating any action against its mother would have to prove, in this
type of action as in others, all the necessary elements of a negligence claim,
including causation and damages to the standard required in all tortious
actions.  127                          
The threshold for state intervention is high.  In this case the
difficult test is met but each case will have to be decided on its facts.  The
failure of a pregnant woman to quit smoking or act in some way that is optimum
for fetal health would not meet the test for state intervention.  The familiar
“slippery slope” argument has some points of value, however, it cannot be
raised as a principled bar to granting an injunction in this case.  The
“slippery slope” argument if not carefully assessed can easily become a in
terrorem argument and lose whatever value it may legitimately possess.  128                          
In the present case it is clear that D.F.G. has had ample knowledge of
the effects of substance abuse on her foetus.  She was sadly aware of giving
birth to two permanently handicapped children.  D.F.G. had been offered
counselling and education of various kinds to no apparent avail.  129                          
On the other hand, it is somewhat enlightening that once she was confined,
her behaviour improved.  She voluntarily remained in the hospital after the
order of Schulman J. was stayed by the Court of Appeal.  To the date of this
hearing, she has apparently stayed free of solvents.  Her child was born
healthy and she is raising him primarily alone, but with the aid of C.F.S. and
others.  130                          
D.F.G.’s case indicates that confinement remedies need not last the
entire term of the pregnancy, and would be modified as circumstances change. 
The treatment necessary will vary with the severity of the abuse and the
subsequent conduct of the mother.  131                          
It is a fundamental precept of our society and justice system that
society can restrict an individual’s right to autonomy where the
exercise of that right causes harm to others.  Conversely, it would be unjust not
to restrict one person’s right of autonomy when the exercise of that right
causes harm to others.  In her dissenting opinion in the final report of the
Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies, Proceed with Care (1993),
vol. 2, Dr. Suzanne Rozell Scorsone stated, at p. 1131:  Autonomy is a necessary good, but it is not an absolute.  All of us
have, as the report says, the right to make our own choices, but rights
necessarily entail responsibilities; where our choices may or do harm others,
our choices are, in fact, limited, and we are held accountable, whatever our
gender.  It is the suspension of that accountability with respect to pregnant
women which would constitute the setting of a different (and lower) standard of
behaviour.  As one
American author explained:  [A] state’s compelling interest in potential life outweighs a mother’s
privacy right to conduct her life as she chooses when state intervention is
hardly intrusive.  Moreover,   a privacy right protecting the daily conduct of a pregnant woman from
interference would necessarily be far weaker than her privacy right to decide
whether to have an abortion because, although it might not always be in her
interest to have a child, it is never in her interest to have a child with
birth defects.  (C. A. Kyres,
“A ‘Cracked’ Image of My Mother/Myself?  The Need for a Legislative Directive
Proscribing Maternal Drug Abuse” (1991), 25 New Eng. L. Rev. 1325, at p.
1350.)  132                          
When confinement is determined to be the only solution that will work in
the circumstances, this type of imposition on the mother is fairly modest when
balanced against the devastating harm substance abuse will potentially inflict
on her child.  The afflicted children may be sentenced to a permanently lower
standard of life.  To advocate not confining the mother to prevent this harm
seems extreme and shortsighted.  133                          
The mother’s continuing ability to elect an abortion and end her
confinement makes the intrusion of her liberty relatively modest when weighed
against the child from birth being seriously and permanently impaired.  E.                Procedural
Considerations  134                          
In order to provide some certainty and predictability in these types of
cases, procedural considerations must be developed.  The important questions
are: Who has standing to apply for an order of this type?  On what standard
should the trial judge determine the issue?  What procedural rules should be
used?  135                          
It is not necessary to determine all parties who should have standing in
cases such as this one.  In my view, it is enough that C.F.S., as a governmental
agency, has the requisite standing.  Whether other parties may qualify for
standing should be resolved on a case-by-case basis.  136                          
It is only in those extreme cases, where the conduct of the mother has a
reasonable probability of causing serious and irreparable harm to the unborn
child, and no other reasonable means of treatment exists, that a court should
assume jurisdiction to intervene.  This standard must be met by evidence
presented at a hearing held prior to any restriction being imposed on the mother’s
liberty.  137                          
Finally, there should be procedural fairness.  In this case, the rules
set out in The Court of Queen’s Bench Act, C.C.S.M., c. C280, and the Court
of Queen’s Bench Rules, Man. Reg. 553/88, if properly applied, appear to
meet that need.  F.                Conclusion  138                          
I do not believe our system, whether legislative or  judicial, has
become so paralysed that it will ignore a situation where the imposition
required in order to prevent terrible harm is so slight.  It may be preferable
that the legislature act but its failure to do so is not an excuse for the
judiciary to follow the same course of inaction.  Failure of the court to act
should occur where there is no jurisdiction for the court to proceed.  Outdated
medical assumptions should not provide any licence to permit the damage to
continue.  Where the harm is so great and the temporary remedy so slight, the
law is compelled to act.  139                          
In  Montreal Tramways Co. v. Léveillé, supra, this Court
set the standard for the common law world in tort actions launched by a child
injured in utero by a third party.  The majority of the Court recognized
that in 1933 “the great weight of judicial opinion in the common law courts
denies the right of a child when born to maintain an action for pre-natal
injuries” (p. 460).  Notwithstanding those authorities, the Court ruled that a
child who suffered injury in its mother’s womb as the result of a wrongful act
or default of another had the right, after birth, to maintain an action for its
prenatal injuries.  Lamont J. relied on the following principle:  If a child after
birth has no right of action for pre-natal injuries, we have a wrong inflicted
for which there is no remedy. . . . If a right of action be denied to the child
it will be compelled, without any fault on its part, to go through life carrying
the seal of another’s fault and bearing
a very heavy burden of infirmity and inconvenience without any compensation
therefor.   Lamont J. appealed to fundamental fairness:  To my mind it is but natural
justice that a child, if born alive and viable, should be allowed to
maintain an action in the courts for injuries wrongfully committed upon its
person while in the womb of its mother.  [Emphasis added.]   In my view, the general principles cited by Lamont J. have
application to the case at bar.  See also Dobson, supra.  140                          
It seems fundamentally unfair and inexplicable for this Court to hold
that a foetus, upon live birth, can sue for damages to recompense injuries
suffered in utero, yet have no ability to obtain a remedy preventing
that damage from occurring in the first place.  This is the one of the clearest
of cases where monetary damages are a singularly insufficient remedy.  If our
society is to protect the health and well-being of children, there must exist
jurisdiction to order a pre-birth remedy preventing a mother from causing
serious harm to her foetus.  Someone must speak for those who cannot speak for
themselves.  IV.               Disposition  141                          
To grant the limited intervention proposed in this appeal serves the
interest of:  (a)   the mother as her option for an abortion is always available,  (b)  protecting the foetus from serious and irreparable harm and
permits it a reasonable chance of having a normal life after birth,  (c)   preventing unnecessary spending by Canadian governments to
permanently care for the mentally disabled child born as a result of the
mother’s unrestricted drug addiction.  142                          
I would allow the appeal, and declare that Schulman J. was within his
jurisdiction under parens patriae to order the respondent to refrain
from the consumption of intoxicating substances, and to compel the respondent
to live at a place of safety until the birth of her child.  Appeal dismissed, Sopinka
and Major JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Wolch Pinx Tapper Scurfield,
Winnipeg.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Phillips Aiello Boni, Winnipeg.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba:  The
Department of Justice, Winnipeg.  Solicitors for the intervener the Government of Yukon:  Wolch Pinx
Tapper Scurfield, Winnipeg.  Solicitors for the interveners the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada
and the Christian Medical and Dental Society:  Stikeman, Elliott, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Catholic Group for Health, Justice
and Life:  Barnes, Sammon, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the intervener the Alliance for Life:  Costigan &
Costigan, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Association des Centres jeunesse
du Québec:  Cousineau Primeau & Associés, Montreal.  Solicitors for the interveners the Southeast Child and Family
Services and the West Region Child and Family Services:  Myers Weinberg Kussin
Weinstein Bryk, Winnipeg.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties
Association:  Tory Tory DesLauriers & Binnington, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Abortion Rights Action
League:  Eberts Symes Street & Corbett, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Women’s Legal Education and Action
Fund:  Sheilah Martin and Sharon McIvor, Toronto.  Solicitors for the interveners the Women’s Health Clinic Inc., the
Metis Women of Manitoba Inc., the Native Women’s Transition Centre Inc. and the
Manitoba Association of Rights and Liberties Inc.:  Public Interest Law Centre,
Winnipeg; Taylor McCaffrey, Winnipeg.   