Prud’homme v. Prud’homme, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 663, 2002 SCC 85  André Fortin and Savino Cantatore                                                               Appellants  v.  Fernand Prud’homme                                                                                    Respondent  and  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, La Presse Ltée, 3834310 Canada Inc., Groupe Transcontinental G.T.C. Ltée and Fédération professionnelle des journalistes du Québec                       Interveners  Indexed as:  Prud’homme v.
Prud’homme  Neutral citation:  2002 SCC 85.  File No.:  28117.  2002:  March 13; 2002:  December 20.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec  Civil liability — Municipal councillor — Defamation
— Rules of civil liability applicable to wrongful individual act of municipal
councillor in Quebec — Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64,
arts. 1376, 1457.  Civil liability — Municipal councillor — Defamation
— Common law defences — Whether defence of fair
comment and defence of qualified privilege applicable to Quebec rules of civil
liability — Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, art. 1457.  Civil liability — Municipal councillor — Defamation
— Ratepayers suing municipal councillor for defamation for remarks made at
regular meeting of municipal council that allegedly interfered with their
reputation — Whether municipal councillor committed a fault — Civil Code of
Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, art. 1457.  A school board purchased a lot located in a part of
the city of Repentigny on which to build a school.  The municipal council
passed a bylaw which provided that only residents of that part of the city
would have to cover the cost of a loan to pay for the infrastructure work. 
Some ratepayers, including the appellants, brought an action to have the bylaw
quashed and the action was allowed by the Superior Court.  The respondent, who
was then a municipal councillor, tried unsuccessfully to persuade the other
councillors to appeal the judgment.  He decided to criticize publicly, for 20
minutes at a regular meeting of the council, the fact that no public debate had
been held as to whether the judgment should be appealed.  The appellants,
offended by the statement, which was, in their opinion, full of malicious
insinuations about them that made them out to be bad citizens, brought an
action against the respondent in damages for interfering with their reputation,
honour and dignity.  The Superior Court allowed the action.  The Court of
Appeal set the judgment aside.  Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.  Elected municipal officials are, as a rule, governed
by public law.  Before finding that the wrongful individual act of an elected
municipal official in Quebec is subject to the rules of civil liability, a rule
of public law that provides for this must be identified.  When the new
provisions of the Civil Code of Québec, and more particularly
art. 1376, came into force, they no longer allowed the use of the method
laid down by Laurentide Motels, insofar as that decision imposed an
obligation on the individual to identify a public common law rule that made the
private law applicable to his or her action in liability against the
governmental body.  Article 1376 C.C.Q., which is public law,
expressly provides that the rules set forth in Book Five of the Civil Code
of Québec on obligations “apply to the State and its bodies, and to all
other legal persons established in the public interest, subject to any other
rules of law which may be applicable to them”.  The civil law principles of
civil liability now apply, as a rule, to wrongful acts by such bodies.  It
therefore belongs to the party which intends to rely on the public law in order
to avoid or limit the application of the general rules of civil liability to
establish, where the need arises, that there are relevant public law principles
that prevail over the civil law rules.  Article 1376 C.C.Q. also
applies to the persons who make up a public authority or a body of that
authority, where their acts are connected with public duties.  In this
case, the respondent was acting as a member of a public authority in the
performance of important political duties.  The action thus gave rise to a
public liability problem, within the meaning of art. 1376 C.C.Q.  Because Quebec civil law does not provide for a specific
form of action for interference with reputation, the general rules that apply
to questions of civil liability as laid down in  art. 1457 C.C.Q.
apply.  In an action of that nature, the plaintiff must establish, on a balance
of probabilities, the existence of injury, of a wrongful act, and of a causal
connection.  To demonstrate the existence of injury, the plaintiff must
convince the judge that the impugned remarks were defamatory.  Words may be
defamatory because of the idea they expressly convey or by the insinuations
that may be inferred from them.  Whether remarks are defamatory is determined
by applying an objective standard.  It must be asked whether an ordinary person
would believe that the remarks made, when viewed as a whole, brought discredit
on the reputation of another person.  In defamation cases, the wrongful act may
derive from two types of conduct, one malicious and the other merely
negligent.  Determining fault is a contextual question.  An action in defamation involves two fundamental
values: freedom of expression and the right to reputation.  While elected
municipal officials may be quite free to discuss matters of public interest,
they must act as would the reasonable person.  The reasonableness of their
conduct will often be demonstrated by their good faith and the prior checking
they did to satisfy themselves as to the truth of their allegations.  Because the laws governing elected municipal officials
in Quebec are silent as to the personal liability of those officials for their
wrongful individual acts, any public law rule that deviates from the jus
commune of civil liability will therefore necessarily derive from the
public common law.  The common law qualified privilege that protects a
municipal councillor at council meetings is so intimately connected to the
public nature of the duties of office performed by the councillor, and to the
unique requirements of that office, that it must be recognized as a principle
of the public common law that is applicable in Quebec law.  However, the
defence of qualified privilege that applies to defamation actions in common law
is based on the existence of a presumption of malice, and therefore cannot be
incorporated in that form into the civil law rules, which are based on a presumption
of good faith (art. 2805 C.C.Q.), without disturbing the coherence
of its application in the area of public authority liability.   The intervention by the Court of Appeal in this case,
and its decision to set aside the trial judgment, were not based on a general
reassessment of the evidence.  The issue in this appeal is the legal
characterization and effects of the events.  The issue is whether the
respondent’s statement, when viewed in its context and in its entirety, was
defamatory in nature and constituted a fault within the meaning of the law of
civil liability, having regard to the judgment of the Superior Court and the
findings of fact in that judgment.  The characterization of the respondent’s
statements for the purpose of determining whether they were wrongful may,
depending on the circumstances, be a question of mixed fact and law. In the
circumstances, the Court of Appeal must accord a degree of deference to the
trial judge’s decision, and, in order to review that decision, must find
palpable and overriding error.  In this case, the respondent did not commit a fault. 
The Superior Court focused its analysis on isolated elements of the
respondent’s speech instead of examining it as a whole and in context, and this
vitiated its assessment of the content and legal consequences of the
speech.  Even assuming that this was an error on a question of mixed fact
and law, it must be regarded as a palpable and overriding error. The nature and
gravity of the error justified the Court of Appeal’s intervention with respect
to the trial judge’s decision.  The respondent spoke to let the voters of the
city know that he opposed the council’s decision not to appeal the judgment
quashing the bylaw.  He was entitled to question the assessment of the facts
done by the judge.  He remained steadfast in his original position, and argued
that it was not the responsibility of the entire population of the city to pay
the cost of the infrastructure work.  The respondent cannot be faulted for
failing, in the time that he was allowed and in a speech punctuated by
interruptions and calls to order, to present an exhaustive account of all of
the facts of the case.  In his attempt to persuade the other councillors and
his audience, he was entitled to stress the facts that appeared to support an
appeal.  Overall, the respondent acted in good faith, with the aim of
performing his duties as an elected municipal official.  While his
comments about the appellants were sometimes harsh, they were made in the
public interest.  His remarks remained within the bounds of his right of
comment, opinion and expression, as a municipal official, about the affairs of
his municipality that were matters of public interest.  If the respondent were
to be found to have committed a fault in these circumstances, the right of free
discussion within the municipal political precincts would be dangerously undermined,
and the vitality of democracy at the local level would be weakened.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .    Civil Code of Lower Canada, art. 356.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, Preliminary Provision, arts. 3, 35,
300, 1376, 1457, 2805.   Quebec Act, 1774, R.S.C. 1985, App. II, No. 2.   Authors Cited     Colas, Émile.  “Le droit à la
vérité et le libelle diffamatoire” (1984), 44 R. du B. 637.   David, René.  English Law and
French Law:  A Comparison in Substance.  London:  Stevens & Sons, 1980.   Hétu, Jean, Yvon Duplessis et
Dennis Pakenham.  Droit municipal:  principes généraux et contentieux. 
Montréal:  Hébert Denault, 1998.   Klar, Lewis N.  Tort Law,
2nd ed.  Scarborough:  Carswell, 1996.  Lemieux, Denis.  “L’impact du
Code civil du Québec en droit administratif” (1994), 15 Admin. L.R. (2d)
275.  Linden, Allen M.  Canadian
Tort Law, 6th ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1997.  McLaren,
John P. S.  “The Defamation Action and Municipal Politics”
(1980), 29 U.N.B. L.J. 123.  Pineau, Jean, et Monique
Ouellette.  Théorie de la responsabilité civile, 2e éd. 
Montréal:  Thémis, 1980.  Rogers, Ian MacFee.  Municipal
Councillors’ Handbook, 6th ed.  Scarborough:  Carswell, 1993.    Tremblay, Jacques.  “La
responsabilité de l’élu municipal et sa protection contre certaines pertes
financières: récents développements”, dans Développements récents en droit
municipal.  Cowansville:  Yvon Blais, 1998, 155.  Trudel, Pierre.  “Poursuites en
diffamation et censure des débats publics.  Quand la participation aux
débats démocratiques nous conduit en cour” (1998), 5 B.D.M. 18.  Vallières, Nicole.  La presse
et la diffamation.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur, 1985.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[2000] R.R.A. 607, [2000] Q.J. No. 2070 (QL), setting aside a decision of the
Superior Court.  Appeal dismissed.  William J. Atkinson, for the appellants.   English version of the judgment of the Court delivered
by   I.  Nature of the Appeal  1                                  
The appellants have appealed from a decision of the Quebec Court of
Appeal setting aside a judgment of the Superior Court ordering the respondent
to pay the appellants $58,198 in damages for defamation.  The remarks in issue
were made at a regular meeting of the Repentigny municipal council in the
course of the respondent’s performance of his duties as a municipal
councillor.  In this appeal, the Court is asked to determine the rules of civil
liability that apply to the wrongful individual act of an elected municipal
official in Quebec.  At the same time, it provides an opportunity to review and
clarify the rules governing defamation actions in Quebec.  II.  Origin of the Case  2                                  
The facts are relatively complex.  It is not necessary, for the purposes
of this appeal, to reiterate them in full.  It will suffice to review the facts
that are essential to a proper understanding of the remarks made by the
respondent on the evening of July 7, 1997.   4                                  
In the winter of 1991, plans and specifications for completing the
infrastructure work were filed.  The anticipated cost of that infrastructure
work, which consisted primarily of extending Iberville boulevard, came to
$7,748,000.  At that time, the City of Repentigny was one of the most heavily
indebted cities in Quebec.  In March 1991, with no real development plan,
and without studying the financial impact of the project for ratepayers, the
municipal council passed bylaw 1055 which provided that residents of the
eastern part of the city would have to cover the cost, themselves, of a loan in
the amount of $7,748,000, through an increase in property taxes and a special
levy, amortized over 20 years.  The fiscal repercussions were staggering. 
For some residents, the special tax came to $200,000.  The City realized its
error, and tried as best it could to reduce the cost of the work.  Its efforts
resulted in only a very slightly lighter tax burden on ratepayers, who decided
to organize in order to bring an action to have bylaw 1055 quashed.  That
action was commenced in 1994 by 48 ratepayers, including the
appellants.  In the interim, the City initiated expropriation proceedings
against the appellants, who refused to convey the part of their lands to be
used for extending Iberville boulevard for the sum of $1.   6                                  
Fernand Prud’homme (the respondent), who is not related to the
appellants, has been a municipal councillor for the City of Repentigny since
November 1993.  He disagreed completely with the judgment of the Superior
Court quashing bylaw 1055, and tried to persuade the other councillors to
appeal the judgment.  They refused to back him up, and very much preferred to
put an end to the entire matter, which had undeniably been extremely
embarrassing for the City a few months before a municipal election.  The
respondent was upset by this attitude, and decided to criticize publicly the
fact that no public debate had been held as to whether the judgment should be
appealed, at a regular meeting of the Council.  That meeting was held on the
evening of July 7, 1997, the date on which the time for appeal
expired.  Between 100 and 150 residents attended the meeting, which was
also broadcast on the community television channel to a potential audience of
62,000 viewers.  For the purposes of this case, copies of the videotape
were made available to the Court.   8                                  
The appellants were offended by this statement, which was, in their
opinion, full of malicious insinuations making them out to be bad
citizens.  They called on the respondent to retract his words, but to no
avail.  They were determined to obtain reparation, and applied to the Superior
Court for a special order to compel the respondent to appear on a charge of
contempt of court.  The application was dismissed by Michel Côté J.
of the Superior Court, who found that the respondent was entitled to express
his disagreement with the decision of Croteau J. without this constituting
contempt of court.  Despite having lost in their attempt, the appellants decided
to bring action against the respondent in damages for interfering with their
reputation, honour and dignity.  On February 18, 1999,
Tellier J. of the Superior Court allowed their defamation action and
awarded damages of $58,198 against the respondent.  On June 26, 2000,
the Quebec Court of Appeal set that judgment aside.  III.  Relevant Statutory Provisions   3.  Every person is the possessor of the fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of conscience, freedom of religion, freedom of
opinion, freedom of expression, freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of
association.  4.  Every person has a right to the safeguard of his
dignity, honour and reputation.  5.  Every person has a right to respect for his
private life.  44.  Every person has a right to information to the
extent provided by law.  49.  Any unlawful interference with any right or freedom
recognized by this Charter entitles the victim to obtain the cessation of such
interference and compensation for the moral or material prejudice resulting
therefrom.  In case of unlawful and intentional interference,
the tribunal may, in addition, condemn the person guilty of it to exemplary
damages.  Civil Code
of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64                            PRELIMINARY PROVISION  The Civil Code of Québec, in harmony with the
Charter of human rights and freedoms and the general principles of law, governs
persons, relations between persons, and property.  The Civil Code comprises a body of rules which, in
all matters within the letter, spirit or object of its provisions, lays down
the jus commune, expressly or by implication.  In these matters, the
Code is the foundation of all other laws, although other laws may complement
the Code or make exceptions to it.                                                             BOOK
ONE                                                              PERSONS  3.  Every person is the holder of
personality rights, such as the right to life, the right to the inviolability
and integrity of his person, and the right to the respect of his name,
reputation and privacy.  These rights are inalienable.  35.  Every person has a right to
the respect of his reputation and privacy.  No one may invade the privacy of a person without
the consent of the person or his heirs unless authorized by law.  300.  Legal persons established in
the public interest are primarily governed by the special Acts by which they
are constituted and by those which are applicable to them; legal persons
established for a private interest are primarily governed by the Acts applicable
to their particular type.  Both kinds of legal persons are also governed by
this Code where the provisions of such Acts require to be complemented,
particularly with regard to their status as legal persons, their property or
their relations with other persons.                                                             BOOK
FIVE                                                          OBLIGATIONS  1376.  The rules set forth in this
Book apply to the State and its bodies, and to all other legal persons
established in the public interest, subject to any other rules of law which may
be applicable to them.  1457.  Every person has a duty to
abide by the rules of conduct which lie upon him, according to the
circumstances, usage or law, so as not to cause injury to another.  Where he is endowed with reason and fails in this
duty, he is responsible for any injury he causes to another person and is
liable to reparation for the injury, whether it be bodily, moral or material in
nature.  He is also liable, in certain cases, to reparation
for injury caused to another by the act or fault of another person or by the
act of things in his custody.  IV.  Judicial History  A.  Superior Court of Quebec, February 18, 1999  10                              
After a detailed examination of the facts, Tellier J. stated a series of
findings.  First, he noted that the respondent’s statement was made at a
regular meeting of the municipal council barely an hour before the time for
appeal expired.  Second, he observed that the respondent’s remarks appeared to
have been made with aforethought.  Third, he found that the respondent had been
acting completely alone, in that his colleagues had refused to support his
request for a special meeting to be held to consider whether the judgment of
Croteau J. of the Superior Court should be appealed.  11                              
Tellier J. went on to acknowledge that everyone is free to state
the reasons why he or she disagrees with a judgment.  However, no one may abuse
that right in such a way as to interfere with the honour or reputation of
another person.  Then, analysing the statement itself, Tellier J. criticized
the respondent for a number of inexcusable omissions, and for referring to
certain facts which were entirely outside the scope of any alleged discussion
as to whether the judgment should be appealed.  He deduced from this that the
respondent had intended to humiliate the appellants by making them out to be
bad citizens who did not pay their taxes and who were getting rich at the
community’s expense.  He added that the wrongdoing was such that the
qualified privilege enjoyed by municipal councillors in the performance of the
duties of their office could not protect him.  12                              
Tellier J. moved on to the assessment of damages, and observed that
while it may be difficult to assign a value to moral injury with mathematical
exactitude, it is nonetheless a real injury.  He therefore ordered that the
respondent pay each of the appellants the sum of $5,000 in damages. 
Having regard to the intentional nature of the respondent’s remarks, he awarded
each of the appellants an additional $3,000 as exemplary damages for
interference with their fundamental rights.  He also ordered that $18,198
be paid for extrajudicial fees.  B.  Court of Appeal of Quebec, [2000] R.R.A. 607  13                              
Michaud C.J., with whom Gendreau and Mailhot JJ.A. concurred,
started by pointing out that the measured, unaggressive and polite nature of
the respondent’s speech could be seen on the video recording.  He then said
that the respondent was entitled to criticize publicly a judgment that could
increase the tax burden on all the ratepayers of Repentigny.  Whether the
judgment should have been appealed was a matter of public interest on which it
was legitimate for him to state an opinion in the performance of the duties of
his office as a municipal councillor.  Moreover, his statement was directed
more to the Mayor and the other members of the municipal council than to the
appellants.  The respondent was attempting to inform the public that he
personally would have advocated an appeal.   15                              
In his final ruling, reaffirming the importance of freedom of political
speech in a democratic society, Michaud C.J. held that the respondent was
entitled to the defence of fair comment as defined by the Court of Appeal in Steenhaut
v. Vigneault, [1986] R.R.A. 548.  He also found that the
respondent’s remarks were protected by the qualified privilege enjoyed by
municipal councillors in the performance of the duties of their office.  V.  Analysis  16                              
Elected municipal officials are the leading players in municipal
democracy.  They are chosen by the residents to look after the community’s
interests; they take on a variety of responsibilities, some of which are
provided by law and others of which are inherent in the nature of their
position.  Because their office is an elected one, municipal officials are
accountable primarily to their constituents if they are unable to meet the
demands of their position.  However, like anyone else, elected municipal
officials may commit wrongful acts that cause injury to individuals in the
performance of the duties of their office.  Because such a wrongful act cannot
be adequately remedied at the polls, an effective sanction for it can be
applied only by the courts.  When this happens, because of the public nature
of the duties of the office of elected municipal officials, the courts are
faced with the question of how to apply the ordinary rules of liability in the jus commune
to the wrongful individual acts of those officials.  17                              
The parties did not examine the impact of the public nature of the
duties of the respondent’s office on the rules that apply to this appeal, but
they analysed the respondent’s actions under the rules of the civil law system
of liability.  The respondent, citing case law, also raised two common law
defences:  fair comment, and qualified privilege.  The appellants argued that
the criteria that the first defence requires were not met, while the second
defence simply could not be made in civil law.  Before addressing the central
issue in this appeal, the respondent’s liability, this Court must try to
resolve the difficulties associated with identifying and defining the rules
that apply to a defamation action against an elected municipal official in
Quebec.  For that purpose, the Court must revisit what it held in Laurentide
Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 705, having regard to
the provisions of the new Civil Code of Québec (“C.C.Q.”). 
First, however, we should briefly outline the nature and scope of the duties of
the office of elected municipal officials, since it is precisely those duties
of office that define the framework within which the allegedly wrongful conduct
of the municipal councillor here must be analysed.  A.     What Rules of
Civil Liability Apply to the Wrongful Individual Act of an Elected Municipal
Official in Quebec?  (i)  Legal Status and Duties of
Elected Municipal Officials  18                              
Despite the early emergence of municipal institutions in Quebec, the
rights and duties of elected municipal officials are still not stated in
precise, well-organized statutory provisions.  The few obligations imposed
on elected municipal officials by the statutes in question plainly do not
provide a complete guide to their legal status, and are rather, for the most
part, particular applications of a general duty to take care of the
municipality’s affairs honestly and fairly.  For example, there are laws that
provide that they have an obligation to vote, they are entitled to
remuneration, they have an obligation to declare financial interests, they have
a duty of fairness that requires that they abstain from voting when they have a
conflict of interest, and so on.  (See J. Tremblay, “La responsabilité de
l’élu municipal et sa protection contre certaines pertes financières: récents
développements”, in Développements récents en droit municipal (1998),
155, at p. 157.)    21                              
Generally speaking, elected municipal officials are officials of the
municipal corporation (s. 47 of the Cities and Towns Act, R.S.Q.,
c. C-19, and s. 79 of the Municipal Code of Québec, R.S.Q., c.
C-27.1).  In that capacity, their rights and duties are those of a mandatary. 
As well, in the course of their participation in the legislative or
administrative activities of the council, they are not personally liable for the
council’s acts, unless they acted fraudulently or with gross negligence
amounting to gross fault.  Nor are they liable for the ultra vires acts
of the municipality, unless they acted maliciously or in bad faith (Jean, supra,
at p. 211; I. MacF. Rogers, The Law of Canadian Municipal
Corporations (2nd ed. (loose-leaf)), at p. 214.16).  However, in the
case of the collegial acts of the council, elected municipal officials are, as
a rule, personally liable for their wrongful individual acts.    (ii)  Applicable Rules of Liability  24                              
Elected municipal officials are, as a rule, governed by the law that
creates their offices, which is public law.  This does not mean that they may
never be subject to the civil law.  Public law, however, will determine the
extent to which they will be subject to that law.  Accordingly, before finding
that the wrongful individual act of an elected municipal official in Quebec is
subject to the rules of civil liability set out in arts. 1457 C.C.Q.
et seq., a rule of public law that provides for this must be identified.  25                              
In Laurentide Motels, supra, this Court held that the
extent to which public authorities are subject to the rules of the civil law in
matters of liability was determined by the common law rule established by the
House of Lords in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978]
A.C. 728.  That rule provides that only those decisions of public
authorities that are within the “operational sphere”, as opposed to the
political sphere, are subject to the rules of private law, the private law in
Quebec being composed of the rules found in the Civil Code.  26                              
Laurentide Motels, supra, was decided under the Civil
Code of Lower Canada (“C.C.L.C.”).  The only provision of that Code
that is even remotely relevant to the definition of the rules of civil
liability that apply to public authorities was found in art. 356 C.C.L.C. 
That article provided that political corporations were governed by the public
law and were only subject to the civil law in their relations, in certain
respects, to individual members of society.  Beetz J. said that this
article had no normative value, and noted that it was very surprising if the
law of exception, which, in that area, was at that time the civil law, were to
determine itself the sphere in which it applied to public authorities
(p. 720).   28                              
It may seem surprising that a public law rule would be found in the Civil
Code of Québec.  It is important to recall, however, that the new Code does
not simply lay down a body of private law rules, or “a law of exception”.  As
stated in its preliminary provision, it is the jus commune of
Quebec:  The Civil Code of Québec, in harmony with the
Charter of human rights and freedoms and the general principles of law, governs
persons, relations between persons, and property.  The Civil Code comprises a body of rules which,
in all matters within the letter, spirit or object of its provisions, lays down
the jus commune, expressly or by implication.  In these matters, the
Code is the foundation of all other laws, although other laws may complement
the Code or make exceptions to it.  [Emphasis added.]    31                              
In short, when the new provisions of the Civil Code of Québec,
and more particularly art. 1376, came into force, they no longer allowed
the use of the method laid down by Laurentide Motels, supra,
insofar as that decision imposed an obligation on the individual to identify a
public common law rule that made the private law applicable to his or her
action in liability against the governmental body.  The civil law principles of
civil liability now apply, as a rule, to wrongful acts by such bodies.  It
therefore belongs to the party which intends to rely on the public law in order
to avoid or to limit the application of the general rules of civil liability to
establish, where the need arises, that there are relevant public law principles
that prevail over the civil law rules.  (iii)  Civil Law Rules of Liability     [translation]  “The
form in which the libel is expressed is of little import; it is the result
achieved in the mind of the reader that creates the delict.”  The defamatory
allegation or imputation may be direct, or it may be indirect, “by simple
allusion, insinuation or irony, or be made conditionally, as an expression of
doubt, or hypothetically.”  Often, the allegation or imputation “is conveyed to
the reader by way of a simple insinuation, an interrogative sentence, a
reference to a rumour, mention of information that has infiltrated the public
awareness, juxtaposition of unrelated facts that, together, take on the
appearance of being related”.    [translation]  The
first is an act in which the defendant, knowingly, in bad faith, with intent to
harm, attacks the reputation of the victim and tries to ridicule or humiliate
him or her, expose the victim to the hatred or contempt of the public or a
group.  The second results from conduct in which there is no intent to
harm, but in which the defendant has nonetheless interfered with the reputation
of the victim through the defendant’s temerity, negligence, impertinence or
carelessness.  Both kinds of conduct constitute a civil fault and entitle
the victim to reparation, and there is no difference between them in terms of
the right.  In other words, we must refer to the ordinary rules of civil
liability and resolutely abandon the false idea that defamation is only the
result of an act of bad faith where there was intent to harm.    38                              
In every case, determining fault is a contextual question of fact and
circumstances.  On this point, it is important to note that an action in
defamation involves two fundamental values: freedom of expression and the right
to reputation.  This Court has long recognized the importance of the first of
those values in a democratic society.  In Reference re Alberta Statutes,
[1938] S.C.R. 100, at pp. 145-46, Cannon J. explained that freedom of
expression was a necessary prerequisite for the proper function of our
parliamentary institutions:  Freedom of discussion is essential to enlighten public opinion in a
democratic State; it cannot be curtailed without affecting the right of the
people to be informed through sources independent of the government concerning
matters of public interest.  There must be an untrammelled publication of the
news and political opinions of the political parties contending for ascendancy.
. . .  Democracy cannot be maintained without its foundation: free
public opinion and free discussion throughout the nation of all matters
affecting the State within the limits set by the criminal code and the common
law.  40                              
The Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q., c. C-12, which
is applicable in this case, a matter that is within the legislative
jurisdiction of the National Assembly of Quebec, recognizes the crucial
importance of freedom of expression.  Section 3 of that Charter ranks that
freedom among the fundamental rights that s. 52 provides will prevail over
Quebec’s legislation (see Ford, supra; see also Guignard, supra,
at para. 18).  41                              
In addition, this Court has often stressed that political discourse is
central to the constitutional guarantee of freedom of expression (Thomson
Newspapers, supra; Sharpe, supra; Guignard, supra). 
In Keegstra, supra, at pp. 763-64, Dickson C.J. said, inter
alia:  The connection between freedom of expression and the political process
is perhaps the linchpin of the s. 2(b) guarantee, and the nature of
this connection is largely derived from the Canadian commitment to democracy.
Freedom of expression is a crucial aspect of the democratic commitment, not
merely because it permits the best policies to be chosen from among a wide
array of proffered options, but additionally because it helps to ensure that
participation in the political process is open to all persons.   [translation]  Municipal
democracy is based on confrontation between views and on open, and sometimes
vigorous and passionate, debate.  Discussion about controversial subjects can
occur only in an atmosphere of liberty.  If the rules governing the conduct of
such debates are applied in such a way as to cause the people who participate
in them to fear that they will be hauled before the courts for the slightest
breach, the probability that they will choose to withdraw from public life will
increase.  43                              
That freedom of speech is not absolute.  It is limited by, inter alia,
the requirements imposed by other people’s right to the protection of their
reputation.  As Cory J. observed in Hill v. Church of Scientology of
Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130, at para. 108, reputation is an
attribute of personality that any democratic society concerned about respect
for the individual must protect:  Democracy has always recognized and cherished the
fundamental importance of an individual.  That importance must, in turn,
be based upon the good repute of a person.  It is that good repute which
enhances an individual’s sense of worth and value.  False allegations can so
very quickly and completely destroy a good reputation.  A reputation tarnished
by libel can seldom regain its former lustre.  A democratic society, therefore,
has an interest in ensuring that its members can enjoy and protect their good
reputation so long as it is merited.  44                              
The right to reputation is also protected, in Quebec, by s. 4 of
the Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms and by art. 3 C.C.Q. 
As well, although it is not specifically mentioned in the Canadian Charter ,
the good reputation of the individual represents and reflects the innate
dignity of the individual, a concept which underlies all the Canadian Charter 
rights (Hill, supra, at para. 120).  45                              
Accordingly, while elected municipal officials may be quite free to
discuss matters of public interest, they must act as would the reasonable
person.  The reasonableness of their conduct will often be demonstrated by
their good faith and the prior checking they did to satisfy themselves as to
the truth of their allegations.  These are guidelines for exercising their
right to comment, which has been repeatedly reaffirmed by the courts.  (iv)  Public Common Law Rules That
Prevail  46                              
The question that arises at this stage is whether there are public law
rules that defeat the application of the civil law rules of liability for the
individual wrongful acts of elected municipal officials.  Quebec public
law is composed of the written law and the “public” common law.  Only those
common law rules that are public in nature apply in the province, because the Quebec
Act, 1774, established that the civil law prevails in respect of property
and civil rights.  Identifying the rules of the public common law may be
an especially difficult task for the Quebec jurist, because the common law, as
a rule, makes no distinction between private law and public law.  Public law
and private law problems must be examined and resolved within a single legal
system, using a consistent method and the same vocabulary or concepts. 
Nonetheless, those rules must be identified, in order to coordinate the two
legal systems in Quebec, which apply in separate spheres.  (See Laurentide
Motels, supra, at p. 721.)  This Court has developed that legal
technique as a method to be used for solving the problems that might arise when
the common law and the civil law come in contact, in some areas of Quebec law,
because of the mixed nature of that law.  This is not to suggest that outside
that context, as a general rule, there is a summa divisio in common law
that would distinguish public common law from private common law for all
purposes.  47                              
As noted earlier, the laws governing elected municipal officials in
Quebec, apart from a few particular provisions that do not apply in this case,
are silent as to the personal liability of those officials for their wrongful
individual acts.  Accordingly, any public law rule that deviates from the jus
commune of civil liability will necessarily derive from the public common
law.  48                              
The respondent raised two defences derived from the common law: 
qualified privilege and the defence of fair comment.  Those defences were
introduced into the civil law some years ago under the influence of an earlier
tendency on the part of the Quebec courts to import common law concepts in
areas of the law that are governed by both public law and private law
rules.  In order to determine whether those defences may be applied
directly in the civil law, we must determine the nature of the defences. 
As noted earlier, whether they may be raised depends on whether they are public
in nature.  (v)  Qualified Privilege      51                              
The fact that the defence of qualified privilege may be raised by
individuals who are not performing the duties of a public office casts doubt on
its purely public nature.  We would note that if the defence derived from the
private common law, it could not defeat the application of the usual rules of
the civil law.  For the purpose of determining whether the rule is applicable
in Quebec law, with or without adaptation or by identifying rules that are
equivalent, in terms of their effects, in Quebec law, it therefore becomes
necessary to distinguish between private common law and public common law.  52                              
Any attempt to distinguish between two branches of a common law that is,
in principle, a single body, will necessarily generate methodological
difficulties.  Properly speaking, there are no established criteria by
which a public common law rule may be identified.  However, in Laurentide
Motels, supra, at p. 723, Beetz J. said that “[a] rule
which has application only to public bodies, which exists and is justified by
the public nature of those bodies, is surely a rule of public law.”  Professor
Côté, supra, clearly understood what that statement meant when he wrote,
at p. 401:  [translation] 
We might think that Beetz J. did not intend to propose two distinct
criteria for whether a common law rule is public in nature, because it is hard
to imagine circumstances in which a rule would be applicable only to public
authorities when this specific legal treatment was not justified by the public
nature of the persons to whom it applied.  We may conclude that a common law
rule will be in the nature of a public law rule, inter alia, when it
applies only to public authorities.  On the other hand, a common law rule
that applies without distinction to public authorities and to individuals would
not be a priori in the nature of a public law rule.  53                              
Qualified privilege is not, a priori, a concept unique to the
public common law.  It may be raised by individuals just as it may be raised by
persons performing the duties of public office.  In fact, as its definition
suggests, qualified privilege attaches much more often to particular
circumstances than to specific classes of identifiable persons.  It is
therefore more accurate to talk about “privileged occasions” than about
“privileged persons”.  Things done by municipal councillors acting in the
course of the duties of their office fall into those privileged occasions where
important public interest considerations call for them to be granted partial
protection against the legal consequences that flow from words that would
otherwise be regarded as defamatory.  As noted earlier, the duties of office of
municipal councillors require that they take public positions and make efforts
to explain and persuade with respect to the numerous problems that arise in a
municipality and in the running of it.  The councillor’s freedom of expression
is a crucial instrument for achieving effective participation in and
transparent management of municipal affairs.  Decisions that sometimes
have a negative effect on individuals or on important interests not only must
be made, but must also be justified to the public.  Freedom of speech, when
exercised in a manner that respects other persons but exercised freely, is an
essential instrument for the proper performance of the duties of the office of
an elected municipal official.  For that reason, it is generally
acknowledged that words spoken by a municipal councillor at a council meeting
are protected.  Although not all instances of qualified privilege fall into the
realm of public law, obviously, the qualified privilege that protects a
municipal councillor at council meetings is clearly part of it:  the
application of this particular form of qualified privilege is so intimately
connected to the public nature of the duties of office performed by a municipal
councillor, and to the unique requirements of that office, that it must be recognized
as a principle of the public common law that is applicable in Quebec law.   [translation] 
When one legal system borrows from another, there will always be
problems.  This is not a matter of simply taking an apple from one basket
and putting it in another.  Each element of a legal system derives its meaning,
its very value, from the fact that it belongs to that system.  We therefore
cannot dissociate it from that system and introduce it into another system
without effecting certain transpositions, which are in no way obvious.      [translation]  In Quebec
civil law, elected municipal officials may be protected by the application of
the ordinary rules of civil liability, without reference to an extrinsic
concept.  In this sense, the qualified privilege conferred on elected municipal
officials by the civil law is not a mere defence of justification which a
priori relies on the absence of fault on the part of the official, having
regard to the nature of the office, the duties that it implies and the specific
circumstances of the case.  The rules of civil liability mean that the conduct
of an elected official will be assessed objectively, referring to the conduct
that comparable persons would have adopted in the same circumstances. 
What is called “qualified privilege” is therefore, in the civil law, simply the
defence raised by a person who may have performed an objectively wrongful act,
but who has not committed a fault, because the act was performed in the normal
performance of the duties of public office, that office imposes a duty on him
or her to perform that act (or the act may be connected to a duty inherent in
the duties of that office) it was therefore in the public interest to perform
it, and in performing it, the person who did so acted with all the care that a
comparable person would reasonably have exercised in the same circumstances.  60                              
In Quebec civil law, the criteria for the defence of qualified privilege
are circumstances that must be considered in assessing fault.  Accordingly, the
only rules that apply to an action in defamation brought against an elected
municipal official in Quebec are still in fact the rules set out in the Civil
Code.  However, the manner in which those rules are applied must be based on
the context, having regard to the requirements associated with the office of an
elected municipal official and the specific constraints involved in municipal
government.  They may also incorporate the substance of the other defence
proposed by the respondent, the defence of fair comment, which we shall now
examine.  (vi)  Defence of Fair Comment   62                              
The problems that often arise when this defence has been asserted in the
courts in Quebec were again in evidence in the recent decision of the Quebec
Court of Appeal in Hervieux-Payette, supra.  In that case, which
involved a defamation suit, the majority of the Court of Appeal placed its
analysis in the civil law context at the outset, based on the concept of fault,
and also referring, on that point, to the trial judgment (see p. 1673,
para. 14).  Later, however, the majority reasons examined the defence of
fair comment without any apparent connection to the concept of fault, although
that concept was the underpinning of its analysis.  Terminological uncertainty
and ambiguity, if not ambiguity in the legal concepts, could be avoided by
focusing the analysis more on the objective, although still context-based,
nature of the concept of civil fault.  This avoids the risk of forgetting that
the reasonableness standard is not parallel to or concurrent with the standard
set out in art. 1457 C.C.Q. for evaluating conduct.  The standard of
what is reasonable, rather, is central to art. 1457 C.C.Q., which refers
to it for the purpose of determining whether the conduct in issue adheres to
the standard of the reasonable person, acting in a particular context. 
Reasonableness serves as a method for making a legal assessment of the conduct
in order to determine whether it must be legally characterized as a fault.  As
we shall now see, the fact that this is a system of liability based on the
establishment of fault means that contextual factors that the defence of “fair
comment” attempts to incorporate into the legal rules governing defamation may
be taken into consideration.   B.  Application of the Rules to the Facts  (i)  Characterization of the Facts
and Assessment of Fault  64                              
Having regard to the principles that have been examined, we must now
determine whether the respondent committed a fault.  On that point, the
appellants submitted that the Court of Appeal had completely reassessed the
evidence when no serious, patent and determining errors had been made by the
trial judge in assessing the facts.  The Court of Appeal, they submitted,
thus violated the principles governing intervention by appellate courts in
respect of questions of fact, which this Court has reiterated on many occasions
(see for example Housen v. Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, 2002 SCC
33).  65                              
Undeniably, the decision in Housen once again stressed, very
strongly, the need for great caution and deference on the part of appellate
courts when they review the assessment of the facts by a trial court.  That
rule certainly does not preclude an appellate court from identifying errors in
the findings of fact, where those errors are sufficiently palpable and
important, and had a sufficiently decisive effect, that they would justify
intervention and review on appeal.  In any event, in this case, notwithstanding
the appellant’s arguments, the intervention by the Court of Appeal and its
decision to set aside the trial judgment were not based on a general
reassessment of the evidence.  In this appeal, as in the appeal originally
taken to the Quebec Court of Appeal, the facts seemed to be relatively clearly
established, overall.  Essentially, they consisted of a public statement, which
was recorded in its entirety by a community television station, and a set of
public documents such as municipal bylaws and resolutions and decisions of
administrative tribunals or courts.  The issue in this appeal is not so much
what happened as the legal characterization and effects of the events.  To
justify reviewing the trial judge’s judgment, it would not have been sufficient
to identify errors in the details of the findings of fact made by him if his
characterization of the conduct of the respondent Prud’homme had been correct
in law.  However, a few errors of fact, or omissions in selecting the relevant
facts, were made, and it is nonetheless worth pointing them out.  Once again,
the essential question is whether the respondent’s conduct, in the factual
context that was presented to the Court and originally analysed by the Superior
Court, amounts to a civil fault for which the respondent is civilly liable.  66                              
The characterization of the respondent’s statements for the purpose of
determining whether they were wrongful may, depending on the circumstances, be
a question of mixed fact and law.  If that is the case, the Court of Appeal
must accord a degree of deference to the decision of the trial judge, in
accordance with the principles laid down in Housen.  It will be recalled
that in a case of this nature the Court of Appeal, in order to review the
decision of the trial judge on a question of mixed fact and law, must find
palpable and overriding error, as defined in Housen.  67                              
Accordingly, in reviewing the judgment of the Superior Court and the
findings of fact in that judgment, the issue before this Court, like the Court
of Appeal before it, is whether the respondent’s statement, when viewed in its
context and in its entirety, was defamatory in nature and constituted a fault
within the meaning of the law of civil liability.  In order to dispose of these
questions, we must examine, more precisely, the elements of the respondent’s
conduct that Tellier J. relied on in concluding that he was civilly
liable.  For this purpose we shall examine those parts of the statement which
the trial judge considered defamatory.  This examination will then lead us to
the problem of the legal characterization of the facts and to our conclusions
on the existence of fault.  To assist in understanding the analysis that
follows, several passages from the respondent’s statement have been reproduced.  (ii)  Analysis of the Content of
the Statement     70                              
As well, the transactions that took place shortly after the revision of
the zoning show that the value of the land actually did change.  In 1993,
Domaine Repentigny purchased part of the land from the Prud’homme brothers, for
a price of $1.75 per square foot.  In 1998, in Domaine Repentigny inc. v.
Repentigny (Ville de), [1998] T.A.Q. 453, the Tribunal administratif du
Québec established the value of the appellant’s land, on July 1, 1993, at
$0.40 per square foot.  In the opinion of Tellier J., that decision
confirmed that the value of the appellant’s land had not risen as substantially
as the respondent suggested.  Of course, that decision was rendered in 1998,
after the respondent’s public statement.  The respondent can therefore not be
faulted for having been unaware of that decision or failing to anticipate that
the Tribunal administratif du Québec would reduce the value of the appellants’
land back to $0.40 per square foot, having regard to the negative impact of
bylaw 1055 on urban development in the eastern part of the city.  The
respondent therefore stated his opinion as to that value based on the known
facts.  71                              
Second, Tellier J. held that the respondent had stated a number of
facts that had nothing to do with any alleged debate as to whether the judgment
should have been appealed.  More specifically, he faulted the respondent for
suggesting, in the following passage from his statement, that all of the
appellants had not opposed the revision of the zoning, when he knew that the
Prud’homme brothers had objected to it, through the Union des producteurs
agricoles:  [translation]  There are
events that led to this price increase.  In June of nineteen hundred and ninety
(90), the eastern part of the city was dezoned.  Dezoned means that before
nineteen hundred and ninety (90), it was zoned green, that is, agricultural
zoning.  In June nineteen hundred and ninety (90), the city passed white
zoning, that is, urban development.  It was the Commission de protection du
territoire agricole that made this decision.  The municipalities, the R.C.M.s,
applied to be permitted to develop the
lands and each of the owners were therefore kept informed about this procedure,
because they could have opposed it.  If it was agreeable to them, they would
not oppose it.  One thing is certain, however:  there was correspondence
entered into with those people, and so they were made aware that there was a
zoning change to that effect.  So at that time, in June nineteen hundred and
ninety (90), the C.P.T.A.Q. acknowledged the importance of urban development in
that part of the city, and so it authorized the zoning change.  72                              
That omission may appear insidious at first glance.  An examination of
the context in which the statement was made, however, shows that the respondent
had only a few minutes to make his point.  In addition, he was urged to hurry
by the remarks made by the Mayor, who plainly did not want to hear anything
about any of this.  It would of course have been wiser to mention the
objection of the Prud’homme brothers.  However, having regard to the
circumstances, that omission did not justify characterizing this part of the
statement as defamatory.  73                              
The third point on which Tellier J. faulted the respondent was that he
had shown a lack of respect for judicial authority by challenging the findings
of fact made by Croteau J. in respect of the appellants’ knowledge of the
legal notices concerning bylaw 1055.  On this point, the respondent stated:  [translation]  In
March nineteen hundred and ninety-one (91), a notice was published in the
newspapers informing the public in that area, and the entire population, about
bylaw 1055, that is, after the dezoning, okay.  The people contended that they
had not been kept informed.  So after the dezoning, there was a notice in the
newspapers talking about a bylaw 1055 and there was a deadline, as there
always is these days, by which people could oppose it by entering their names
in a registry to say no, I do not agree with these bylaws.  It gave the
time for obtaining information, etc.  So during the period before the deadline,
no one came forward to oppose bylaw 1055.  I am not making this up, it is
in the Judge’s document.  I am not talking about the other documents that are
this thick, the other files.  I am just citing the facts set out in it. 
And all those facts were given to the Judge.  So in March nineteen hundred
and ninety-one (91), there was a notice in the newspapers.  74                              
Tellier J. held that the respondent should not have impugned the
appellants’ sincerity and credibility when the judgment of Croteau J. had,
for all practical purposes, become res judicata.  With respect, the
respondent could legitimately have criticized the judgment of Croteau J.
and the judge’s assessment of the facts.  He was entitled to argue that
the judgment was wrong and to try to persuade his colleagues to that view.  The
respect owed to the courts and the obligation to respect res judicata
and to comply with judicial decisions do not mean that those decisions must be
immune to all criticism.  Anyone, and a fortiori a municipal official,
has the right to question the correctness of a judgment.  The respondent was
entitled to comment on the findings made by Croteau J. if they appeared to
him, in good faith, to be wrong.  There is no legal principle that would
suggest that such comments are defamatory, in the form and the circumstances in
which they were made.  75                              
The fourth point on which Tellier J. faulted the respondent was
that in the following passage he failed to mention the special circumstances
which justified the appellants’ refusal to convey part of their lands for $1:  [translation]  In April
nineteen hundred and ninety-one (91), the City asked those owners to convey the
land so that Iberville boulevard could be opened all the way to the Repentigny
city limits.  We know that in the history of Repentigny, roads and parks,
roads, I am going to refer only to roads, are conveyed for one dollar ($1). 
Iberville boulevard, the whole length of it, was conveyed for one dollar ($1),
with the exception of Iberville boulevard that covers those lands, okay.  So
those owners refused to convey it for one dollar ($1), and this meant that the
municipality had to expropriate them.  So in December nineteen hundred and
ninety-one (91) . . . in November nineteen hundred and ninety-one
(91), some six (6) months later, construction started on the school.  A lot of
things happened before that.  In December nineteen hundred and ninety-one
(91), the City did expropriate the lands.  Today, we know that the
expropriation established the value of those lands, for running Iberville
boulevard, at two dollars sixty ($2.60) a foot.  This amounts to eight hundred
thousand dollars ($800,000) in bylaw 1055 that you have paid, and that they
have collected.  76                              
The judge found that the respondent’s remarks were true in part, in that
owners who wanted to have access to municipal services generally conveyed the
roadbed for $1.  However, he added that those remarks were false in part,
because Iberville boulevard was not extended for the benefit of the appellants,
but to provide for access to a school freshly built in the middle of the
countryside.    79                              
It appears that because of the judgment of Croteau J., the
appellants no longer have to repay the $800,000.  What the judgment did was to
quash the provisions of s. 13 of bylaw 1055, which levied special
taxes that would have operated to have the appellants repay the compensation
for the expropriation.  80                              
The fifth point on which Tellier J. faulted the respondent was that, in
his view, the reference to an offer to purchase that was rejected by the Fortin
brothers, in the following passage of the respondent’s statement, had nothing
to do with a debate about whether the judgment should have been appealed.  He
further noted that the offer to purchase had been made to the Fortin brothers
in 1990, not in 1993, and that the Fortin brothers were justified in refusing
it by its unattractive terms:  [translation]  At the
same time, the Fortin brothers rejected one dollar thirty-five ($1.35) per
square foot for two point two (2.2) million square feet, which amounted to
very nearly three point four (3.4) million.  I have no ill will for anyone.  I
am just mentioning facts, okay.  Since nineteen hundred and ninety-four (94),
that is, our Council . . . .  81                              
In the time he was allowed, and having regard to the numerous
interruptions by the Mayor, it is difficult to see what the relevance of a
detailed explanation of the offer to purchase rejected by the Fortin brothers
would have been, let alone how such an omission could have been defamatory.  In
referring to that offer to purchase, the respondent was simply trying to show
that speculation prompted by the extension of Iberville boulevard had caused
the value of the appellants’ land to shoot up, and that it was therefore unfair
for the population of Repentigny as a whole to have to bear the costs of the
infrastructure work.  That position is in fact the same one that the respondent
argued throughout the entire epic tale in Repentigny.  His remarks remained
within the bounds of his right of comment, opinion and expression, as a
municipal official, about the affairs of his municipality that were matters of
public interest.  82                              
The final point on which Tellier J. faulted the respondent was for
insinuating that the appellants had refused a reasonable offer from the City in
bad faith.  After examining the terms of that offer, the judge added that it
was anything but generous, and that it was readily understandable why the
appellants had preferred to go to the courts.  The following comment about
management is found in the respondent’s statement:   83                              
There would be no disagreement that the City’s offer was not the “deal
of the century”.  However, that part of the statement does not disclose
malicious intent on the part of the respondent.  He argued at all times that
the appellants had to bear all of the costs associated with the construction of
the school on the ground that they were the ones who primarily benefited from
it.  He was therefore entitled to criticize the appellants’ refusal to sign an
agreement if he, in good faith, considered the offers reasonable, without it
being possible to regard his expression of opinion as defamatory.  Once again,
it is important to note that the respondent’s statement must be considered in
context and in its entirety.  The general impression that it conveys must
govern in determining whether a fault was committed.  The fact that the
Superior Court focused its analysis on isolated elements of the respondent’s
speech and failed to examine it as a whole and in context vitiated the
assessment of its content and its legal consequences.  Even if we assume that
this was an error on a question of mixed fact and law, it must be regarded as a
palpable and overriding error.  The nature and gravity of the error justified
the Court of Appeal’s intervention with respect to the trial judge’s decision.  VI.  Conclusion  84                              
The respondent did not commit a fault.  He spoke at the meeting on
July 7, 1997, to let the voters of Repentigny know that he opposed
the Council’s decision not to appeal the judgment quashing bylaw 1055.  He
remained steadfast in the position he had argued throughout this judicial tale,
and argued that it was not the responsibility of the entire population of
Repentigny to pay the cost of the infrastructure work to extend Iberville
boulevard.  The respondent was entitled to question the assessment of the facts
done by Croteau J.  The C.P.T.A.Q. itself had faulted the appellants for
switching hats, portraying themselves as farmers in respect of one part of
their property and speculators in respect of the rest.  The respondent’s
statement was of course incomplete.  However, he cannot be faulted for failing,
in the time that he was allowed and in a speech punctuated by interruptions and
calls to order, to present an exhaustive account of all of the facts of the
case.  In his attempt to persuade the other councillors and his audience, he
was entitled to stress the facts that appeared to support an appeal. 
Overall, the respondent acted in good faith, with the aim of performing his
duties as an elected municipal official.  While his comments about the
appellants were sometimes harsh, they were made in the public interest.  The
respondent did not abuse his right to comment on and discuss public affairs
that affected the municipality.  If the respondent were to be found to have
committed a fault in these circumstances, the right of free discussion within
the municipal political precincts would be dangerously undermined, and the
vitality of democracy at the local level would be weakened.  85                              
For all these reasons, the appeal must be dismissed with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  McCarthy Tétrault,
Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Dunton Rainville,
Montréal.  Solicitors for the interveners:  Gowling Lafleur
Henderson, Montréal.    