                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Young v. Bella, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 108, 2006 SCC 3  Date:  20060127 Docket:  30670  Between: Wanda Young Appellant v. Leslie Bella,
William S. Rowe and Memorial University of Newfoundland Respondents Child Welfare
League of Canada Intervener  Coram:
McLachlin C.J. and Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 67)   McLachlin C.J. and Binnie J.
  (Bastarache, LeBel, Fish Abella and Charron JJ. concurring)  ______________________________ Young v.
Bella, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 108, 2006 SCC 3  Wanda Young                                                                                                   Appellant  v.  Leslie
Bella, William S. Rowe and Memorial University of
Newfoundland                                                                                          Respondents  and  Child
Welfare League of Canada                                                                   Intervener  Indexed
as:  Young v. Bella  Neutral
citation:  2006 SCC 3.  File
No.:  30670.  2005:  October 20;
2006:  January 27.  Present:  McLachlin C.J.
and Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.  on appeal from
the court of appeal for newfoundland and labrador   Damages — Jury award — Whether evidence at trial supported jury’s
award of damages.     Held:  The appeal should be allowed and the trial judgment
should be restored.    Section 38(6) does not bar the appellant’s action.  Under
s. 38(1), information that a child “may be” in danger or in need of
protection suffices to trigger the duty to report.  The respondents were not
obliged to conduct their own investigation of the suspected abuse, nor were
they required to have reasonable cause to believe abuse had in fact occurred
before making a report.  They were, however, obliged to have reasonable cause
to make a report to CPS, i.e. to possess information that CPS reasonably
ought to be asked to look into, even if it turned out to be misinformation.  It
is the absence of reasonable cause even to make a report that lay at the heart
of the appellant’s allegation of negligence. [34] [49]  Section 38(6) offers no protection to the respondents because the
case study contained in the appendix was not information that a child was in
danger or in need of protection from the appellant.  So far as the respondents
were concerned, its date and authorship were simply unknown.  There was nothing
that tied the experiences it related to the appellant. R acted on nothing more
than speculation and conjecture.  It appears the jury concluded that he must
have known that simply making a report would have serious consequences,
especially for someone in the appellant’s position, and in particular that a
report by a prominent individual such as the Director of the School of Social
Work would likely cause the appellant’s name to be placed on the Child Abuse
Registry. [42] [51]    Cases Cited  Applied:  Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130; distinguished:  Andrews v. Grand & Toy
Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229; Thornton v. School District No. 57
(Prince George), [1978] 2 S.C.R. 267; Arnold v. Teno, [1978] 2
S.C.R. 287; referred to:  Housen v. Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R.
235, 2002 SCC 33; H.L. v. Canada (Attorney General), [2005] 1 S.C.R.
401, 2005 SCC 25; Cooper v. Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79; Martel
Building Ltd. v. Canada, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 860, 2000 SCC 60; Central Trust
Co. v. Rafuse, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 147; Fulton v. Globe and Mail (1996),
194 A.R. 254, aff’d (1997), 53 Alta. L.R. (3d) 212; Elliott v. Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. (1993), 16 O.R. (3d) 677, aff’d (1995), 25 O.R.
(3d) 302; Spring v. Guardian Assurance plc, [1994] 3 All E.R. 129; Nance
v. British Columbia Electric Railway Co., [1951] A.C. 601; S.Y. v.
F.G.C. (1996), 78 B.C.A.C. 209.  Statutes and Regulations Cited   APPEAL from a judgment of the Newfoundland and Labrador Court of Appeal
(Roberts, Welsh and Rowe JJ.A.) (2004), 241 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 35, 716
A.P.R. 35, 8 C.P.C. (6th) 131, [2004] N.J. No. 338 (QL), 2004 NLCA 60,
setting aside a jury award.  Appeal allowed.  Gillian D. Butler, Q.C., and Kimberley M.
McLennan, for the appellant.  R. Wayne Bruce and Susan E. Norman, for the
respondents.  Michael E. Barrack and Christopher A. Wayland, for
the intervener.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  The Chief Justice and Binnie J. —  I.     Introduction  1                                  
The appellant, Wanda Young, was a student at Memorial University of
Newfoundland in 1994, taking courses toward her goal of being admitted to the
School of Social Work and becoming  a social worker.  Because
of a bizarre misunderstanding between her and one of her professors over a
missing footnote to a term paper, a misunderstanding that was not brought to
the appellant’s attention until more than two years after her paper was
submitted, she was reported in May 1994 by the respondent William Rowe, the then
Director of the School of Social Work, to the provincial Child Protection
Services (“CPS”) as a potential child abuser.  When the report was belatedly
“investigated” by CPS in 1996, the misunderstanding was cleared up within 24
hours.  The suspicion of child abuse was found by CPS to be without a shred of
reality.  As a result of the Director’s report, however, the appellant
(unbeknownst to her) had been placed on the provincial Child Abuse Registry and
her name was “red flagged” in the police and social work communities in
Newfoundland and Labrador where, as an aspiring social worker, she might have
hoped to obtain employment.  A Newfoundland jury found the University’s
treatment of her to be negligent, and further found (more controversially) that
as a result of this negligence, her chosen career prospects had been
destroyed.  The jury awarded her damages of $839,400.  2                                  
It is important that suspected child abuse be promptly reported.  But,
as this case illustrates, it is also important that persons in positions of
authority (such as university professors in relation to their students) act
responsibly and avoid unfounded and damaging reports of suspicion.  Section
38(6) of the Child Welfare Act, R.S.N. 1990, c. C-12, requires there to
be “reasonable cause” to make the report, thus striking an appropriate balance
between the protection of children, the protection of third parties against
unfounded allegations, and the protection of informants.  3                                  
A majority of the Newfoundland Court of Appeal overturned the jury award
because it considered the appellant’s action to be barred by s. 38(6),
which protects individuals from legal action who report “information that a
child has been, is or may be in danger” of abuse.  We agree, of course, that those
who are subject to a duty to report information must be protected from any
adverse legal consequences flowing from compliance with that duty, but here the
university professors acted on conjecture and speculation which fell far short
of the required “reasonable cause” to make a report to CPS required by
s. 38(6).  They did not even have misinformation (for which protection
will be available unless reported maliciously or without reasonable cause). 
They acted in a way the jury found to be without any reasonable cause to make a
report.  In our view, s. 38(6) does not bar relief to the appellant in
these circumstances.  The cause of the action of negligence was properly put to
the jury.  The defence’s evidence, as well as the plaintiff’s evidence, was clearly
laid out by the trial judge. It was open to the jury, as the finder of facts,
to reach the conclusions it did on the evidence put before it.  We would allow
the appeal, set aside the decision of the Court of Appeal, and restore the
jury’s verdict.  II.      The Facts  4                                  
In 1994, the appellant, then 23 years old, lived in Spaniard’s Bay, a
community about a hundred kilometres from St. John’s.  Although a full-time
fee-paying student, she subscribed to “distance courses” taught largely by
conference calls and correspondence.  Her interaction with her professors in
St. John’s was limited.  Her grades were marginal, and in 1993, her application
to pursue a specialized course of study at the School of Social Work was
rejected.  Nevertheless, she soldiered on and took what courses in social work
she was eligible to take.  5                                  
In April 1994, the appellant submitted her final assignment in Social
Work 5614, entitled “Social Work in Rural Newfoundland and Northern Labrador”. 
The appellant said she met with her professor, the respondent Professor Leslie
Bella, only once during the term.  She said she obtained prior approval of the
topic for her paper entitled “Juvenile Sex Offenders — Treatment and
Counselling Techniques”.  The paper was eventually submitted over two weeks
late.  6                                  
Her term paper included the uncontroversial observation that abused
children may themselves go on to become abusers.  To illustrate this
observation, the appellant  attached as Appendix A a case study copied from a
textbook. The case study was a woman’s “first person” account of being sexually
abused as a child, then sexually abusing children in her care as an adult
babysitter.  The textbook from which the case study was taken was listed in the
appellant’s bibliography.  However, the Appendix was not footnoted in the body
of the text in accordance with proper practice, a requirement of which the
appellant was apparently oblivious.  In light of subsequent events, it is
convenient to reproduce the portion of her term paper that referred to Appendix
A:  From an early age, generally around the ages of eleven or twelve, many
sex offenders develop specific interest in various sexual behaviours.  Many
agree that these behaviours are learned primarily through observation and by
direct experience.  These experiences are often the result of sexual abuse.  In
the majority of cases, juvenile sex offenders are themselves victims of sexual
abuse (See appendix A).  Sexual abuse occurs in a cycle that is repeated
over and over, so if we could get to these offenders at an early age we would
prevent a lot of this abuse. [Emphasis added.]   Appendix A
itself did not contain any identifying details of dates, places or the names of
people implicated in the confession.  In particular, there was nothing to link
the experiences it related to the appellant herself.  7                                  
Professor Bella testified that she was taken aback to read a case study
written in a confessional style by a woman, which in those days she considered
unusual.  Instead of accepting Appendix A as illustrative of the point being
made in the term paper, Professor Bella speculated that perhaps it was
autobiographical, a personal confession by the appellant of having sexually
abused children she babysat, or as Professor Bella put it, a “cry for help”. 
Professor Bella also suspected the term paper was plagiarized.  8                                  
On April 26, 1994, Professor Bella shared her concerns with the Acting
Director of the School of Social Work and Chair of the School’s Admissions
Committee,  Professor Jane Dempster.  Professor Bella showed Professor Dempster
Appendix A of the term paper, without the paper itself, and did not mention
that the appendix had been attached to a paper on juvenile sex offenders.  Based
on what she was told, Professor Dempster (who did not read the term paper)
testified that she suggested Professor Bella meet with the appellant to discuss
the appendix, and, if the meeting did not resolve her concerns, to call CPS. 
In the meantime, Professor Dempster undertook to consult the appellant’s
personal file to see if perhaps a letter of reference or other document
disclosed the name of a child or children babysat by the appellant that could
lead to further inquiries.  The search apparently yielded nothing of interest.  9                                  
Instead of meeting with the appellant and asking her to explain where
Appendix A came from, Professor Bella decided her plagiarism inquiry should
proceed entirely separately from the abuse inquiry which she thought should go
directly to CPS.  Accordingly, her letter of April 28, 1994 to the appellant
said nothing about Appendix A, the “footnote issue” or Professor Bella’s
speculation about its autobiographical nature.  After stating that the topic of
juvenile sex offenders was not appropriate for the course (although as stated
the appellant testified the topic had been approved in advance), Professor
Bella’s letter went on to suggest the appellant’s paper might have been written
for another course (“self-plagiarism”) or by somebody else (“[t]he style of
presentation in your paper is very different from the work in your
examination”).  Professor Bella then wrote:  Please consider my comments, and decide if you can give me evidence
that the paper was (i) written for this course, (ii) was your own
work (iii) and that its submission was delayed for reasons that are not
your own fault. . . .  Please note that if I do proceed to mark this paper I will also check
your references and other related sources, to confirm that you have not
plagiarised sections of the paper.  10                              
Without waiting to hear back from the appellant, Professor Bella placed
an informal telephone call on April 28, 1994 to CPS for advice.  She was told
that as she was unable to provide any information about a specific child at
risk, there was nothing for CPS to inquire into.  CPS also advised Professor
Bella to speak to the appellant to obtain some clarification.  Professor Bella
did not accept this advice.  Nothing was ever said by any of
the professors to the appellant about the footnote issue or their suspicions
that Appendix A was autobiographical.  11                              
Professor Bella’s notes confirmed that she heard from the appellant
shortly after dispatch of the letter, and the appellant testified that she
provided Professor Bella with all the documents requested to rebut the
suspicion of plagiarism.  In the end, Professor Bella declined to mark the
paper (ostensibly because of its lateness) and gave the appellant a zero.  12                              
Although Professor Bella did not raise the issue of the case study and
possible child abuse with the appellant (as she considered that it was not her
proper role to “investigate”),  she did not let the matter rest.  She took her
concerns to the Director of the School of Social Work, Dr. William Rowe.  She
told Dr. Rowe the appendix “was neither referenced nor had any explanation in
terms of paper”.  Dr. Rowe, making no other inquiries, then attached
Appendix A to a report he sent to Paula Burt of CPS dated May 25, 1994, which
read in its entirety as follows:  Further to our conversation, please find enclosed an item submitted by
Wanda Young [address omitted] who was a student in one of our distance
education courses this past term.  The paper, while competently written, had little, if anything, to do
with the assignment and the case study was attached without explanation. 
The material in the case study is alarming and it maybe [sic]
appropriate for someone from your office or from the RCMP detachment
responsible for Spaniard’s Bay to follow up.  Please inform me of your decision.  If I can be of any assistance,
please do not hesitate to call me.  [Emphasis added.]  The community
of social workers in Newfoundland is very small.  There is only one School of
Social Work. For example Paula Burt, while working at CPS, was also continuing
courses at the school, and was therefore a fellow student of the appellant. 
Dr. Rowe did not disclose to Paula Burt that the case study was provided in the
context of a paper on juvenile sex offenders.  Dr. Rowe knew, as a specialist
in the field of child abuse, it was quite foreseeable that his report would
result in the appellant’s name being placed on the  Child Abuse Registry. 
Dr. Rowe testified:  Q. Okay.  You mentioned a Child Abuse Registry. 
What Child Abuse Registry?  A. When someone has been, when a complaint has been
sent to Social Services, or to Child Protection, their, if it’s found out to be
a reasonable complaint, even if it isn’t a situation where someone has been
found guilty, their name is placed on the Registry.  Officials from
CPS testified that Dr. Rowe’s stature in the field of child abuse lent
significant credibility to his report.  13                              
Dr. Rowe rejected any suggestion that he ought to have raised his
concern with the appellant before sending the letter.  That, he told the jury,
was a job best left to CPS.  He also said he had copyright concerns about
sharing the appellant’s paper with CPS.  14                              
In the meantime, the University had written to the appellant on May 11,
1994, rejecting her request for reconsideration of her application to pursue a
degree in social work.  Saying she was disheartened, the appellant approached
Professor Jane Dempster (whose roles at the School of Social Work included
guidance counselling) to see how she might improve her chances of acceptance. 
Professor Bella had already shared with Professor Dempster her concerns about
suspected child abuse but the appellant was not told about this or the reason
why the School had decided she was irredeemably unfit for social work. 
Professor Dempster was “cold” (according to the appellant) and flatly advised
her that the faculty did not think she had what it took to be a social worker
and that she should look elsewhere for a career.  15                              
Professor Dempster said she had no recollection of such a meeting, and
that the  remarks attributed to her sounded unlike the things she would
normally say to a student in such circumstances.  16                              
The evidence for the respondents was that there were numerous reasons
why the appellant was rejected quite apart from suspicions about child abuse. 
Admission to the course, they told the jury, was highly competitive (three
applicants for each acceptance) and the appellant’s grades were low.  (The fact
that Professor Bella gave her zero on her final assignment on juvenile sex
offenders did not help matters.)  The evidence also suggested, however, that
some students with low marks were counselled to take further courses.  The
advice to the appellant, on the contrary, was to leave the field.  17                              
Saying that she was demoralized by the peremptory tone of Professor
Dempster’s message, the appellant took a summer job in Quebec and did not
return to Memorial University in September.  Instead, she sought and accepted
whatever casual employment she could obtain as a youth care worker at various
facilities. Unbeknownst to her, the suggestion that she was a potential child
sex abuser had been discussed amongst three university professors, communicated
to the RCMP, and disclosed to a minimum of ten social workers in several
communities, many of whom knew the appellant through her summer employment and
one of whom was her boyfriend’s sister.  18                              
More than two years after the initial referral to CPS, a staff worker
sought a meeting with the appellant, which belatedly took place on September 9,
1996.  There, for the first time, the appellant learned of the long-standing
“report”.  The appellant responded by delivering the relevant textbook to CPS
the next day.  It was immediately obvious to CPS that Appendix A had been
copied from the textbook and was not in the least autobiographical.  By letter
of September 13, 1996, CPS sent the following acknowledgment:  Dear Ms. Young:  As per your request, this is to confirm that the
Department of Social Services was made aware of information which it was
advised related to you and we felt required further clarification.  When
explored it was immediately clear that the information did not relate to you. 
Rather, the information provided was an excerpt from a book.  Thank you for your understanding and complete
cooperation in this process. [Emphasis added.]  No explanation
was offered as to why it had taken CPS more than two years to “investigate” a
matter which, on being looked into, was shown to be completely baseless within
24 hours.  19                              
The University and its staff, however, refused to apologize, suggesting
that because of the missing footnote, the appellant was the author of her own
misfortune.  20                              
Concerns about whether the appellant was safe to hire continued to dog
her in the years that followed.  Evidence of her difficulty in finding work and
attempts to mitigate it were put before the jury.  As late as January 2001,
seven years after the baseless report, the witness Andrew Caddigan told the
jury that the appellant’s application for a temporary job was openly questioned
in his presence by others in the field on the mistaken belief that the
appellant was “red-flagged” as a potential child abuser as a result of Dr.
Rowe’s “report”.  III.    The Legal Proceedings  21                              
The appellant’s trial was heard before a civil jury.  Counsel for the
University made essentially the same submissions on the facts at trial as he
made before us.  He obtained a ruling from the trial judge that as a matter of
law the words in Dr. Rowe’s letter to CPS were not capable of being
defamatory.  The remaining claim, in negligence, proceeded.  The jury found
that Professor Bella and Dr. Rowe had breached the duty of care owed to the
appellant as a student of the University both before and after reporting; that
the report to CPS was made without reasonable cause; that the professors failed
to meet the required standard of care; that the injury and loss the appellant suffered
was a foreseeable consequence of their acts and omissions; and that the
appellant had not contributed to her damages.  22                              
The jury heard medical and psychological evidence that the appellant had
suffered  anxiety, embarrassment, insomnia, paranoia and depression as a result
of the allegations against her (both before and after the report) and their
repercussions.  It also received evidence of economic loss flowing from the
University’s termination of her hope of becoming a social worker.  The jury went
on to award damages as follows:  General non-pecuniary                                          $430,000  Past loss of income                                                 
$47,000  Future loss of income                                            $314,000  Past loss of sick leave                                             
$13,000  Future loss of sick leave                             
$28,000  Cost of future care                                                  
$7,400   Total                                                                     $839,400  23                              
The Court of Appeal overturned the jury award, Roberts J.A. dissenting
((2004), 241 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 35, 2004 NLCA 60).  Writing for the majority,
Welsh J.A. was of the view that s. 38(6) provided a complete defence to
the entire claim.  Roberts J.A., on the other hand, found no error by the trial
judge, and concluded that there was ample evidence on which a jury, properly
instructed, could reach the conclusions it did. Although strongly contested by
the University, he thought the damages were not beyond the scope of what was
reasonable, based on the evidence.  Roberts J.A. would have dismissed the
appeal and cross-appeal.  Rowe J.A., while agreeing with Welsh J.A. that
s. 38(6) of the Child Welfare Act shielded the University from
liability relating to the report made to CPS, differed from Welsh J.A. on its
scope.  In his view, s. 38(6) provided no defence to Ms. Young’s
claim that the University, by its internal failures, had negligently and
wrongfully denied her a career in social work.  Concerns about what damages
possibly flowed from these dealings led him to conclude that a new trial was
necessary.  The formal order of the Court of Appeal however simply allowed the
appeal and dismissed the plaintiff’s action, Roberts J.A. dissenting.  24                              
Ms. Young now appeals to this Court.  IV.    Analysis  25                              
The issues raised in the appeal fall under the following main headings:  (1)     The nature of the cause of action;  (2)     The duty and protection accorded by s. 38 of the Child
Welfare Act; and  (3)     Whether the law and evidence support the jury’s award of
damages.  26                              
In approaching these questions, we must bear in mind the principle that
appellate courts should not overturn the verdict of a jury unless it is one
that no reasonable jury, properly instructed, could reach: Housen v.
Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, 2002 SCC 33; H.L. v. Canada (Attorney
General), [2005] 1 S.C.R. 401, 2005 SCC 25.  A.     The Nature of the Cause of Action  27                              
The jury was asked whether Leslie Bella or William Rowe, by their acts
or omissions, had breached the duty of care they owed to the appellant.  This
is the classic formulation of the cause of action in negligence.  It is
premised on a relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant, which in
turn gives rise to a duty of care on the defendant toward the plaintiff. 
Breach of the standard of care imposed by that duty creates legal liability for
damages caused by the breach.  There was evidence before the jury capable of
establishing all the elements of the tort of negligence.  (1)     Existence of a Duty of Care  28                              
The Court recently affirmed in Cooper v. Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R.
537, 2001 SCC 79, at para. 24, and Martel Building Ltd. v. Canada,
[2000] 2 S.C.R. 860, 2000 SCC 60, at para. 46, that the “duty” analysis
proceeds in two stages:  (a)            Is there a sufficiently close
relationship of proximity between the parties such that, in the reasonable
contemplation of the defendant, carelessness on its part might cause damage to
the plaintiff?  (b)            If so, are there any considerations
which ought to negative or limit: (a) the scope of the duty; (b) the
class of persons to whom it is owed; or (c) the damages to which a breach
of it may give rise?  29                              
The respondents assert that the duty of care in this case is negated for
policy reasons under the second branch of the test.  They argue that s. 38
of the Child Welfare Act establishes the policy that in the interests of
protecting children, people should be encouraged to report suspicions of child
abuse, free from fear of reprisal.  The duty imposed by s. 38(1), they
argue, should as a matter of policy negate any duty of care which might
otherwise arise at common law.  30                              
We discuss the Act in greater detail below.  At this point, however, it
suffices to note that the respondents’ argument overlooks the fact that the
appellant’s claim in negligence was a broad one, encompassing not only the
report made to CPS, but the University’s dealings with the appellant
generally.  Paragraph 15(a) of her Amended Statement of Claim reads:  The Plaintiff states that the actions of Dr. Bella, Dr. Rowe and other
officials at Memorial University of Newfoundland combined to put in motion a
series of events that would forever shape the course of the Plaintiff’s future
by affecting her reputation in the community, her ability to complete her
education and by reducing her income-earning capacity.  In support of
this broader claim the appellant led evidence of failure to mentor, failure to
properly advise her on her future and negligent publication within the faculty,
through means other than the report to CPS, of the suggestion that the
appellant may have abused children.  31                              
In short, in the present case, proximity was not simply grounded in a
misguided report to CPS, but was rooted in the broader relationship between the
professors at Memorial University and their students.  The appellant, even as a
“distant” student, was a fee-paying member of the university community, and
this fact created mutual rights and responsibilities.  The relationship between
the appellant and the University had a contractual foundation, giving rise to
duties that sound in both contract and tort:  Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 147.  32                              
Whether or not a duty of care will be negatived where the parties are
strangers linked only by the events surrounding a “report” is a question that
should only be decided when it arises.  Assuming that the policy expressed in
the Act could countermand potential liability for a negligent report in such
circumstances, as discussed below, it does not provide any policy reason to
negative liability that would otherwise arise on the facts of this case.  The
scope of the s. 38(6) defence is restricted to the making of the CPS
report and would not excuse the University and its employees from failure to
live up to their broader responsibilities to the appellant as a member of the
university community.  The facts in this case do not trigger the protection of
the Act because, quite simply, the respondent Dr. Rowe acted on nothing more
than speculation and conjecture in making his report which, as Director of the
School of Social Work, he must have known would have serious consequences
within the small community of social workers in Newfoundland, including the
likely posting of the appellant’s name on the provincial Child Abuse Registry.  (2)     The Standard of Care  33                              
The standard of care that ought to be exercised by professors towards
their students was emphasized in the testimony of Dr. Wayne Ludlow who, during
the relevant 1994-1996 period, was the Dean of Student Affairs at Memorial
University.  Dr. Ludlow testified:  The relationship between the professor and the student is a special
relationship . . . [I]t is an imbalanced relationship because
professor is all knowing, and I can see now the fear and trembling of the young
first-year students when they went to classes, someone in a flowing black robe. 
So the power balance was evident . . . .  34                              
Those whose professional responsibilities include the exercise of such
power over the careers and future lives of fee-paying students are required to
take the necessary care to get their facts straight before taking a potential
career-ending action in relation to a student.  While legislative and judicial
policy mandates the quick reporting of information of suspected child abuse, it
does not do so to the exclusion of consideration of the legitimate interests of
the person named in the report, or the interests of informants.  This  is not
at all to say that the respondents were obliged to conduct their own
investigation of the suspected abuse.  Informants are not required to
have reasonable cause to believe abuse has in fact occurred before making a
report.  They are, however, obliged to have reasonable cause to make a
report to CPS, i.e. to possess information that CPS reasonably ought
to be asked to look into, even if it turns out to be misinformation.  It is the
absence of reasonable cause even to make a report that lies at the heart
of the appellant’s allegation of negligence.  (3)     Breach of the Duty  35                              
There was evidence that the University had breached these duties through
the negligence of its employees.  The task of the reviewing court is not to
agree or disagree with the jury’s conclusions, but just to satisfy itself that
there was evidence on which the jury, properly instructed, could reasonably
conclude as it did.  The issue for the jury was the failure of her professors
even to seek from the appellant an explanation of a missing footnote
before embarking on a course of action fraught with danger for her
hoped-for-career.  36                              
As might be expected, the recollections of events of the various
participants differed.  There was no suggestion that any of the respondents had
acted in bad faith.  37                              
The jury clearly concluded that Professor Bella should have done what
both Professor Dempster and officials at CPS recommended, namely check out the
“footnote issue” with the appellant before proceeding on a course of action, in
concert with Dr. Rowe, based on nothing more than speculation.  Professor
Karen Mitchell (who, as sessional lecturer, also taught the appellant) told the
jury it was not uncommon for students to make errors in footnoting.  Professor
Dempster testified that in Professor Bella’s position, in writing to the
appellant, she “would have made reference to appendix A, a clear reference”.  38                              
Looking at the broader duty, the jury heard that Professor Dempster told
the appellant, in effect, that she was unfit to be a social worker.  The jury
must have concluded that Professor Dempster knew of Professor Bella’s
speculation that Appendix A was autobiographical, but failed to check the facts
before delivering a judgment on the appellant’s career prospects.  39                              
The jury heard from the University’s Dean of Student Affairs, Dr. Wayne
Ludlow, that  professors are mentors, that part of their whole philosophy for what
they teach and what they espouse is to be able to allow young people to avail
of their expertise and to learn and grow. [A.R., at p. 413]  40                              
The jury heard evidence that Dr. Rowe’s report of speculation to CPS was
itself negligent.  Dr. Rowe, without looking at the term paper, assured CPS in
his letter that the case study had been attached “without explanation”.  At
trial, when confronted with the term paper itself, which clearly indicated the
relevance of the case study, he retreated to the view that “it didn’t seem like
much of an explanation” (emphasis added).  However, Elizabeth Crawford,
the Director of CPS, testified that had she been given the full term paper she
would have understood the context and looked at the situation differently. 
Paula Burt, the CPS official to whom Dr. Rowe sent the May 25 report, testified
that when she eventually saw the term paper the Appendix seemed to her to have
“some relevance” to the appellant’s topic.  41                              
At trial, Dr. Rowe testified that he was reluctant to send the term
paper to CPS because it might infringe the appellant’s intellectual property
rights but the jury appeared to conclude that it was unlikely someone reported
for suspected sexual abuse would take a copyright objection to the handing over
of exculpatory material that would show the suspicion to be unfounded.  42                              
Dr. Rowe also took the view that it was up to CPS, not him, to determine
whether an investigation was appropriate, but the jury must have concluded that
he failed to provide CPS with the proper information (e.g., the term paper
as well as the Appendix) on which such an informed decision could properly be
made.  It appears the jury concluded that Dr. Rowe must have known that simply
making a report would have serious consequences, especially for someone in the
appellant’s position, and in particular that a report by a prominent individual
such as the Director of the School of Social Work would likely cause the
appellant’s name to be placed on the Child Abuse Registry.  43                              
It was open to the jury to accept the respondents’ evidence if it found
the professors to be persuasive, but it was equally open to the jury to
conclude that the professors’ behaviour fell markedly short of the standard of
care professors should exercise towards their students.  It was for the jury to
make that determination.  The jury concluded that the University and its employees
did not do so and there is no basis for an appellate court to intervene with
the jury’s findings in that respect.  B.      The Duty and Protection under Section 38
of the Child Welfare Act  44                              
The University and its employees argue that if they owed a duty of care
to the appellant, this was negated by s. 38(6) of the Child Welfare Act. 
In their view, s. 38(6) bars any cause of action on the facts of this
case.  Section 38 provided:  38. (1) Where a person has information that a
child has been, is or may be in danger of abandonment, desertion, neglect,
physical, sexual or emotional ill-treatment or has been, is or may be otherwise
in need of protection, the person shall immediately report the matter to the
director, a social worker or a peace officer.  .
. .  (6)   This section applies notwithstanding that the
information is confidential or privileged, and an action does not lie against
the informant unless the making of the report is done maliciously or without
reasonable cause.  45                              
The appellant argues that even if s. 38(6) applied, it would not
furnish a complete defence, since her claim goes beyond the mere reporting of
suspected abuse as required by the Act.  The respondents contend that this
broader context makes no difference.  So strong is the policy of the Act that
it overrides all other considerations. 46                              
The respondents’ argument was accepted in the majority judgment of the
Newfoundland Court of Appeal.  Welsh J.A., speaking for herself and Rowe J.A.,
declined to interpret as disjunctive the test “unless the making of the report
is done maliciously or without reasonable cause”.  In her view the
phrase “without reasonable cause”, while ambiguous, means in context “the
absence of good faith” (para. 44).  In other words s. 38(6), as
interpreted, should read “maliciously or in the absence of good faith”.  In the
result she found, “a report made in good faith, even if negligently made, is
protected by subsection (6), precluding legal action against the reporter”
(para. 53).  47                              
In our view, such an interpretation does not give effect to the
legislator’s specification of both a subjective element (“maliciously”) and an
objective element (“reasonable cause”) to determine whether the report of
“information” is to be protected from all legal consequences.  The respondents
and the intervener say that anything potentially relevant to child abuse that
comes from an external source (i.e. eliminating only the product of the
reporter’s unaided imagination) should be reported.  However, to construe
s. 38(6) so broadly reads the words “reasonable cause” out of the section
and fundamentally changes the legislative scheme.  48                              
We agree with Welsh J.A. that the duty to report “information” imposed
by s. 38(1) and the protection against suits accorded by s. 38(6) are
co-extensive and must be read together.  The legislature cannot have intended
to impose a duty to report and leave the informant exposed to legal liability
for complying with the statutory duty.  49                              
We also agree with Welsh J.A. that the duty to report under
s. 38(1) should not be narrowly construed. The language of the section
suggests as much.  Information that a child “may be” in danger or in need of
protection suffices to trigger the obligation.  Moreover, the obligation is to
report “immediately”.  This language suggests that there is no duty to
investigate the information (where information exists) to ensure that it is
accurate before reporting.  The Act distinguishes between the stage of
receiving information suggesting danger or need of protection, which is for the
informant, and investigating the truthfulness of the information, which is for
CPS.  A broad duty to report information of possible abuse is consistent with
the Act’s goal of protecting children.  50                              
Where we disagree with Welsh J.A., however, is in our view that her
interpretation of s. 38 evinces too little concern for third parties who
may be adversely affected by irresponsible reports.  Here Dr. Rowe had no
data that, interpreted by a reasonable person, would suggest that a child has
been, was, or may be in need of protection from Wanda Young.  Foreseeable
consequences such as placement on the Child Abuse Registry are serious
matters.  While the primary objective of the Act is to protect children, it
seeks to do so in a way that also takes into account the interests of the
persons under suspicion and the interests of informants.  The interest of the
person suspected of abuse is protected by the inclusion of an objective
“reasonable cause” standard in s. 38(6).  These two components must be
read together and the words used — “information” and “reasonable cause” — must
together be given a purposive interpretation.  “Information” in s. 38(1)
is the partner of “reasonable cause” in s. 38(6).  “Reasonable cause” does
not mean reasonable grounds to believe that abuse has occurred, or is
occurring, or will occur (which in certain legal contexts implies belief in the
truthfulness of the information).  Section 38(6) sets a lower threshold.  The
informant need only have “reasonable cause” to ask CPS to consider looking into
the matter.  51                              
Section 38(6) offers no protection to the respondents here because,
however it is viewed, the case study contained in Appendix A to the appellant’s
paper was not information that a child was in danger or in need of protection
from Wanda Young.  So far as the respondents are concerned, its date and
authorship were simply unknown (and not asked about).  There was nothing that
tied the experiences it related to the appellant.  If there was a “cry for
help”, there was nothing to indicate it originated with the appellant.  The
respondents’ problem is that the jury, having heard conflicting versions of
events, apparently concluded that the professors acted on speculation arising
from their failure to properly consider the material before them.  Had
Professor Bella or Dr. Rowe come into possession of information that related to
the appellant in a relevant way, their duty would have been to report
immediately, without investigating its truth.  In this case, they had no such
information.  C.     Whether the Law and the Evidence Support
the Jury’s Award of Damages  52                              
A number of issues arise relating to damages.  (1)     Proof of Damages  53                              
The appellant called Cara Brown as an expert on damages.  She laid out
the calculations for four different “scenarios”, the choice of which would
depend on the version of the facts eventually accepted as correct by the jury. 
The respondents called no counter evidence to refute the calculations, although
in his jury address their counsel  urged the jury not to accept the factual
assumptions that gave rise to the various calculations:  Don’t judge damages on the fuss that’s being made here, or the length
of the trial, or the number of witnesses.  It’s very easy to claim huge losses,
and it’s very easy to make a mountain out of a mole-hill.  54                              
There were many contingencies built into the damage calculations, all of
which were laid out before the jury by the contending parties.  The jury chose
to resolve those contingencies in favour of the appellant.  It was within their
province, as the triers of fact, to do so.  55                              
The respondents, however, also take an objection in law to the award. 
Starting from the fact, as stated, that the defamation issue was withdrawn from
the jury by the trial judge because in his view the wording of Dr. Rowe’s
letter dated May 25, 1994 to CPS was not capable of giving rise to a defamatory
meaning, they argue that the appellant’s claim is really an action for
defamation, dressed up as a negligence action.  They say that her action is
essentially for loss of reputation, and that damages for loss of reputation can
only be claimed in a defamation action to which the issues of malice and
qualified privilege are relevant.  They say resort to negligence law interfered
with the exercise of their freedom of expression of an opinion to CPS. 
Negligence principles, they assert, do not strike the proper balance between
free expression and the duty not to harm others.  56                              
We cannot accept the respondents’ argument.  The possibility of suing in
defamation does not negate the availability of a cause of action in negligence
where the necessary elements are made out.  Freedom of expression and the
policies underlying qualified privilege can be taken into account in
determining the appropriate standard of care in negligence.  Counsel for the
University referred to a number of cases in support of the assertion that this
action lies only in defamation:  see, e.g., Fulton v. Globe and Mail
(1996), 194 A.R. 254 (Q.B. (Master)), aff’d (1997), 53 Alta. L.R. (3d) 212 (Q.B.),
and Elliott v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp. (1993), 16 O.R. (3d) 677
(Gen. Div.), aff’d (1995), 25 O.R. (3d) 302 (C.A.).  In fact, these were cases
where the defendants’ actions alleged to have caused the plaintiffs’ loss of
reputation fell entirely within the law of defamation and the basic elements of
a negligence action, such as a duty of care owed to the plaintiffs, had not
been established.  There is no reason in principle why negligence actions
should not be allowed to proceed where (a) proximity and foreseeability
have been established, and (b) the damages cover more than just harm to
the plaintiff’s reputation (i.e. where there are further damages arising
from the defendant’s negligence): see Spring v. Guardian Assurance plc,
[1994] 3 All E.R. 129 (H.L.).  In fact, all of the cases cited by the
respondents as standing for the proposition that defamation had “cornered the
market” on reputation damages were cases in which (unlike here) there was no
pre-existing relationship between the parties that gave rise to a duty of care.  57                              
In summary then, we conclude that the evidence at trial supported the
jury’s finding of negligence and the factual underpinnings of the appellant’s
claim to damages.  (2)     Causation  58                              
The respondents argue that the failure of the appellant to be admitted
to the School of Social Work cannot be attributed to their conduct.  They point
out that the appellant’s average grades were below the cut-off for admission. 
Better qualified candidates were being turned away.  On the other hand, the
jury also heard that the appellant’s position was not hopeless.  It was, the
appellant says, only Professor Dempster’s advice, apparently fuelled by the
baseless suspicions arising out of a missing footnote, that caused her to
abandon steps that might have led to her improving her academic standing and
gaining admission.  The evidence was that some of the other students with low
grades were counselled to take extra courses to improve their averages, and some
succeeded.  As well, the jury may have concluded that complete rejection of the
appellant’s assignment on juvenile sex offenders lowered her scores more for
reasons (plagiarism and suspicion of abuse) that proved entirely groundless
than for its lateness.  The jury heard that marks were not the only criteria
for admission.   Professor Dempster said that a candidate’s volunteer work and
job experience are also relevant, the very experience which placement on the
Child Abuse Registry jeopardized.  59                              
Whether we agree with all of the findings the jury was prepared to make
in the appellant’s favour on the question of damages is irrelevant.  While the
issue of causation was strongly contested, there was, in our view, sufficient
evidence to permit the jury to find a causal connection between the
University’s breach of duty and the damages suffered by the appellant.  (3)     Foreseeability of the Damage  60                              
It was argued that it was not foreseeable that communications among
university staff would result in such damages to the appellant.  Nor was it
foreseeable, the respondents argue, that various officials at CPS would pass
the file around from hand to hand and office to office for more than two years
before actually picking up the phone to contact the appellant.  Nevertheless,
there was evidence before the jury of the profound risk of damage posed by the
fanciful speculations of the professors, which gave rise to their actions
against the appellant internally as well as to their report to CPS.  The jury
concluded that the professors’ collective negligence destroyed the career
prospects of the appellant as a social worker.  The respondents strongly
dispute such a conclusion and do so with some good reason, but it was open to
the jury on the evidence to take that view, and to assess damages accordingly. 
Their decision was not so aberrant that it could be said that no reasonable
jury, properly instructed, could have made it.  Accordingly, we would not
interfere.  (4)     Contributory Negligence  61                              
The University argues that the appellant’s loss was in part caused by
her failure to footnote the Appendix and her failure to address the source of
the Appendix after receiving Professor Bella’s letter raising the issue of
plagiarism.  However, the onus was on the respondents to prove on a balance of
probabilities that the appellant failed to take reasonable care and the extent
to which this contributed to her loss.  As earlier noted, Professor Bella’s
letter to the appellant did not even raise an issue about Appendix A. 
Moreover, the jury had Professor Mitchell’s evidence that footnoting mistakes
were commonplace.  The jury must have found that contributory negligence on the
part of the appellant had not been proved and that conclusion was open to it on
the evidence.  The respondents’ argument on causation is little more than an
invitation to this Court to retry the case.  We cannot accept this argument.  (5)     Quantification of Damages  62                              
As discussed, there was evidence to support the claims for loss of
income and cost of future care.  This leaves non-pecuniary damages and the
issue of whether a judicially imposed cap on them is appropriate in this type
of case.  63                              
The respondents argue that the assessment of $430,000 for non-pecuniary
damages must be set aside because the loss suffered by the appellant is not of
such magnitude to justify “one of the largest non-pecuniary general damage
awards . . . ever awarded in this country and it is therefore
appropriate for this Court to exercise its discretion in adjusting same”.  64                              
This is not the test for appellate interference with a jury award.  As
mentioned earlier, the appellant called expert evidence (which was
uncontradicted), laying out a number of scenarios based on different potential
findings of fact for the jury’s consideration.  Damage assessments are
questions of fact for the jury.  Jury awards of damages may only be set aside
for palpable and overriding error.  It is a long-held principle that “when on a
proper direction the quantum is ascertained by a jury, the disparity between
the figure at which they have arrived and any figure at which they could
properly have arrived must, to justify correction by a court of appeal, be even
wider than when the figure has been assessed by a judge sitting alone”: Nance
v. British Columbia Electric Railway Co., [1951] A.C. 601 (P.C.), at
p. 614.  On this test, we cannot conclude that the award for non-pecuniary
damages should be set aside.  In light of the evidence, the jury’s award cannot
be said to be wholly disproportionate or shockingly unreasonable.  65                              
The respondents also argue that the cap on non-pecuniary damages imposed
in catastrophic personal injury cases should be imposed in cases such as this:
see Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229, at
p. 265; Thornton v. School District No. 57 (Prince George),
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 267; and Arnold v. Teno, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 287.  The very
different context of the “trilogy” is illustrated by the following passage from
Andrews, at p. 262:  If damages for non-pecuniary loss are viewed from a
functional perspective, it is reasonable that large amounts should not be
awarded once a person is properly provided for in terms of future care for his
injuries and disabilities.  The money for future care is to provide physical
arrangements for assistance, equipment and facilities directly related to the
injuries.  Additional money to make life more endurable should then be seen as
providing more general physical arrangements above and beyond those relating
directly to the injuries.  The result is a coordinated and interlocking basis
for compensation, and a more rational justification for non-pecuniary loss
compensation.   The
respondents have not established why the policy considerations which arise from
negligence causing catastrophic personal injuries, in the contexts of accident
and medical malpractice, should be extended to cap a jury award in a case such
as the present.  The argument was rejected in relation to damages for
defamation in Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R.
1130, at paras. 170-76.  In our view, the case for imposing a cap in cases of
negligence causing economic loss is not made out here either.  As
Macfarlane J.A. commented in S.Y. v. F.G.C. (1996), 78 B.C.A.C.
209:  There is no evidence before us that this type of case has any impact on
the public purse, or that there is any crisis arising from the size and
disparity of assessments.  A cap is not needed to protect the general public
from a serious social burden, such as enormous insurance premiums.
[para. 30]  66                              
We leave open for consideration in another case (where the policy
considerations supporting a cap are more fully developed in evidence and
argument) the issue of whether and in what circumstances the cap applies to
non-pecuniary damage awards outside the catastrophic personal injury context. 
While the damages are higher than we would have awarded in the circumstances,
the law assigns the task of that assessment to the jury.  Given our conclusion
that the cap does not apply in this case, the principle enunciated in Hill that
an appellate court should not interfere with a jury assessment of non-pecuniary
damages unless it “shocks the conscience of the court” (para. 163) precludes
reduction of the award for non-pecuniary damages in this case.  V.     Conclusion  67                              
We find no basis upon which to interfere with the jury’s verdict, and
accordingly we would set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and restore
the trial judgment with costs to the appellant on a party-and-party basis here
and in the courts below.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellant:  Gillian D. Butler,
St. John’s.  Solicitors for the respondents:  Stewart McKelvey Stirling
Scales, St. John’s.  Solicitors for the intervener:  McCarthy Tétrault,
Toronto.   