 legal representative of the late Henri Masson                                               Appellant  v.  General Trust of Canada, in its capacity as legal representative of the late Joseph Avila Perras                                  Respondent  and  Mark Weinberg and Lucien Roy                                                      (Respondents/ Defendants before the Superior Court)   Neutral citation:  2001 SCC 87.  File No.:  27623.  2001:  May 16; 2001:  December  7.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec  Civil liability – Professional liability –
Chartered accountant – Whether constituent elements of civil liability
established – Whether creditor must exhaust remedies against debtors before
bringing action in professional liability.  Civil law – Obligations – Obligations in solidum –
Sum of money owed by two different debtors as debt for contractual liability
and as balance of selling price – Whether obligations must be regarded as in
solidum.  In 1988, P sold a number of lots to a company and two
shareholders assumed joint and several liability for the selling price.  The
company later sold the lots to 2639-1565 Québec inc. and in the deed of sale
2639-1565 Québec inc. assumed joint and several liability to P for the balance
of the selling price.  When the term for payment of the balance of the selling
price was up, P instructed M, his chartered accountant and professional
adviser, to prepare a statement of account for the balance owing by 2639-1565
Québec inc.  In preparing that statement, M committed an error which reduced
the liability by $170,000.  A notary prepared the discharges and received the
payments on the basis of those figures, which 2639-1565 Québec inc. did not
attempt to correct.  In the months that followed, M realized his error and
prepared a revised statement of account but 2639-1565 Québec inc. refused to
pay.  P then brought action against M and all of the debtors.  The Superior
Court nullified the discharge and found M professionally liable, and found all
the debtors, including M, jointly and severally liable to pay P the sum of
$206,000 with interest.  The Court of Appeal varied the trial judgment.  The
court nullified the discharge in part, set aside the joint and several award
and declared the debt to be indivisible within the meaning of art. 1124 C.C.L.C. 
It ordered M to pay P the sum of $206,000 with interest and ordered the other
debtors to pay the same amount.  Since the two debts were indivisible, the
court declared that each of the debtors and M were liable to pay the total
amount of the debt to P.  Held:  The appeal
should be allowed in part.  The law of delictual or contractual civil liability
does not require merely a finding of fault.  Damage and causality must also be
proved.  In this case, the professional liability of M has been established. 
The discharge extinguished the sureties that secured not only the payment of
the debt but also the debt itself.  On the date when the discharge was signed,
P's legal status in relation to M crystallized.  As a result of the fault
committed by M, P lost his right to claim and the sureties associated with it. 
Since his damage was present and actual, he was not required to exhaust his
remedies against the debtors before commencing his action in professional
liability.  In relation to M, P had a right of claim for $182,476 in damages
based on his adviser's professional liability.  At the same time, 2639-1565
Québec inc. and other parties were indebted for the unpaid balance of the
hypothecary debt, $206,000 plus interest.  The $182,476 was therefore part of a
larger amount owed by 2639-1565 Québec inc., which could have been claimed both
from it and from M.  Since the same sum of money was owed by two different
debtors as a debt for contractual liability and as the balance of the selling
price, the relationship among the co-debtors must be organized in a manner that
reflects the principles of the law of obligations and concern for a fair
apportionment of the legal responsibilities of each party in the situation
created by the conflict.  To achieve those objectives, indivisibility is an
approach that is not legally available.  The debts involve a sum of money owing
by two different debtors and arising from separate sources.  By its nature, the
obligation to pay a sum of money is susceptible of division.  Furthermore, the
concept of passive joint and several liability, in the strict sense of that
term, does not apply.  The situation that the parties are in does not fall
within the express terms of the instances of joint and several liability set
out in the Civil Code of Lower Canada.  The only concept that accurately
reflects the parties' situation is obligation in solidum.  That concept
allows for the legal problems arising from the relationship among the
co-debtors to be solved in accordance with the general principles of joint and
several liability and the objectives of the law of obligations.  M is therefore
liable in solidum with 2639-1565 Québec inc. for a maximum of $182,476
with interest at the legal rate and the additional indemnity under art. 1078.1 C.C.L.C. 
Upon payment of that amount, M will be subrogated for an equivalent amount in
the rights of P and may demand an equivalent contribution from 2639-1565 Québec
inc.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Civil
Code of Lower Canada, arts. 1023, 1078,
1078.1, 1105, 1106, 1124.  Authors Cited    Chabas, François.  L’influence
de la pluralité de causes sur le droit à réparation.  Paris:  Librairie
générale de droit et de jurisprudence, 1967.  Malaurie, Philippe, et Laurent
Aynès.  Cours de droit civil, t. VI, Les obligations, 9e
éd. par Laurent Aynès.  Paris:  Cujas, 1998.   Mazeaud, Henri, Léon et Jean, et
François Chabas, Leçons de droit civil, t. 2, vol. 1, Obligations:
théorie générale, 9e éd. par François Chabas.  Paris: 
Montchrestien, 1998.   Pineau, Jean, Danielle Burman et
Serge Gaudet.  Théorie des obligations, 4e éd.  par Jean
Pineau et Serge Gaudet.  Montréal:  Thémis, 2001.  Starck, Boris, Henri Roland et
Laurent Boyer.  Droit civil:  Les obligations, t. 3, Régime
général, 6e éd. par Henri Roland.  Paris:  Litec, 1998.  Tancelin, Maurice.  Des
obligations: actes et responsabilités, 6e éd.  Montréal: Wilson
& Lafleur, 1997.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[1999] R.R.A. 817, [1999] Q.J. No. 4446 (QL), reversing in part a judgment
of the Superior Court, [1994] R.R.A. 125.  Appeal allowed in part.   G. George Sand and
Olivier Tergny, for the respondent.  English version of the judgment of the Court delivered
by   I.  Introduction   II.  Origin of the Case    III.  Judicial History  A.  Quebec Superior Court, [1994] R.R.A. 125     B.  Quebec Court of Appeal, [1999] R.R.A. 817     IV.  Legislation  10                              
Civil Code of Lower Canada  1023.  Contracts have effect only
between the contracting parties; they cannot affect third persons, except in
the cases provided in the articles of the fifth section of this chapter.  1078.  Interest accrued from
capital sums also bears interest: 1.    When there is a special agreement to that
effect;  2.  When in any action brought such new interest is
specially demanded;  3.  When an administrator of the property of others
has received or ought to have received interest on the moneys of the minor, the
protected person of full age or the beneficiary of the administration and has
failed in his obligation to invest it within a reasonable time or within the
term prescribed by law.  1078.1  The amount awarded by
judgment for the inexecution of an obligation, except that contemplated in
article 1077, bears interest at the legal rate, or, where such is the
case, at the rate lawfully agreed between the parties, from the date of the
institution of the action.   1105.  An obligation is not presumed to be
joint and several; it must be expressly declared to be so.  This rule does not prevail in cases where a joint
and several obligation arises of right by virtue of some provision of law.  Nor is it applicable to commercial transactions, in
which the obligation is presumed to be joint and several, except in cases
otherwise regulated by special laws.   1124.  An obligation is indivisible:  1.  When it has for its object something which by
its nature is not susceptible of division, either materially or intellectually;  2.  When although the object of the obligation is
divisible by its nature, yet from the character given to it by the contract,
this object becomes insusceptible not only of performance in parts but also of
division.  V.  Analysis
of Issues  11                              
The issues before this Court were narrowly framed.  Essentially, the
issue is whether damage was done and whether there was a causal connection. 
The professional fault committed by the accountant, Masson, is no longer in
question. Although the appellant did not formally admit that fault, she denied
Masson’s liability on the basis that the other constituent elements of civil
liability are not present.     A.  Causality and Damage  15                              
The appellant correctly pointed out that the law of delictual or
contractual civil liability does not require merely a finding of fault.  Damage
and causality must also be proved.  The appellant argued that although the
accountant’s fault was established, the other constituent elements of civil
liability were not.  In substance, she argued that the damage had not occurred
at the time the proceedings were commenced.  She added that it was impossible
to prove the existence and quantum of the damage before establishing that the
parties could not be restored to their original condition because the debt
could not be recovered.  Whether there was damage, and the evidence of that
damage, depended on the steps that the Perras estate should have taken to
recover after the discharge was nullified.  It was only after that stage that
the conditions on which an action against the accountant could be commenced
would have been met.  16                              
This argument is based on an erroneous analysis of the legal situation
created by the discharge signed on December 21, 1990.  That discharge
extinguished not only the sureties that secured the payment of the debt, but
also the debt itself.  The terms of the discharge are clear on that point:   THE within Discharge revokes and nullifies
all receipts previously given.  17                              
On December 21, 1990, Perras' legal status in relation to Masson
crystallized.  As a result of the fault committed by Masson, Perras lost his
right to claim and the sureties associated with it.  Since his damage was
present and actual, he was not required to exhaust his remedies against the
debtors before commencing his action in professional liability.  In relation to
Masson, Perras had a right of claim based on his adviser’s professional
liability.  The claim was equivalent to the loss incurred, which was
established as $182,476.88 in principal and interest as at December 21,
1990.  The conditions on which a civil liability action against Masson could be
commenced had then been met.  A fault had been committed, and damage resulting
from that fault had been established.  Contrary to the appellant’s argument,
the damage was not purely contingent in nature.  The existence and
determination of that damage did not depend on the recovery proceedings that
Perras could have commenced against his debtors having been exhausted.     B.  The Problem of Indivisibility and Joint and Several
Liability   22                              
With respect, the Civil Code of Lower Canada does not provide for
indivisibility in such a case.  Article 1124 C.C.L.C. provides:  1124.  An obligation is indivisible:  1.  When it has for its object something
which by its nature is not susceptible of division, either materially or
intellectually;  2.  When although the object of the
obligation is divisible by its nature, yet from the character given to it by
the contract, this object becomes insusceptible not only of performance in
parts but also of division.  23                              
This is certainly not a case in which the object of the obligation is
insusceptible of division, since it consists of a sum of money.  We are not
concerned, for example, with the delivery of a certain and determinate physical
object, such as a vehicle.     (H., L. and J. Mazeaud and F. Chabas, Leçons de droit civil,
t. 2, vol. 1, Obligations: théorie générale (9th ed. 1998), at
p. 1124)  26                              
Passive joint and several liability is one of the principal mechanisms
created by the law of obligations to facilitate execution of an obligation
against more than one debtor and to organize the legal relationship among
them.  As Chabas points out, it is based on a concept of mutual
representation.  (See also Baudouin and Jobin, supra.)  In the event
that a debt is susceptible of division, passive joint and several liability
enables the creditor to look to any one of the debtors, leaving them to debate
the appropriate apportionment of the payment among themselves.  What
art. 468 C.C.P. does is to create a convenient procedural vehicle
for resolving a debate of that kind.   28                              
This concept, which has been criticized frequently in French law and on
which opinion is not unanimous among the authors in Quebec, is derived from the
general concept of joint and several liability and is consistent with the
general policy of that part of the law of obligations, which is to protect the
creditor while allowing for a fair apportionment of obligations among the
debtors.  The incorporation of that concept in Quebec civil law as art. 1106 C.C.L.C.,
which allowed a victim of damage that was caused by several separate delictual
faults to look to any one of the debtors for compensation, was consistent with
that legal policy.   30                              
Baudouin and Jobin, supra, at p. 478, expressed the effects
of an obligation in solidum as follows:  [translation]  In effect,
insofar as it is agreed that since (perfect) joint and several liability is an
exceptional regime, (perfect) joint and several liability will exist only where
the legislature has expressly prescribed it, or where the parties have clearly
agreed to it, and that, in addition, the secondary effects of joint and several
liability do not arise in imperfect joint and several liability, the purpose of
the category is apparently to clarify the law in certain circumstances where
debtors are liable for an identical object but are not subject to the secondary
effects of joint and several liability.  Thus, the category of obligations in
solidum allows for expeditious determination of how two debtors for the
same amount of money, arising under separate legal instruments not resulting in
perfect joint and several liability, are each liable for the full amount and
not for a share pro rata, and how full payment by one results in extinction of
the debt and entitles that debtor to an equivalent contribution from the other
debtor.  (See Proulx v. Leblanc, [1969] B.R. 461, aff’d [1969] S.C.R.
765.)     For these reasons, I would find Dostie to be
contractually liable and order him on that basis to pay $65,000 as a
comminatory penalty and to pay $25,000 as a compensatory penalty in solidum
with Fortier and Charland, both of whom of are delictually liable.    VI.  Conclusion   Appeal allowed in part with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Ogilvy Renault, Montréal.  Solicitor for the respondent:  G. George Sand, Montréal.   