Gauthier v. Beaumont, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 3  David Allen Gauthier  Appellant  v.  Municipal Corporation of the Town of Brome Lake                        Respondent  and  Mario Beaumont and Alyre Thireault                                              Respondents  Indexed as:  Gauthier v. Beaumont  File No.:  25022.  1997:  December 3; 1998:  July 9.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec     During the night of March 1 to 2, 1982, the appellant,
who was suspected of theft, was beaten, tortured and threatened with death by
the respondents B and T, who were respectively a police officer and chief of
police of the respondent town. After he had left the police station, the
appellant, fearing for his life, did not give the real cause of his injuries
when he went to the hospital, where he stayed for a few days.  He then left
Quebec for Western Canada.  In 1985, a representative of the Quebec Police
Commission contacted him.  Afraid of a trap, the appellant consulted the RCMP,
who confirmed that the caller was a member of the Police Commission.  The
appellant then testified before the Commission under police protection.  He
also testified at the preliminary inquiry of B and T in 1986, and then at their
trial in February 1988, where they were convicted of aggravated assault and
sentenced to prison.  On each occasion, he was represented by counsel.  On May
3, 1988, the appellant brought an action for damages against the respondents in
which he alleged that B and T had committed a fault within the meaning of
art. 1053 C.C.L.C. and had interfered with his rights guaranteed by
the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms.  The appellant
submitted that the town was also liable because its officials knew or ought to
have known about the conduct of B and T.  The Superior Court dismissed the
action on the basis that it was prescribed in light of the six-month extinctive
prescription provided for in s. 586 of the Cities and Towns Act. 
The judge considered the opinions of the two psychiatric experts heard at
trial, one called by the plaintiff and the other by the defence, who were of
the view that the appellant had gone through several stages of post-traumatic
neurosis as a result of which he was psychologically incapable of taking legal
action against B and T until March 1988.  The judge nevertheless made a
distinction between an ability that includes the courage to initiate
proceedings, and absolute impossibility, and determined that the appellant had
simply lacked courage.  The judge was not satisfied that it was indeed
absolutely impossible for the appellant to act throughout the six years
following the assault, as he found it hard to believe that it was totally impossible
for him to act after testifying before the Police Commission.  The Court of
Appeal affirmed this judgment.  Held (Lamer C.J. and
McLachlin J. dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed.   In this case, the trial judge erred in law in drawing
a distinction between the appellant’s lack of courage to initiate legal
proceedings and absolute impossibility in fact to act.  There is no such
distinction here.  A fear caused by an assailant’s violence or torture can take
away the victim’s ability to act and make it absolutely impossible in fact for
the victim to act against the assailant.  There is uncontradicted evidence that
B and T tortured the appellant atrociously and threatened to kill him, that the
appellant feared for his life and for the lives of his family, and that he was
in a state of extreme fear for the six years that followed this brutal
assault.  There is no question that his fear was present throughout the six
years and that it was a fear of serious harm.  The psychiatric experts assessed
the appellant, and both of them recognized that he had suffered a post-traumatic
neurosis that had prevented him from taking legal action against the
respondents during the six years following the night of torture in March 1982. 
They assessed the appellant’s personal situation and reached a concrete
conclusion that his fear was real and determinative of his impossibility to
act.  The only conclusion that can accordingly be drawn, on a preponderance of
evidence, is that the appellant was gripped by fear such that it was impossible
for him to act, and that this was the case until March 1988.  Although the
appellant testified before the Police Commission in 1985 and at the preliminary
inquiry in 1986, he was compelled to do so by way of subpoena and was under
police protection.  It was only once B and T had been convicted and sent to
prison in March 1988 that he was sufficiently free of his fear to be able to
act.  The effect of the acute and subacute post-traumatic stress disorder,
which was characterized by extreme fear, was to strip the appellant of any
control over his own will as regards B and T, who deliberately, and through
their own fault, placed the appellant in this profound state of fear.  In
requiring an insurmountable impossibility, the trial judge appears to have
applied an objective reasonable person legal standard.  Furthermore, whether
the appellant knew or may have known about the prescription period for his
action is immaterial here, since he was in a state of fear and of profound
post-traumatic stress that made it impossible for him to take legal action against
B and T for six years.  Finally, to blame the appellant for a lack of diligence
in obtaining treatment amounts implicitly to judging diligence based on the
reasonable person standard, and disregarding the psychological reality of the
victim, who suffered severe post-traumatic stress.  The fact that a victim
avoids talking about his or her trauma is in fact a consequence of the trauma. 
Since it was absolutely impossible in fact for the appellant to act within the
meaning of art. 2232 C.C.L.C., the six-month extinctive
prescription provided for in s. 586 of the Cities and Towns Act did
not run from March 2, 1982, the date on which the appellant’s right of action
arose, to March 1988.  As the court action was brought within six
months of the end of the suspension of prescription, the action was not
prescribed.  The civil fault of B and T is based on a breach of the
general duty of good conduct to which everyone is subject and on unlawful
interference with the appellant’s rights to personal inviolability and to the
safeguard of his dignity guaranteed in ss. 1 and 4 of the Quebec Charter. 
At the time of the delict, the respondent town was the employer of B and T.  In
light of art. 1054 para. 7 C.C.L.C., an employer is liable for
damage caused by its servants that involves unlawful interference with rights
protected by the Quebec Charter, since such interference constitutes a
civil fault.  The fact that the town did not knowingly endorse the brutal acts
committed by its employees does not relieve it from liability.  It must
therefore be held liable for the compensatory damages owed to the appellant as
a result of the acts of B and T.  The appellant is entitled to $50,000 in
pecuniary damages and $200,000 in moral damages.  The appellant is also entitled to $50,000 in exemplary
damages.  B and T are the persons guilty of unlawful and intentional
interference, within the meaning of s. 49 para. 2 of the Quebec Charter,
with the appellant’s rights to inviolability and dignity.  It is clear from the
evidence that they wished to cause the consequences of their wrongful conduct. 
As for the respondent town, proof of an employer-employee relationship under
art. 1054 para. 7 C.C.L.C. is not sufficient to establish unlawful
and intentional interference by the employer.  It must be shown on a
preponderance of evidence that the employer had an intent with respect to the
consequences of the unlawful breach of rights guaranteed by the Quebec Charter. 
There is sufficient evidence in this case to conclude that the town can be
presumed to have intended to interfere with the appellant’s inviolability and
dignity, or that this intention can be attributed to it.  There had been
several cases of unreasonable use of force in the respondent town’s police
force involving B and T, among others, before March 1982, and it would be
strange if the town had never got wind of the conduct of its police officers
and police chief before the Police Commission’s inquiry.  In the present case,
the evidence established that the police force itself, including the police
chief, played an active role in the violence against the appellant.  T, as the
chief of police, was one of the town’s directing minds, and his intent to cause
the consequences of the unlawful breach is to be attributed to the town.  The
town is therefore one of the persons guilty, within the meaning of s. 49
para. 2, of the unlawful and intentional interference with the appellant’s
rights to personal inviolability and dignity, and is ordered to pay exemplary damages
jointly and severally.  Under art. 1056c C.C.L.C., interest and
the additional indemnity run from the date when the action was instituted. 
Although it was absolutely impossible in fact for the appellant to act until
March 1988 and he could not therefore require that the obligation be performed
before then, there is no rule in the Civil Code of Lower Canada
permitting interest to be imposed as of the date of the cause of action.  As
for s. 50  of the Supreme Court Act , it cannot be applied against a
clear rule of the Civil Code of Lower Canada that provides for moratory
damages related to the debt itself.  Finally, the appellant’s request for
extrajudicial costs is dismissed.   The trial judge did not err in rejecting the experts’
unanimous opinion that the appellant was psychologically unable to act until
March 1988, since the psychiatric assessments were not entirely consistent.  Be
that as it may, the determination of “impossibility to act” is a matter for the
trier of fact, not for the experts, and it can be seen from the trial judge’s
reasons as a whole that he considered this notion in a subjective manner, in
light of all the evidence.  In a subjective analysis of impossibility, a trier
of fact must ensure that the psychological impossibility was just as
unforeseeable and irresistible for the victim as superior force, in light of
the victim’s personal characteristics and the lack of precision inherent in
psychological evidence.  The impossibility must be reasonable, which means in
this case that the fear must relate to an objectively serious injury.    Cases Cited  By Gonthier J.   By Lamer C.J. (dissenting)  Oznaga v. Société d’exploitation des loteries et
courses du Québec, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 113.  Statutes and Regulations Cited    Civil Code (France), arts.  2251, 2252, 2253, 2258.  Civil Code of Lower Canada, arts. 995, 1053, 1054 para. 7, 1056c [am. 1987,
c. 98, s. 1], 2232 [am. 1989, c. 54, s. 125], 2258
para. 2.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, art. 2930.     Authors Cited     Buy, Michel.  “Prescriptions de
courte durée et suspension de la prescription”, J.C.P. 77, I, 2833.  Carbonnier, J.  “La règle contra
non valentem agere non currit praecriptio” (1937), 57 Rev. crit. lég. et
jur. 155.  Cass., 2e Ch. civ.,
10 février 1966, D.1967.315, note Prévault.  Dallaire, Claude.  Les dommages
exemplaires sous le régime des Chartes.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur,
1995.  Delwaide, Karl.  “Les
articles 49 et 52 de la Charte québécoise des droits et libertés:  recours
et sanctions à l’encontre d’une violation des droits et libertés garantis par
la Charte québécoise”.  Dans Application des Chartes des droits et libertés
en matière civile.  Formation permanente du Barreau du Québec. 
Cowansville:  Yvon Blais, 1988, 95.  Durnford, John W.  “Some Aspects
of the Suspension and of the Starting Point of Prescription” (1963), 13 Thémis
245.  Gardner, Daniel.  L’évaluation
du préjudice corporel. Cowansville:  Yvon Blais, 1994.   Langelier, F., sir.  Cours de
droit civil de la Province de Québec, t. 6.  Montréal:  Wilson &
Lafleur, 1911.  Langevin, Louise.  “Suspension de
la prescription extinctive:  à l’impossible nul n’est tenu” (1996), 56 R. du
B. 265.  Larouche, Angers.  “Chronique de
droit des obligations” (1973), 4 R.G.D. 201.   Martineau, Pierre.  La
prescription.  Montréal:  PUM, 1977.  Mazeaud, Henri, Léon et Jean.
 Leçons de droit civil, t. II, vol. 1, Obligations: 
théorie générale, 8e éd., par François Chabas. 
Paris:  Montchrestien, 1991.  Mignault, Pierre Basile.  Le
droit civil canadien, t. 9.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur, 1916.  Nouveau Petit Robert.  Paris:  Le Robert, 1996, «courage».  Perret, Louis.  “De l’impact de la
Charte des droits et libertés de la personne sur le droit civil des contrats et
de la responsabilité au Québec” (1981), 12 R.G.D. 121.  Pineau, Jean, et Danielle Burman. 
Théorie des obligations, 2e éd.  Montréal:  Thémis, 1988. Quebec.  Civil Code of Lower
Canada:  Report of the Commissioners for the Codification of the Laws of Lower
Canada relating to Civil Matters.  First, Second and Third Reports. 
Québec:  Desbarats, 1865.  Roland, Henri, et
Laurent Boyer.  Adages du droit français, 3e éd. 
Paris:  Litec, 1992.  Starck, Boris, Henri Roland et
Laurent Boyer.  Obligations, vol. 3, Régime général, 5e éd. 
Paris:  Litec, 1995.  Tancelin, Maurice. Des
obligations: actes et responsabilités, 6e éd.  Montréal: 
Wilson & Lafleur, 1997.  Tancelin, Maurice.  Des
obligations: contrat et responsabilité, 4e éd.  Montréal: 
Wilson & Lafleur, 1988.   Traité de droit civil du Québec, t. 15, par Witold Rodys.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur,
1958.  Troplong, M. De la prescription,
t. 2, 4e éd.  Paris:  Librairie de jurisprudence ancienne et
moderne d’Édouard Duchemin, 1857.   Martin Gauthier, for
the appellant.  Thomas A. Lavin and Isabelle
Reinhardt, for the respondent the Town of Brome Lake.  No one appeared for the respondents Beaumont and
Thireault.  //The Chief Justice//   English version of the reasons of Lamer C.J. and
McLachlin J. delivered by   2                        While
I agree with Gonthier J. that a psychological impossibility exists in theory, I
do not believe that the facts of this case gave rise to such an inability to
act.  In my view, the trial judge did not commit any errors of law in analysing
this question.  It is therefore not open to this Court to review his findings
of fact as to the extent of the disability of the appellant David Allen Gauthier
between 1982 and 1988.  3                        I
recognize without hesitation that the appellant was treated brutally during the
night of March 1, 1982.  Rarely in my career as a judge have such odious events
come to my attention.  The respondent police officers were convicted of serious
criminal offences, and their convictions were clearly well deserved.  Since I
am well aware of the horror experienced by the appellant, it is without any
enthusiasm that I conclude that his action is prescribed.  4                        My
reasons explain in detail why I am of the view that Boily J. did not err in his
assessment of the appellant’s psychological condition after March 1982.  I then
discuss certain aspects of the evidence that in my view confirm that the trial
judge made the proper findings of fact in the present case.  I.  The Test for Assessing Psychological
Impossibility  5                        In
the Superior Court the plaintiff appellant had to show on a balance of
probabilities that it was psychologically (“absolutely” says the Civil Code
of Lower Canada (“C.C.L.C.”)) impossible for him to bring an action
against the respondents at least until six months before he actually did so in
May 1988.  Boily J. was of the view that Mr. Gauthier had failed to discharge
this burden.  The following is an excerpt from the trial judgment that
illustrates the analytical method adopted by Boily J. and concludes that the
action is prescribed:  [translation]
This is therefore a case in which the expert’s role is combined in a way with
that of the judge.  Ultimately, however, it is the judge who must determine
whether it was absolutely impossible for Gauthier to act.  A distinction must be made
between an ability that includes the courage to initiate proceedings, and
absolute impossibility.  Both experts are of the view that Gauthier lacked this
courage and was unable to initiate proceedings, and that it was highly or
likely or “practically impossible” for him to act.  Both experts are categorical
regarding the first six months after the incident.  They are much less so
concerning the subsequent period. 
Dr. Vacaflor stated the following:  “C) Unable for the 6 years following the night of
March the first to gather the necessary psychological strength to initiate
legal charges against the policemen and the local police.”  Dr. Béliveau stated the following:   . . . The burden of
proving absolute impossibility lies with the person relying on it.  In the present case, the
plaintiff has not satisfied the court that it was indeed absolutely impossible
for him to act throughout this lengthy period. 
While it probably was for a certain period, it is hard to believe that it was
totally impossible for him to act thereafter, especially at the time of the
Police Commission’s inquiry [in 1985], when he was under police protection and
pleaded guilty to a charge against him.   If boldness is the basis for the
judgment, it is open to condemnation for the same reason.  The court must not
let itself be carried away by fairness and place itself above the law by
creating an imaginary suspension, proportionate to the seriousness of the
assault on the plaintiff.  In its delictual aspect the action
is accordingly prescribed.  [Emphasis added.]   6                        The
judge is alleged to have committed an error of law in distinguishing the
appellant’s lack of courage from an absolute impossibility to act.  With
respect for the contrary opinion, I am of the view that this is not the case.  7                        A
possible error by the trial judge must be assessed in light of his reasons as a
whole, not simply by reading two sentences distinguishing impossibility from
lack of courage.  In my view, the following procedure should be followed in
this regard.  If Boily J.’s purpose in distinguishing “an ability that includes
the courage to initiate proceedings” from absolute impossibility was to state a
rule of law of general application, he erred in law.  His analysis would be in
error, since it would disregard the psychological and subjective nature of the
impossibility at issue.  It might then be possible to reject all forms of
psychological impossibility out of hand as being a lack of courage (“courage”),
that is, a lack of [translation]
“moral strength” or “[f]irmness in the face of danger or suffering
. . .” (Nouveau Petit Robert (1996), at p. 492).  If,
however, rather than setting out an objective standard, Boily J. tried to
determine the appellant’s psychological state in the case at bar and assessed
the credibility of his testimony to the effect that he lived in terror, my view
would be that Boily J.’s overall assessment of the evidence should not be
altered.  8                        The
use of the words “lack of courage” was clearly unfortunate.  With respect, this
expression trivializes the appellant’s tragedy, the main events of which are
not even disputed by the respondents.  However, Boily J.’s expression does not
in my view constitute an error of law.  First of all, the expression “lack of
courage” is similar to the terms used in the report of Dr. Vacaflor, the
respondents’ expert, regarding the subacute phase of the appellant’s neurosis:  In regard to his alleged
impossibility of denouncing the event of the first of March of ’82 to the
proper authorities it must be said at the very onset that we can only entertain
hypothesis [sic] of various degrees of credibility.  My personal opinion
is that he was truly so very frightened and understandably mistrustful of any
police action that it effectively kept him from denouncing the event.  Although
he had managed to put to some degree his life together, his fear of retaliation
(that still persists) made it, given his psychological frame of mind, practically
impossible to take the necessary legal action against his torturers.  In brief . . .   9                        Can
it nonetheless be argued that Boily J. misinterpreted Dr. Vacaflor’s
diagnosis?  At the hearing, this expert explained the words “practically
impossible” as follows:  “it would be understood like under most circumstances as
a severe impediment” (Case on Appeal, at p. 343 (emphasis added)). 
Dr. Vacaflor continued his testimony by describing two categories of examples
of what is “practically impossible”.  The impediments of the first group, such
as phobias, have an “imaginary” source:  “Let’s take phobia of a closed room. 
Now, a phobic individual in this situation would do whatever he can not to be
in this room.  That’s a severe impediment.” (Case on Appeal, at p. 344.) 
The expert then gave an example of a “real” cause of something that is
“practically impossible”:  “Let’s suppose I run into a confrontation with a
professional boxer and I’m invited to climb into the ring to decide my fate mostly,
I would be intensely frightened and I would probably do my best not to climb
into the ring because I would see the options of success negligible” (Case
on Appeal, at p. 344 (emphasis added)).  At the judge’s request, Dr.
Vacaflor returned to his example of a fear whose cause is “real” (“climb into a
ring and fight . . . [Mike] Tyson”) and stated:  Yes, yes, I mean to say that fear can have a
paralyzing effect.  Be that real like Tyson or
imaginary like the closed room.  The effect may be just about the same.  So, we
could not call that an absolute impossibility.  I guess I could climb into
the ring and get smashed or I could remain in the room and faint.  I think
that’s a practical impossibility meaning strong, intense.  [Case on Appeal,
at p. 345 (emphasis added).]  10                      Finally,
counsel for the respondents asked Dr. Vacaflor to gauge the intensity of the
impediment that prevented Gauthier from taking action against his assailants. 
He answered as follows:  11                      I
have reproduced the comments of the respondents’ expert in detail in order to
show that the content of his testimony is difficult to assess.  His
professional opinion as to the extent of the appellant’s disability was vague. 
Nor did Dr. Vacaflor give a satisfactory explanation for his expression
“[u]nable . . . to gather the necessary psychological strength to
initiate legal charges”.  He focused on the source of the impossibility (in
this case half “real” and half “imaginary”, he said:  Case on Appeal, at
p. 346), but not really on whether the mental impediment was
determinative, on its consequences or on the evolution of the symptoms of
trauma over time.  When the psychiatrist Dr. Vacaflor considered these
questions, he stated that Gauthier faced two difficulties:  a fairly
pessimistic perception of his chances of success against the police in any
legal proceedings and a phobia that was not intense enough to cause him to
faint.  12                      As
a result, if Boily J. found Dr. Vacaflor’s testimony on this subject to be more
credible than that of Dr. Béliveau, the appellant’s expert, it is
understandable that he adopted a qualified opinion of the appellant’s
psychological state during the months or years prior to his action for
damages.  Boily J. cannot be accused of erring in rejecting the experts’
unanimous opinion that the appellant was psychologically unable to act until
March 1988.  Such a conclusion would be unjustified, since in my view the
psychiatric assessments are not entirely consistent.    16                      I
concede that Boily J.’s reasons are problematic, in that he began at one point
in his reasoning to lean toward an objective analysis of impossibility.  The
trial judge wrote (at p. 18):       [translation]   20                      Counsel
for the respondents asked the expert what made him say that the appellant had
become capable of bringing an action “in March 1988”.  He answered as follows:  [translation]  A.   Well what I said is that
in March he was.  I can’t say that he wasn’t in April or that he wasn’t in
February. . . .  What I said is that he was in March, y’know, at the
time he brought them.  I believe it was in March that he brought the
proceedings; I don’t remember that for sure any more.  But in March he was,
perhaps a bit before then.  But exactly when, it can’t be done like that. 
What I said is that when he learned that the police officers had been
convicted, when he had the judgment in other words, I think that must have been
a strong factor.  Especially if people were reassuring him at that time that he
could do it.  [Case on Appeal, at p. 281 (emphasis added).]   R.    I don’t really know who it was who finally got
me going like to take the proceedings. Q.   O.K. well at a given point, did somebody explain
to you that you had the right to sue these people? R.     Not really no, no . . . outright no. Q.   Well did any people encourage you to
. . . say that you should do it, members of your family or anybody? R.    No. Q.   It was just came into your own mind yourself, is
that correct? R.    Well it was in my mind for quite a while myself,
with nobody telling me. Q.   Yes, for how long had it been in your mind? R.    Actually ever since it happened. Q.   Ever since it happened? R.    Ever since they got hold of me in 1982.  23                      I
have reproduced these lengthy excerpts from the transcripts to show that the
expert assessments are of limited usefulness for determining the time when the
subacute phase of the neurosis abated.  Dr. Béliveau even concluded as follows:  [translation]
All I can tell you is that I give an opinion based on the symptomatology before
me.  The rest are possibilities, but I can’t. . . .  To be honest, I
don’t think I can give a firm opinion on this point.  I think the judge is
in as good a position as I am, even in a better position than I am with all the
evidence before him, to reach a decision.  [Case on Appeal, at p. 295
(emphasis added).]  24                      With
respect, it would be wrong to maintain that Boily J. disregarded the unanimous
opinion of the experts that it was impossible for Gauthier to act until March
1988.  The expert assessments are silent or unconvincing on the question of the
time when the subacute symptoms of the neurosis dissipated.  Dr. Béliveau’s
diagnosis that the appellant became capable of bringing his proceedings in
March 1988 is based in large part on the fact that it was then that he actually
contacted a lawyer.  In my view, this reasoning is not determinative of whether
Gauthier could have brought his action before that date.  25                      Notwithstanding
Boily J.’s inappropriate use of the expression “lack of courage” with respect
to the appellant, it is my view that the trial judge did not commit any errors
in his analysis of absolute impossibility in fact.  His conclusion is supported
by complex and detailed evidence.  Nor am I convinced that his assessment of
the probative value of the various pieces of evidence was unreasonable.  For
these reasons, I do not think that this Court should interfere with the
decision of the trier of fact.  II.  The Assessment of Subjective Impossibility in
This Case  26                      If
my conclusion that Boily J. did not commit any errors of law was wrong, I am
also satisfied after reviewing the evidence that the appellant was capable of
bringing his action for damages long before March 1988.  In this case, the
alleged impossibility is a question of fact that depends on how credible the
appellant’s account of his state of mind until 1988 is found to be.  It must be
understood that this Court is at a disadvantage in relation to the trial court
on any questions of credibility.  For example, what weight should be given to
the perjury committed by David Gauthier in 1985 when he stated under oath that
he had not taken part in the theft of the safe?  (Gauthier later pleaded guilty
to a charge relating to that offence:  Case on Appeal, at pp. 170 and
459-61.)  Or what importance should be attached to his mistrust of the police? 
The appellant stated that he had no faith in the police or the judicial system
(Case on Appeal, at pp. 112 and 131), although he agreed to give
information to the Police Commission.  Furthermore, when a representative of
the Commission contacted him in 1985, he was afraid it was a trap, and his
response was to verify the identity of the caller by contacting a member of the
RCMP! (Case on Appeal, at p. 118.)   28                      It
is hard to know what to think of the comments set out above that were made by
the appellant in the course of a painful judicial saga that has now been going
on for 13 years.  While it is clear that some of these remarks are unreliable
or do not specify the period to which they refer, they nevertheless cast doubt
on the appellant’s psychological disability.   30                      Nor
should the appellant’s participation in the Police Commission’s inquiry or the
criminal trial be distinguished from the institution of civil proceedings on
the basis of the subpoenas served on Mr. Gauthier during the criminal trial and
the inquiry.  The following is an excerpt from his examination on this subject
(Case on Appeal, at pp. 215-16):  Q.   Was there anything in 1986
when you came here to testify for the second time, for the third time, for the
preliminary enquiry in 1986, there is anything stopping you at that time from
suing the town of Brome Lake?  R.    Yes there was.  Two police
officers.  Q.   I see?   Q.   And what was it that was
stopping you.  I mean you came here and you testified freely and voluntarily
didn’t you?  R.    Freely, no.  Q.   Oh no?  R.    I believe I got a subpoena.  Q.   But if you hadn’t got a
subpoena, you would have come on your own wouldn’t you?  R.    If I could have afforded
it.  Q.   So it wasn’t the fact that
those two police officers were here that was stopping you from coming and
testifying?  R.    I knew if I could have got
down here I could have got police protection.  Q.   Right.  So what was the
difference between testifying against them in open court or taking a civil
action against the town of Brome Lake?  R.    I didn’t know, I still
don’t know if you can get the police protection for a civil suit.  The appellant’s testimony does not convince me that he was compelled
to act against his will on all these occasions.  In short, even when Mr.
Gauthier referred to the police protection he received when testifying at the
Police Commission’s inquiry, what he said suggests that his fear was more
reasoned than insurmountable.  31                      One
can only speculate why the appellant did not institute legal proceedings before
May 3, 1988.  I wonder what effect the fact that he lived in British Columbia
had, since the action had to be brought in Quebec.  It can be seen from the
evidence that the appellant and his family came to live in Quebec in June 1988,
which made it much easier to prosecute the action.   33                      Should
the Court conclude that the appellant’s action is not prescribed, I believe it
would be rash to award damages without the benefit of the reasons of the courts
below on this question.  In that event, I would suggest that the matter be
remanded to the Superior Court so that it may determine the municipality’s
liability and the extent of the damage sustained by the appellant.  //Gonthier J.//  English version of the judgment of L’Heureux-Dubé,
Gonthier and Bastarache JJ. delivered by  34                      Gonthier J. -- This appeal deals
primarily with the concept of absolute impossibility in fact to act as a cause
of suspension of extinctive prescription.  I.  Facts  35                      On
March 1, 1982, the appellant was brutally beaten and tortured by the
respondents Mario Beaumont and Alyre Thireault, who were respectively a police
officer and chief of police of the respondent Municipal Corporation of the Town
of Brome Lake.  The trial judge’s description of the events was reproduced by
the Court of Appeal.  The parties also referred to this account, which I will
now quote:  [translation]
At about midnight on March 1, 1982, while Gauthier [the appellant] was sleeping
at his brother-in-law’s residence in Lac Brôme, he was suddenly awakened by
police officers from that municipality.  He was arrested for questioning about
the theft of a safe.  No formal charges had yet been laid against him.  He was taken to the police
station, to a room where officers Beaumont and Thireau [sic] wanted to
question him; the latter is the chief of police.  In fact, they tried to force
him to answer.  Thireau punched and kicked him in the head a number of times. 
Before they went further, he was photographed; his injuries were not yet
apparent.  He was then hit again, and they tried to make him confess that he
was involved in the theft of a safe in Foster, a municipality located close to
Lac Brôme.  Gauthier still refused to speak. 
He made no statement.  At no time was he told why he had been arrested, and the
only justification for detaining him was to make him confess to participating
in the theft of the safe.  Nor was he told of his right to contact his next of
kin or his right to retain and instruct counsel.  At one point, Beaumont punched him
so hard with a right to the head that his uniform was spattered with blood.  In
anger, Beaumont screamed:  “I’m going to kill you fucking pig.”  They continued
to hit him.  Then, they took him to a washroom, where they plunged his head
into the toilet.  As they were not yet satisfied, he was taken to another room,
where they removed his clothes and started throwing burning matches at his
genitals, which caused him unspeakable pain.  The contents of an aerosol
container were sprayed in his face.  The torture continued.  The defendants
hung him upside down in a stairwell and clubbed him.  They threatened to drop
him unless he talked.  He was then taken to a basement
cell, where he was given a 40-ounce bottle of liquor.  They suggested he drink
it to get his strength back.  He refused, as he knew that it could be used
against him if he smelled of alcohol.  Although he was now dressed only
lightly and covered with scratches and bruises, he was driven to an isolated
place, where he was tied to a metal post near a little-travelled gravel road. 
It was close to -25° Celsius.  They returned for him one or one and a half hours
later.  Day was breaking; it may have been about 6:00 a.m.  He was taken back to the station,
where he was told to place his frozen hands on a desk.  Thireau picked up a
club, struck the desk with it a few times and ordered Gauthier to confess that
he had taken part in the theft or he would break all his fingers.  Thireau did
in fact hit Gauthier’s right hand with the club.  He then hit the floor near
Gauthier’s frozen feet and forced him to dance.  Finally, since he would not
confess, they returned him to his cell.  A little later, he was taken to
the ground floor, where another officer who arrived for his shift was more
conciliatory.  Gauthier wanted to call his brother-in-law, whose name was
Thompson.  The officers agreed, but he was warned that after his release, he
would have to stay at Thompson’s house.  Thireau told him that if he saw him
anywhere other than at Thompson’s house after he left, he would kill him.  However, they kept him in a
basement cell until 7:00 p.m, when the defendant Thireau drove him to a side
road in a patrol car and told him:  [translation]
“If I see you again, I’ll kill you.”  Gauthier walked to Thompson’s house,
which was a fair distance from the place where he had been dropped off.  He walked barefoot or in stocking
feet, but without shoes, which he found painful to wear.  He knocked on
Thompson’s door with his knees, as he was unable to use his hands owing to his
injuries.  Thompson wanted to take him to the hospital, but Gauthier refused
because he was afraid the defendants would kill him.  Thompson gave him first aid, but
as this was clearly insufficient, Gauthier finally agreed to go to the
Cowansville hospital, where he stayed for a few days.  Still afraid to initiate
an investigation of the defendants because he feared for his life, he did not
give the real cause of his injuries but said that he had suffered frostbite
while hitchhiking.  He then spent a week in the home
of another brother-in-law.  He eventually left for Vancouver, where he was
unable to work for at least six months and lived on welfare benefits.  He then
returned to Yellowknife.  He spoke to no one about what had
happened to him, and it was not until 1985, following disclosures by police
officers from the municipality who had not been involved in the events, that he
received a telephone call from a representative of the Police Commission.  Afraid that it was a trap, he hung
up.  He then contacted a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in
Yellowknife, who gave him some advice on how to determine whether the caller
was indeed a member of the Police Commission.  After the call proved to be
genuine, he made a sworn statement setting out the events concerning himself,
but it contained two falsehoods:  he stated that he had had nothing to do with
the theft of the safe in Foster and that he had not gone there while in Quebec.  He then testified before the
Police Commission under police protection.  After the inquiry, he returned to
Western Canada.  He learned between 1985 and 1988 that the Crown had laid
criminal charges against the defendants and that he would eventually be called
to testify at their trial.  He testified at their preliminary
inquiry in January 1986 and later at the trial in February 1988.  Beaumont
and Thireau were convicted of aggravated assault and sentenced to one and three
months in prison, respectively, and to a fine.  The Court of Appeal later
increased this sentence to one year in prison for Beaumont and two years for
Thireau.  It should be mentioned that prior
to testifying before the Police Commission in 1985, Gauthier pleaded guilty to
the charge of theft of the safe in Foster in 1982.  He was represented by
counsel at that time as well as during the Police Commission’s inquiry and at
the police officers’ preliminary inquiry and trial.  In the course of the trial, he
even discussed with his lawyer the possibility of seeking an order for
compensation under the Criminal Code .  Crown counsel talked him out of
doing so, as he was afraid that an order for compensation would result in a
reduced sentence.  On March 31, 1988, Gauthier
contacted his counsel, who are now helping him obtain compensation for the
ill-treatment he suffered.  The appellant decided to sue the respondents for damages on March
31, 1988, although his action was not served on them until May 3, 1988.  He
alleged in his amended declaration that the respondents Beaumont and Thireault
were liable for his injuries because they wilfully and intentionally committed
a fault within the meaning of art. 1053 of the Civil Code of Lower
Canada (“C.C.L.C.”) and interfered with his rights under the Charter
of Human Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q., c. C-12 (the “Quebec Charter”). 
The appellant further submitted that the respondent Town of Brome Lake was also
liable because the municipality’s officials knew or ought to have known about
the conduct of the other two respondents and it did nothing to dismiss or
reprimand them or ensure that the fundamental rights of arrested persons were respected.  36                      The
appellant asked that all the respondents be ordered jointly and severally to
pay $300,000 in compensatory damages and $100,000 in exemplary
damages.  37                      On
February 21, 1990, Boily J. of the Superior Court dismissed the action on the
basis that it was prescribed.  On October 4, 1995, the Court of Appeal
unanimously affirmed Boily J.’s decision and dismissed the appeal.  The appellant
applied to this Court for leave to appeal, which was granted on October 3,
1996, [1996] 3 S.C.R. viii.  The Town of Brome Lake was the only respondent
heard by the Court.  The respondents Beaumont and Thireault did not make an
appearance at any point during this appeal, even though they had been duly
notified of the appeal.  II.  Statutory Provisions  38                      The relevant
statutory provisions are as follows:  Cities and Towns Act, R.S.Q.,
c. C-19   Civil Code of Lower Canada  1053.  Every person capable of discerning right from wrong is responsible
for the damage caused by his fault to another, whether by positive act,
imprudence, neglect or want of skill.  1054.  . . .  Masters and employers are
responsible for the damage caused by their servants and workmen in the
performance of the work for which they are employed.  1056c.  The amount awarded by judgment for damages resulting from an offence
or a quasi-offence shall bear interest at the legal rate as from the date when
the action at law was instituted.  There may be added to the amount
so awarded an indemnity computed by applying to the amount, from such date, a
percentage equal to the excess of the interest rate fixed according to
section 28 of the Act respecting the Ministère du Revenu (R.S.Q.,
chapter M-31) over the legal interest rate.  2232.  Prescription runs against all persons, unless they are included in
some exception established by this code, or unless it is absolutely impossible
for them in law or in fact to act by themselves or to be represented by others. Saving what is declared in article
2269, prescription does not run, even in favor of subsequent purchasers,
against those who are not born, nor against minors or persons of full age who
are unable to give consent, with or without tutors or curators.  Prescription runs against
absentees as against persons present and by the same lapse of time, saving what
is declared as to persons authorized to take provisional possession of the
estate of an absentee.   1.  Every human being has a right to life, and to personal security,
inviolability and freedom.  He also possesses juridical personality.  4. 
Every person has a right to the safeguard of his dignity, honour and
reputation.  49. 
Any unlawful interference with any right or freedom recognized by this Charter
entitles the victim to obtain the cessation of such interference and
compensation for the moral or material prejudice resulting therefrom.  In case of unlawful and
intentional interference, the tribunal may, in addition, condemn the person
guilty of it to exemplary damages.  III.  Judicial History  A.  Superior Court  39                      Boily
J. noted that an absolute impossibility to act is an inability in fact that is
to be assessed by the court, and that the test laid down by the Superior Court
in Semmelaack v. Ferguson (1941), 48 R.L. 163, at pp. 166-67, is
still valid today:  [translation]
[A]n inability in law or in fact to act is absolute where the person against
whom prescription ran was in a position equivalent to superior force and no
amount of diligence on his part would have allowed him to interrupt it.
. . . 40                      Boily
J. considered the opinion of the appellant’s psychiatric expert and concluded
that it was corroborated by that of the respondent’s psychiatric expert.  Both
experts were of the view that the appellant had gone through several stages of
post-traumatic neurosis as a result of which he was psychologically incapable
of taking legal action against his assailants until March 1988.  41                      Despite
this uncontradicted evidence, Boily J. stated  [translation]
[that a] distinction must be made between an ability that includes the courage
to initiate proceedings, and absolute impossibility.  Both experts are of the
view that Gauthier lacked this courage and was unable to initiate proceedings,
and that it was highly or likely or “practically impossible” for him to act.  Both experts are categorical
regarding the first six months after the incident.  They are much less so
concerning the subsequent period.  Dr. Vacaflor [the respondent’s psychiatric
expert] stated the following:  “C) Unable for the 6 years following the night of
March the first to gather the necessary psychological strength to initiate
legal charges against the policemen and the local police.”  Dr. Béliveau [the appellant’s
psychiatric expert] stated the following:  “He subsequently continued to show the symptomatology
of a state of subacute post-traumatic stress, and in particular of phobias that
in all probability prevented him from taking any action against the persons who
assaulted him in March 1982 until March 1988.”  The rules on prescription are
rules of public order.  The social order depends on them.  The court cannot out
of sympathy — however strong it may be — or daring give them an interpretation
they cannot bear.  The burden of proving absolute impossibility lies with the
person relying on it.  In the present case, the plaintiff
has not satisfied the court that it was indeed absolutely impossible for him to
act throughout this lengthy period.  While it probably was for a certain
period, it is hard to believe that it was totally impossible for him to act
thereafter, especially at the time of the Police Commission’s inquiry, when he
was under police protection and pleaded guilty to a charge against him.  Furthermore, as Dr. Béliveau
mentioned, the chronic period could have been avoided had the plaintiff
consulted a specialist.  For prescription to be suspended, the impossibility
must be equivalent to superior force, that is, a case that human vigilance and
ingenuity can neither anticipate nor prevent.   42                      Being
of the view that the appellant had not been sufficiently diligent during the
six years following the assault and that the court should not let itself be
carried away by fairness in creating [translation]
“an imaginary suspension, proportionate to the seriousness of the assault on
the plaintiff” (p. 18), Boily J. declared the appellant’s action to be
prescribed in light of the six-month extinctive prescription provided for in
s. 586 of the Cities and Towns Act.  43                      Boily
J. then considered the appellant’s argument that the 30-year prescription of
the Civil Code of Lower Canada applied to his action founded on the Quebec
Charter.  There was no question in Boily J.’s mind that certain of the
appellant’s fundamental rights had been interfered with.  If those acts of
interference are considered to be delicts, however, the short prescription
period provided for in the Cities and Towns Act should apply, since the Quebec
Charter specifies no other period.  B.  Court of Appeal, [1996] R.D.J. 126   [translation]
was not absolutely impossible [for the appellant] to initiate legal
proceedings against the respondent police officers and municipality once he had
testified against them in 1985 at the inquiry of the Comité de déontologie
policière and in 1986 at the preliminary inquiry. . . . If the
appellant was capable of so testifying, it was clearly possible for him to
initiate the appropriate proceedings against the respondents at the latest
after the respondents’ preliminary inquiry in 1986.  Even if this last event
were taken as the starting point, his action was prescribed long before he
brought it.  [Emphasis in original.]  45                      The
Court of Appeal concluded by stating that it considered Boily J.’s reasoning on
the extinctive prescription applicable to an action founded on the Quebec
Charter to be entirely consistent with the applicable law.  IV.  Issues  46                      This appeal raises
the following issues:  A.  Is the appellant’s action prescribed?  B.  If not:  1.    are the respondents liable
for the damage sustained by the appellant?  2.    what is the quantum of the
damages to be awarded to the appellant?  3.    should exemplary damages be
awarded under the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Quebec Charter,
and if so, what is the quantum thereof?  4.    if applicable, when do the
interest at the legal rate and the additional indemnity provided for in
art. 1056c C.C.L.C. begin to run?  5.    should extrajudicial costs
be awarded?  V.  Analysis  A.  Is the Appellant’s Action Prescribed?  1.  Introduction  47                      Even
though the cause of action arose the night of March 1 to 2, 1982 and the
action was brought on May 3, 1988, the appellant submits that his action
against the respondents is not prescribed, since it was absolutely impossible
for him in fact to act until March 1988 because the respondents Beaumont and
Thireault had caused him to fear for his life and the lives of his family.  He
argues that his absolute impossibility in fact to act suspended the six-month
prescription provided for in s. 586 of the Cities and Towns Act
which was applicable in this case.  2.  Suspension of
Prescription  48                      Cases
of suspension of prescription, including those based on an absolute
impossibility in fact to act, are exceptions to the rule set out in the first
paragraph of art. 2232 C.C.L.C.:  prescription runs against all
persons.  Prescription is a concept essential to the civil law whose rationale
lies in practical utility and social interest.  As Mazeaud wrote, [translation] “[i]t is in the interest
of public order for obligations to be eliminated after the creditor fails to
act for a long period.”  (H., L. and J. Mazeaud, Leçons de droit civil,
t. II, vol. 1, Obligations: théorie générale, 8th ed., by
F. Chabas, 1991, at p. 1206.)  Prescription appears as an institution
designed to introduce security into legal relations by mitigating the
consequences of time’s erosive effect on memory and on the value of evidence,
and by encouraging creditors to act diligently.  Lamer J. (as he then was)
wrote the following in Oznaga v. Société d’exploitation des loteries et
courses du Québec, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 113, at p. 126, where he was
dealing specifically with time limits other than those of pure prescription:  . . . care must be taken not to relax the
computing of deadlines, substantive as well as procedural, to the point that
they become almost inoperative, for such clauses serve the ends of justice as
they are designed to provide special protection for certain rights which under
certain conditions the legislator wishes to give priority, be that to the
detriment of the rights of others, by providing them protection from litigants
who act belatedly. . . .  Accordingly, the concept of it
being “absolutely impossible . . . in fact to act”, provided for in
art. 2232 of the Civil Code, should not be unduly extended as a
basis for a suspension of deadlines.  49                      The
appellant relies on one of the causes of suspension of prescription set out in
art. 2232 C.C.L.C.:  that it was absolutely impossible in fact to
act.  To determine the exact scope of this cause of suspension of prescription,
it will be helpful to understand the origins and evolution of this civil law
concept.  3.  Origin of the Concept of
Absolute Impossibility in Fact to Act  50                      In
ancient law, the judge-made rule contra non valentem agere non currit
praescriptio (prescription does not run against a person who has been
prevented from acting) was applied very broadly.  Under this maxim, judges gave
themselves the right to decide whether there was in fact a cause that justified
disregarding prescription (H. Roland and L. Boyer, Adages du droit
français (3rd ed. 1992), at p. 114).  Dean
Baudry-Lacantinerie and Professor Tissier (Traité théorique et pratique de
droit civil -- De la prescription (3rd ed. 1905)) stated the following
concerning this generous application of the maxim (at p. 283):  [translation]
The first authors to formulate the rule seem to have only had in mind the case
of legal impediment.  But the authors and the courts were quick to go much
further; they extended the rule to every case in which there seemed to them to
be any impediment whatsoever to an action by someone against whom prescription
ran:  minority, insanity, dotalité, condition, term, contingent nature
of the right, absence, ignorance, superior force and fortuitous event, and any
circumstance considered to prevent the person from acting was also regarded as
resulting in the suspension of prescription.   51                      The
framers of the French Civil Code (“C.C.”) did not of course wish to give
the courts this much latitude, as can be seen from art. 2251 C.C.:  [translation]
Prescription runs against all persons, unless they are under some exception
established by a law.  [Emphasis added.]  Prescription therefore had to be assessed ex lege rather than
ex judicio.  The wording of art. 2251 C.C. was clear in this
respect.  As Dean Baudry-Lacantinerie and Professor Tissier, supra,
stated (at pp. 283-84):  [translation]
The framers of the civil code intended article 2251 to put an end to these
debates; they did not reproduce the maxim; they intended not to apply it.  They
were in fact wise to do so; they wished to eliminate an inexhaustible source of
disagreement, trials and inextricable difficulties and to prevent a return to
abuses that had frequently been noted.    53                      The
commissioners responsible for the drafting of the Civil Code of Lower Canada
were aware of this re-emergence of the maxim in French law, with the result
that the concept of impossibility to act as a cause of suspension of
prescription was codified in the first paragraph of art. 64 of Title
Nineteenth of Book Third of the draft Civil Code of Lower Canada:  64. 
Prescription runs against all persons, unless they be specially exempt
according to law or the established jurisprudence, or that they are unable to
act.  (Third Report of the Commissioners appointed to codify
the Laws of Lower Canada in civil matters (1865), at p. 531.)  The commissioners stated the following with respect to this
provision:  Article 64 declares, as a general
principle, that prescription runs against all persons, unless there be an
acknowledged exception or impossibility of acting.  This last modification is
the reproduction of the well known rule contra non valentem agere non currit
præscriptio.  It is remarkable that it is not textually inserted in the
French code, although it is the basis of all its particular provisions, and has
an extensive application to many other cases which do not result from the
natural or legal state of the parties concerned.  There was no doubt some
apprehension of the too great extent which commentators gave under the ancient
law to the rule of impossibility and of the distinctions to which it might have
led.  [Emphasis added.]  (Third Report of the Commissioners, supra, at
p. 425.)  The commissioners had originally intended to include impossibility
to act as a cause of suspension.  Like the framers of the French Civil Code,
they were aware of the risk that the role of prescription would be too limited
were so general a cause of suspension to be introduced.  They therefore
proposed the present version of art. 2232 C.C.L.C., electing to
retain the rule of the ancient law, while limiting its scope in order to avoid
the abuses to which it had given rise:  Under similar views, the
Commissioners have thought advisable by the amendment 64a
[art. 2232] at once to preserve the rule [of impossibility] and to
restrict it in so far as was necessary to simplicity in its provisions and to
its adaptation to the present state of intercourse between nations and
countries which have been drawn nearer by the increased facilities of
communication.  For these reasons it is suggested that the impossibility ought
to be absolute in fact or in law, excluding the means of acting by intermediate
agent.  It is also there stated that the exceptions under the law, which are
not at the same time founded on the impossibility to act thus limited, will be
found specified in the code, which will thus make the rule more certain and
appears devoid of any danger.  (Third Report of the Commissioners, supra, at
p. 425; see also P. Martineau, La prescription (1977), at
para. 214, at p. 216.)  Thus, it appears that absolute impossibility in fact to act has
always been expressly included among the causes of suspension of prescription
recognized by the Civil Code of Lower Canada.  54                      This
concept has traditionally been interpreted narrowly and objectively in Quebec
civil law.  In Semmelaack v. Ferguson, supra, at pp. 166-67,
Forest J. wrote the following:  [translation]
[A]n inability in law or in fact to act is absolute where the person against
whom prescription ran was in a position equivalent to superior force and no
amount of diligence on his part would have allowed him to interrupt
it. . . .  Forest J. equated impossibility to act with superior force and gave
an objective interpretation of how impossibility to act affects the person
against whom prescription runs.  55                      The
subsequent cases focused on the absoluteness of the impossibility.  For example
in Procureur général du Québec v. Garantie (La), Cie d’assurance de
l’Amérique du Nord, [1979] C.S. 216 (reversed by the Court of Appeal on
other grounds, November 14, 1983, C.A. Mtl., No. 500-09-000291-799,
J.E. 83-1142), Gratton J. stated, at p. 226:  [translation]
The codifiers added to article 2232 C.C. which drew upon art. 2251
C.N. the words “or unless it is absolutely impossible for them in law or in
fact to act”.  I stressed the word “absolutely” at the outset because it must
be given its ordinary meaning of “allowing for no restriction, alleviation or
exception” (Larousse); if the legislature included it in the article, it
intended to say something, and the article has been interpreted accordingly. 
This does not mean that no cases can exist.  Two examples would be a kidnap
victim who is confined indefinitely or an accident victim who lies in a coma
for a long period.  According to Mignault and Rodys, kidnapping was in practice the only
example of absolute impossibility to act (P.-B. Mignault, Le droit
civil canadien, t. 9, 1916, at p. 452; Traité de droit civil
du Québec, t. 15, by W. Rodys, 1958, at p. 195).  56                      Is
so narrow an interpretation of impossibility to act justified?  The addition of
the modifier “absolutely” to the words “impossible in fact to act” should not
be interpreted as showing an intention to minimize the scope of this cause of
suspension of prescription.  Unlike their French counterparts, the codifiers of
the Civil Code of Lower Canada expressly established absolute
impossibility in fact to act as a cause of suspension of prescription in
art. 2232 C.C.L.C.  It is therefore unnecessary to rely on the
French courts’ ingenious interpretation of art. 2251 C.C. in order to
include absolute impossibility in fact to act as a cause of suspension of
prescription in Quebec civil law.  This cause of suspension must be interpreted
in a manner consistent with the codifiers’ intention and with the importance of
the institution of prescription for public order and the security of legal
relations.  In La prescription, supra, at p. 353, Professor
Martineau described the purpose of art. 2232 C.C.L.C. as follows:  [translation]
343 - Impossibility in fact - The first paragraph of article 2232
C.C. states that prescription does not run against persons for whom it is
“absolutely impossible . . . in law or in fact to act by themselves
or to be represented by others”.  This is the contra non valentem agere non currit
praescriptio rule. [Emphasis added.]  Professor Martineau appears to have felt that the modifier
“absolutely” does not limit the application of the impossibility in fact to act
concept to extreme cases, as was suggested by Mignault and Rodys, among
others.  Nowhere in the parts of his book where he discussed absolute
impossibility in fact to act did he refer to superior force as a prerequisite
to this cause of suspension (see Martineau, supra, at
pp. 215-19 and 353-55).  As Langelier stated, [translation] “[t]he word absolute ordinarily means
something that applies to everyone, but that is not what it means here, since
in that case the rule in our article would be meaningless” (F. Langelier,
Cours de droit civil de la Province de Québec, t. 6, 1911, at
p. 486 (emphasis in original)). 57                      In
Beaubien v. Laframboise (1925), 40 B.R. 194, at p. 197, Dorion J.A. of
the Court of Queen’s Bench in turn qualified the use of the term absolute:  [translation]
In their report, the Quebec codifiers stated that the impossibility is
absolute; it is nevertheless necessary to stay with what can occur in practice
and give the word “impossible”, which is unambiguous, its ordinary meaning.  58                      The
notion of absolute impossibility in fact to act thus does not depend
exclusively on superior force for its definition.  What sources will it
therefore draw on?  An analysis of both French and Quebec law is required.  4.  Absolute Impossibility
in Fact to Act  (a)  In French Civil Law  (i)  Broadening of the Concept  59                      In
the formulation frequently reproduced by the Cour de cassation,
prescription does not run against a person for whom it is absolutely impossible
to act owing to some impediment resulting from superior force (for relevant
cases, see Juris-classeur civil, arts. 2251-59, supra,
No. 89; Terré, Simler and Lequette, supra, at
pp. 1104-5).  However, this general formulation is ambiguous.  In a
brilliant comparative analysis, Dean Carbonnier pointed out that the
impossibility to act rule was not perfectly consistent with the general theory
of superior force, as it was sometimes broader and sometimes narrower in scope
(J. Carbonnier, “La règle contra non valentem agere non currit
praecriptio” (1937), 57 Rev. crit. lég. et jur. 155).  The
impossibility to act concept has proved once again to be an equitable remedy,
although this time the French courts have used it with far more circumspection
(Carbonnier, supra, at p. 182).  60                      The
fact that the impossibility to act concept is distinct from that of superior
force has allowed the scope of the former to be defined more broadly.  61                      Thus,
an insane woman who was institutionalized but not interdicted, and therefore
not covered by the causes of suspension set out in the French Civil Code,
applied for a disability pension 13 years after ceasing all salaried employment
because she had been committed to a psychiatric institution.  This was well
beyond the short time limit for applying for benefits under the French Code
de sécurité sociale.  The delay could be attributed to the plaintiff’s
mental state.  The Cour de cassation ruled in favour of the plaintiff,
held that the action was not prescribed and stated:  [translation]
Whereas the appeal alleges that the judgment erred in allowing this action
brought after the expiry of the time provided for in art. 308 of the Code
de sécurité social (art. 53 of the order of October 19, 1945) when
there was an administrator of M.’s property, and whereas the
aforementioned time was not subject to suspension; -- But whereas
prescription does not run against a person for whom it is absolutely impossible
to act; -- And whereas it can be seen from the judgment that M. had
received no medical insurance benefits during the period in question, since
her mental state made it impossible to determine her rights under the social
security legislation, that it was not certain she did qualify for social
assistance until September 1959, when after her condition improved she was
able to provide the necessary specific information, and that it was thus
established that she was not able to assert her rights at any time before the
expiry of the statutory period subsequent to the certification of her
disability; -- Whereas the triers of fact found in light of this
certification that the plaintiff in the instant case was properly relying on
superior force and that the provisions at issue in the appeal were
inapplicable;  For these reasons, dismisses the appeal.  [Emphasis
added.]  (Cass., 2e Ch. civ.,
10 February 1966, D.1967.315)  According to Prévault, who wrote the commentary on this decision,
the prescription of the action was suspended owing to the creditor’s mental
state, which was a factual state beyond her control.  It was necessary to link
the person’s inability to act to a fact beyond her control in light of the
position taken by the French courts that there are no exceptions to the basic
principle in art. 2251 C.C. other than the causes provided for by law, where
the cause of suspension relates to the person of the individual who raises it. 
The commentator noted that the law does not protect insane inmates who are not
interdicted against the prescription of rights that they should have asserted
in time:  [translation]
It can therefore be concluded that the short prescription periods also run
against insane inmates.  This rule is of course unjust (Baudry-Lacantinerie (Traité
théor. et prat. de droit civil, t. 28, no 424) wrote
“it is strange, as this is in fact a situation in which the need for suspension
is most strongly felt, since prescription is especially threatening in that it
is shorter . . .”); but it is inescapable. . . . Although
consistent with the letter of the law, this solution was nevertheless criticized
. . .; short prescription periods are based on a presumption of
payment, but if it was impossible for the creditor to bring an action for a
certain period, the presumption based on his or her failure to act collapses.
. . . In light of the rigidity of the rules of prescription, an
exegetic interpretation of the provisions lead to the denial of all protection
to an insane inmate who is not interdicted.  The maxim “contra non valentem
agere . . .” should play the role of a rule of equity in favour
of legally incapable persons, especially those whose interests the legislator
has not seen fit to protect, that corrects flaws in the law and avoids the
unjust consequences thereof.  (Cass., 2e Ch. civ., 10 February
1966, D.1967.315, Annot. Prévault, at p. 317.)  (ii)  Impossibility to Act and
Fault on the Part of the Debtor  62                      Relying
on equity and events over which the creditor has no control, the French courts
have also held that prescription is suspended if the holder of the right failed
to act owing to a wrongful initiative or shortcoming of his of her adversary (Juris-classeur
civil, arts. 2251-59, supra, Nos. 106 and 107).  As
Troplong mentioned in De la prescription (4th ed. 1857), t. 2, at
paras. 723-25, at pp. 293-94, this possibility was contemplated as
early as 1828:  [translation]
Let us now discuss the non-personal causes of suspension, to which the Code
does not refer.  They all involve a strict application of the contra non
valentem rule.  First of all, there are
impossibilities that result from an agreement. . . .  Others result from assaults and
impediments coming from the adverse party.  This is why the court of Bordeaux
held in a March 21, 1828 decision that the drawer of a bill of exchange could
not raise the five-year prescription period against the bearer where, before
the expiry of that period, the bill was returned to the drawer in confidence
and he or she retained it wrongfully, thereby making it impossible to bring an
action.  [Emphasis added.]  A contemporary of Troplong’s, Le Roux de Bretagne, stated the
following:  [translation]
The principal basis of suspension is the contra non valentem agere non
currit præscriptio rule of the ancient law.  As was mentioned above,
while this rule has not been reproduced verbatim in the code, it is the
necessary consequence of a number of its provisions.  Thus, article 1304 of
the Napoleonic Code provides that the time for bringing an action in nullity or
in rescission of an agreement does not begin running, in the case of violence,
until the day it ceases or, in the case of mistake or fraud, until the day it
is discovered; also, article 488 of the code of civil procedure provides
that the time for a civil action based on forgery, fraud or the discovery of
evidence withheld by the adverse party does not begin running until the day the
forgery, fraud or new evidence is discovered.  There has been no hesitation
to apply the rule in question in cases of superior force in which the
interception of communications or an interruption of the course of justice made
it absolutely impossible to act.                                                                     . . .  Thus, prescription is suspended
as long as the impediment the debtor intentionally places in the way of the
creditor’s action exists. . . . [Emphasis
added.]  (A. Le Roux de Bretagne, Nouveau traité de la
prescription en matière civile (1869), t. 1, at paras. 585 and
587, at pp. 395-96.) A more recent commentary stated the following:  [translation]
The position of the courts is changing, as they now tend to consider the
attitude not only of the holder of the right, but also of a person who tries to
manipulate a prescription period to his or her advantage.  The Court of
Cassation feels that the triers of fact can suspend prescription in light of
the debtor’s attitude by finding it to be a fact that objectively prevented
prescription from running (Cass. com., 14 May 1969; Bull.
civ. IV, No.167. -- Cf. to the same effect Aix-en-Provence, 1
February 1974:  Dr. marit. fr. 1975, at p. 272, Annot.
P. Bonassies).  The courts will therefore try to avoid prescription by
applying the contra non valentem agere rule . . . if the
debtor appears to have acted in bad faith.  The appearance of these
subjective concepts of good and bad faith on the part of the parties is very
interesting, as it enables the court to adopt the attitude it considers
fairest, thereby ensuring that the rules of prescription are not used to the detriment
of a creditor whose conduct is beyond reproach.  [Emphasis added.]  (M. Buy, “Prescriptions de courte durée et suspension
de la prescription”,  J.C.P. 77, I, 2833, at para. 28.)  The maxim contra non valentem agere, on which the notion of
impossibility to act is based, is thus distinct from superior force, which is a
purely external cause that can be assessed objectively, and requires a
subjective assessment of the impossibility to act based on the circumstances of
the victim of the fault that caused it.  As Carbonnier stated, supra, at
p. 180, [translation] “[t]he
suppression of an expired prescription period thus seems to constitute fair
relief for the harm caused by the debtor.”  63                      In
summary, the way in which the impossibility to act concept has developed in
French jurisprudence follows the approach taken by such authors as Troplong and
Le Roux de Bretagne a few decades after the institution of the French
Civil Code.  64                      These
comments on French positive civil law, combined with the legal rules already
set out in the Civil Code of Lower Canada, will be helpful in developing
and articulating the notion of absolute impossibility in fact to act.  (b)  In Quebec Civil Law  65                      In
Quebec, the authors and the courts agree that prescription is suspended where
the impossibility to act results from the fault of the debtor of the obligation
(Martineau, supra, at p. 354; J. W. Durnford, “Some
Aspects of the Suspension and of the Starting Point of Prescription” (1963), 13
Thémis 245, at p. 273; L. Langevin, “Suspension de la
prescription extinctive:  à l’impossible nul n’est tenu” (1996), 56 R. du B.
265, at p. 273; Oznaga v. Société d’exploitation des loteries et
courses du Québec, supra, at p. 127; Bank of Montreal v.
Bail Ltée, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 554, at p. 603).  This is just one
expression of the contra non valentem agere rule, which reflects a
principle of fundamental justice that is also expressed in the doctrine of
abuse of rights, the maxim fraus omnia corrumpit, and the moral precept
that no one should profit from his or her bad faith or wrongdoing (National
Bank of Canada v. Soucisse, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 339; Bank of Montreal v.
Kuet Leong Ng, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 429; Houle v. Canadian National Bank,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 122).  66                      Another
expression of the contra non valentem agere rule is found in the fact
that the prescription period for an action in rescission of a contract based on
fraud or error does not begin to run until the day the fraud or error is
discovered (art. 2258 para. 2 C.C.L.C.).  The Civil Code of
Lower Canada also recognizes the psychological state of fear as a cause of
suspension of prescription in art. 2258, which provides that the
prescription of an action in rescission of contract for fear only runs from the
day the fear ceases.  67                      It
is a logical extension of these civil law rules and principles that the psychological
state of fear will also suspend prescription in delictual matters where the
fear is caused by the defendant’s fault.  Prescription is based, inter alia,
on a presumption that the holder of a right waives the exercise thereof if he
or she is not diligent in asserting it.  If the plaintiff is not in a position
to freely and voluntarily waive the exercise of his or her right and is unable
to act owing to the psychological hold the defendant has over the plaintiff by
inspiring fear in him or her, neither public order nor the public interest, nor
even a legitimate security of legal relations, which prescription is intended
to foster, will be served.  Quite the contrary.  As Professor
Langevin stated, supra, at p. 272 of her article:  [translation]
Public order is not jeopardized if the courts take into account the reality of
psychologically traumatized victims who bring civil actions several years after
the events.  On the contrary, public order would be offended if the
prescription mechanism actually prevented a given class of victims from suing
their abusers.  68                      What
are the characteristics of a fear that causes an absolute impossibility in fact
to act within the meaning of art. 2232 C.C.L.C.?  (c)  Fear Causing an
Absolute Impossibility in Fact to Act  69                      The
Civil Code of Lower Canada itself deals with the notion of fear. 
Article 995 defines the fear that amounts to lack of consent.  It reads as
follows:  995.  The fear whether produced by violence or otherwise must be a
reasonable and present fear of serious injury.  The age, sex, character and
condition of the party are to be taken into consideration.  70                      A
link can be drawn between fear as vitiating consent and fear as a cause of
impossibility to act for the purposes of art. 2232 C.C.L.C.  Fear
makes it impossible for the victim to fully exercise his or her will, whether
in the context of contractual freedom or of legal proceedings.  As with the
assessment of fear vitiating consent, it is necessary in assessing fear as a
cause of suspension of prescription to avoid undermining the security of legal
relations, which is the rationale for the prescription system, while at the
same time accurately determining whether the fear was a deciding factor in the
impossibility to act.  As in contractual matters, it must be determined in each
particular case whether or not the fear deprived the victim of his or her free
will and thus of the will to bring an action.  The criteria of art. 995 C.C.L.C.
and the doctrinal commentaries on the subject are accordingly most relevant
and must serve as a basis for assessing fear as a cause of impossibility to act
for the purposes of art. 2232 C.C.L.C.  71                      Professor
Baudouin (now a judge of the Court of Appeal) stated the following about the
objective characteristics which fear representing lack of consent must have:  [translation]
Determinative fear - The first condition is that the fear be
determinative, that is, that it deprive the contractor of the free choice to
enter into a contract, or at least oblige the contractor to enter into a
contract on conditions other than those he or she would ordinarily have
accepted.  To avoid introducing excessive fragility to contracts and enable
the courts to determine more accurately whether the fear was
determinative, the Civil Code requires the judge to consider two objective
factors and one subjective factor.  Article 995 C.C. provides that the fear
must be a present and reasonable fear of serious injury.  Present fear - First of all, the fear must be present, that is, the
contractor must in fact feel it at the time of formation of the contract and of
the expression of the contractor’s will.  The victim must therefore
perceive that the danger threatening him or her is imminent.  Although the fear
must be present, violence need not be.  For example, psychological violence may
have been exercised beforehand.  It is enough that the fear still exist at the
time of formation of the commitment.  Serious harm - The second objective condition is that the fear be a fear of
serious harm.  The intention of the law here is to make it impossible to
cancel a contract entered into as a result of mere pressure; it therefore
requires that the harm the contractor is threatened with have a certain
seriousness in itself.  Thus, while an injury that is physical (death,
injuries), emotional (defamation, blackmail) or pecuniary (ruin) might at first
glance be considered serious per se, a mere disadvantage, annoyance or
additional difficulty cannot be held to be serious.  [Italics in original;
underlining  added.]  (J.-L. Baudouin, Les obligations
(3rd ed. 1989), at p. 138; see also:  J. Pineau and D. Burman,
Théorie des obligations (2nd ed. 1988), at pp. 112-14;
M. Tancelin, Des obligations: contrat et responsabilité
(4th ed. 1988), at pp. 76-77.)  72                      Once
the objective element of the fear, that is, that it is present and that it
involves serious harm, has been established, what is the test to be applied to
assess the effect of the fear on the victim?  On first reading, the two
sentences of art. 995 C.C.L.C. appear contradictory.  The first
sentence, which requires a reasonable fear, suggests an assessment in
abstracto of the effect of the fear, while the second sentence refers to
the age, sex, character and condition of the victim, which suggests an
assessment in concreto.  The Quebec authors agree that an assessment in
concreto of the determining nature of the fear on the victim’s will is
required (Baudouin, supra, at p. 139; see also Pineau and Burman, supra,
at pp. 113-14; Tancelin, supra, at p. 77; A. Larouche,
“Chronique de droit des obligations” (1973), 4 R.G.D. 201, at
p. 211).  This is logical.  When caused by the defendant’s fault, the fear
is a psychological injury sustained by the victim and must be assessed
subjectively, in light of the victim’s personal situation, as is the case with
the victim’s other damages.  In its assessment in concreto of the
determinative nature of the fear, the court may have recourse to expert
assessments and take into account the victim’s testimony (Langevin, supra,
at p. 276).  73                      Even
if there is a subjective assessment of the effect of the fear on the victim,
not every fear constitutes a cause of impossibility to act as soon as it exists
in the victim’s mind.  Professor Baudouin’s comments on the subjective element
of the fear vitiating consent are highly relevant to this analysis:  [translation]
Reasonableness - Finally, the fear must be reasonable.  The judge must
take the victim’s age, sex, character and condition into account, and thus
assess the victim’s personality.  Some people, owing to their age, for example,
are more receptive to fear than others and are therefore more likely to be
influenced by it.  There seems to be a contradiction
between the objective condition that there be a fear of serious harm and the
subjective condition that this fear be reasonable.  It is conceivable that an
individual might have a real, and therefore reasonable, fear in the
circumstances and that this fear might therefore have a determinative effect on
his or her will, but that the injury with which the individual is threatened is
not, objectively speaking, serious, although he or she thinks it is.  The
contradiction is more apparent than real.  The law merely requires by this
twofold test that the fear not be purely subjective, that is, that it not be
the product solely of the victim’s imagination or sensitivity.  The fear must
be in keeping with the external facts.  Thus, the harm must be real and
certain, not imaginary, but to decide whether the fear was in fact
determinative of consent, the court must also conduct a subjective assessment
of its impact in light of the contractor’s personal situation.  [Emphasis
added.]  (Baudouin, supra, at p. 139.)  This analysis indicates that a purely subjective fear cannot
constitute a cause of impossibility to act under art. 2232 C.C.L.C.,
just as it cannot constitute a cause of rescission of a contract (Tancelin, supra,
at p. 77).  To be a cause of impossibility to act, the fear must be of an
objectively serious harm, must exist throughout the period when it was
impossible to act and must subjectively be determinative of this impossibility
to act, that is, subjectively such that it is psychologically, if not
physically, impossible for the victim to take legal action.  This conjunction
of factors guarantees the integrity of the prescription system without
resulting in flagrant injustices.  As the appellant stated in his factum, one
must avoid allowing torturers to avoid liability by merely choosing their victims.  5.  Application to the Facts  74                      The
trial judge recognized that the two psychiatric experts heard at trial, one
called by the plaintiff and the other by the defence, agreed that it was
psychologically impossible for the appellant to bring legal proceedings against
the respondents until March 1988.  However, he drew a distinction between the
appellant’s lack of courage to initiate legal proceedings and absolute
impossibility.  In his view, the appellant simply lacked courage whereas [translation] “it was highly or likely
or ‘practically impossible’ for him to act” (p. 16).  He was not convinced
that the appellant was indeed in a state of absolute impossibility throughout
the long period.  He stated that [translation]
“the chronic period could have been avoided had the plaintiff consulted [a specialist]”
and that this was therefore not a case in which [translation] “human vigilance and ingenuity” would not have
enabled him to act (at p. 18).  75                      With
respect, the trial judge erred in law in drawing a distinction between the
appellant’s lack of courage to initiate legal proceedings and absolute
impossibility in fact to act.  There is no such distinction in this case.  It
must be recognized that fear, caused by an assailant’s violence or torture, can
take away the victim’s ability to act, or, in other words, make it absolutely
impossible in fact for the victim to act against the assailant.  76                      The
record contains uncontradicted evidence that the respondents Beaumont and
Thireault tortured the appellant atrociously and threatened to kill him, that
the appellant feared for his life and for the lives of his family, and that he
was in a state of extreme fear for the six years that followed this brutal
assault.  There is no question that his fear was present throughout the six
years and that it was a fear of serious, even extreme, harm.  77                      The
psychiatric experts assessed the appellant, and both of them recognized that he
had suffered post-traumatic neurosis that had prevented him from taking legal
action against the respondents during the six years following the night of
torture in March 1982.  They assessed the appellant’s personal situation and
reached a concrete conclusion that his fear was real and determinative of his
impossibility to act.  In their respective reports, Dr. Béliveau, the
appellant’s expert, and Dr. Vacaflor, the respondent’s expert, concluded that
this fear had prevented the appellant from initiating legal proceedings against
the respondents until March 1988 (Dr. Béliveau, Case on Appeal, at p. 50;
Dr. Vacaflor, Case on Appeal, at p. 55).  The following extracts from the
evidence at trial describe the appellant’s state of fear during the six years
of the acute and subacute post-traumatic stress phases:  Testimony of Dr. Béliveau:  [translation]
[I]t’s because of the phobias. . . . The person avoids all
situations that might reactivate the traumatic anxiety.  A little while
ago, I mentioned people who avoid returning to the scene of the assault, who
avoid encountering their assailants.  This mechanism of course means that
someone avoiding this kind of situation will not go looking for trouble by
returning to it in a situation such as a trial.  They know what a trial
means.  It means accusing and so on.  It means reliving the entire traumatic
situation.  So this is what I meant when I said that he was, to use the same
words I used earlier, most likely prevented from taking any action.                                                                     . . .  It’s clear that you are here in an action brought
against police officers, and that you find yourself in a justice system.  When
I said it was highly likely that a person of average intelligence and from a
certain background, and who is at the same time less well informed, might far
more easily be afraid at that time to finally take on the policemen who
assaulted him, out of a fear at that time of reprisals.  It’s as if in so doing
. . . he would really be looking for serious reprisals.
. . . [I]t’s quite clear that a trial, an indictment in a justice
system, I think that . . . myself, I work a bit in this environment,
and I hear about it, too.  People have a sort of image that you don’t take on a
policeman; anyway that’s how it was not too long ago.  You didn’t take on, you
didn’t sue a policeman because the system was designed so that you couldn’t win
against a policeman.  It’s clear that once you have this perception
. . . and in addition you have a sort of phobia against being in the
assailant’s presence, you will avoid putting yourself in a situation where you
will challenge him.  There will, incidentally, necessarily be reprisals for
having dared take on a policeman who was the assailant.  That’s how I see it. 
That’s why I concluded that it most likely contributed to preventing him. 
[Case on Appeal, at pp. 273-74 (emphasis added).]    Report of Dr. Vacaflor:  In regard to his alleged
impossibility of denouncing the event of the first of March of ’82 to the
proper authorities it must be said at the very onset that we can only entertain
hypothesis [sic] of various degrees of credibility.  My personal
opinion is that he was truly so very frightened and understandably mistrustful
of any police action that it effectively kept him from denouncing the event. 
Although he had managed to put to some degree his life together, his fear of
retaliation (that still persists) made it, given his psychological frame of
mind, practically impossible to take the necessary legal action against his
torturers.  [Case on Appeal, at p. 54 (emphasis added).]   Dr. Vacaflor explained what he meant by practical impossibility by
stating that it was an impossibility similar to that of an ordinary person who,
although physically able to climb into the ring to face the world heavyweight
boxing champion, would be too afraid to do so because such a confrontation
would put his or her life in danger:  . . . I mean to say that fear can have a
paralyzing effect.  . . . So, we could not call that an absolute
impossibility.  I guess I could climb into the ring and get smashed. 
. . . I think that’s a practical impossibility meaning strong, intense. 
[Case on Appeal, at p. 345 (emphasis added).]    78                      The
only conclusion I can accordingly draw, on a preponderance of evidence, is that
the appellant was gripped by fear such that it was impossible for him to act,
and that this was the case until March 1988, when the respondents Beaumont
and Thireault were convicted of assaulting the appellant and sentenced to
prison.  The effect of this acute and subacute post-traumatic stress disorder,
which was characterized by extreme fear, was to strip the appellant of any
control over his own will as regards the two respondents, who deliberately, and
through their own fault, placed the appellant in this profound state of fear. 
It would be contrary to the fundamental principles of our civil law for these
respondents to profit from the violence and torture they inflicted on the
appellant by being sheltered from any proceedings for the damage they
caused.  In requiring an insurmountable impossibility, the trial judge
appears to have applied an objective reasonable person legal standard. 
However, as Professor Langevin stated, supra, at p. 276:  [translation]
. . . how does he or she [the trial judge] know, upon setting the
psychiatric assessments aside, how this reasonable person will react in the
same situation?  Every person reacts differently to a violation of his or her
physical and psychological integrity.  So behind this “wonderful
fictitious legal individual of the ordinary reasonable person” lies the judge’s
point of view.  79                      The
trial judge and the Court of Appeal felt that once the appellant had testified
under police protection at the Police Commission’s inquiry and at the preliminary
inquiry of the two respondents Beaumont and Thireault, it was no longer
absolutely impossible in fact for him to act.  However, it should be noted that
the appellant was not testifying in his own action for damages.  In both
proceedings, he was compelled by way of subpoena to testify and was under
police protection.  It was only once the defendants had been convicted and sent
to prison that he was sufficiently free of his fear to be able to act.  Dr.
Béliveau explained the psychological impact of the guilty verdicts on the
appellant as follows:  [translation]
[O]ne hypothesis that I consider highly likely is that, once he learned that
the police officers had been convicted following the trial, at that point,
especially if there were people who reassured him, who convinced him that there
was no danger, at that point he may have been able to control his anxiety
sufficiently to be able to take action. [Case on Appeal, at pp. 277-78.]   80                      The
fact that the appellant retained counsel, who told him about prescription and
about the possibility of seeking compensation at the criminal trial, was also
relied on.  The evidence is ambiguous in this regard.  The appellant stated
that he had no idea of the applicable time limit for bringing an action until
1988 and had never asked his lawyer about it (Case on Appeal, at
pp. 210-13).  Furthermore, whether the appellant knew or may have known
about the prescription period for his action is immaterial here, since he was in
a state of fear and of profound post-traumatic stress that made it impossible
for him to take legal action against his assailants for six years.  That
argument is based more on a lack of diligence, whereas this is a case of
impossibility to act.  81                      Boily
J. added that had the appellant been treated sooner, his period of chronic
post-traumatic stress might have been avoided.  According to the expert
evidence, the chronic phase is the phase of post-traumatic stress that followed
the acute and subacute stress phases, and it involves an alleviation of the
appellant’s phobias and fears, although there are at the same time permanent
psychological after-effects.  The acute and subacute phases lasted a total of
six years from the night of torture in March 1982, and it was during these
six years that it would have been absolutely impossible in fact for the
appellant to act against the respondents.  The appellant brought his action
shortly after the end of the subacute post-traumatic stress phase in
March 1988, at the time of the conviction of the respondents Beaumont and
Thireault.  No one disputes that the appellant was able to take legal action
during his chronic post-traumatic stress phase, which would have begun in
March 1988.  The appellant showed diligence in consulting his lawyers
about obtaining compensation for his injuries on March 31, 1988, two days after
the respondents were sentenced.  With respect, Boily J.’s comments on the possibility
of avoiding the chronic phase are accordingly irrelevant.  82                      Moreover,
to blame the appellant for a lack of diligence in obtaining treatment implies
that diligence should be judged based on the reasonable person standard and
that the psychological reality of the victim, who suffered severe
post-traumatic stress, should be disregarded.  As Dr. Vacaflor, the
respondent’s expert, stated, the fact that a victim avoids talking about his or
her trauma is in fact a consequence of the trauma:  I think that his example in my view would fall in
between the realistic fear and an element of augmentation because of his own
personality and difficulties.  But, I think it was intense enough.  I don’t
think this man was in a position to take action.  I don’t think it crossed his
mind, I think he was in a position of escaping, hiding and not talking about it. 
[Case on Appeal, at p. 350 (emphasis added).]    83                      Nor
is it immaterial that after the appellant learned that the respondents Beaumont
and Thireault had been released from prison, his fears became more acute and he
was again afraid that his assailants would avenge themselves by going after him
and his family.  According to Dr. Béliveau, [translation]
“[h]is hypervigilance and his fears were apparently such that he was in
constant fear of being wounded or killed by gunfire while walking or driving
down the street.”  (Report of Dr. Béliveau, Case on Appeal, at p. 49.)  84                      With
respect, it seems that the Court of Appeal, like the trial judge, in assessing
the absoluteness of the impossibility to act went from a subjective assessment
of absolute impossibility in fact to act to an objective assessment.  This move
to an objective test is contrary to the very principle of the subjective
assessment of the victim’s damages.  This would ultimately encourage assailants
to choose their victims so as to keep them under their thumbs, thereby
guaranteeing impunity.  85                      While
it is true that a court cannot be unduly influenced by sympathy and fairness in
stating and applying the law, the seriousness of the ill-treatment suffered by
a victim affects the seriousness of the after-effects and the prejudice in
terms of both the damage suffered and the impossibility to act.  This is noted
in the diagnoses of both psychiatric experts.  86                      I
therefore find that it was absolutely impossible in fact for the appellant to
act within the meaning of art. 2232 C.C.L.C. and that the six-month
extinctive prescription provided for in s. 586 of the Cities and Towns
Act accordingly did not run from March 2, 1982, the date on which the
appellant’s right of action arose, to March 1988.  Since the court
action was brought within six months of the end of the suspension of
prescription, the action was not prescribed.  I shall now turn to the question
of the respondents’ liability.  B.  Delictual Liability of the Respondents  1.  The Respondents Beaumont
and Thireault  87                      The
civil fault of the respondents Beaumont and Thireault is based on a breach of
the general duty of good conduct to which everyone is subject, and a violation
of rights protected by the Quebec Charter.  88                      The
trial judge found that there was no doubt that certain of the appellant’s
fundamental rights, namely his right to life, his right to the safeguard of his
dignity and his legal rights, had been breached.  I will not discuss the breach
with the appellant’s legal rights, but will limit my analysis to the following
rights protected by the Quebec Charter:  the right to personal
inviolability (s. 1) and the right to the safeguard of one’s dignity
(s. 4).  (a)  Personal Inviolability  89                      As
my colleague L’Heureux-Dubé J. stated in Quebec (Public Curator) v. Syndicat
national des employés de l’hôpital St-Ferdinand, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 211, at
para. 97, interference with personal inviolability within the meaning of
s. 1 of the Quebec Charter  must affect the victim’s physical, psychological or
emotional equilibrium in something more than a fleeting manner.  Moreover, the
objective of s. 1, as it is worded, makes it much more similar to a
guarantee of inviolability of the person and, accordingly, to protection
against the certain consequences of the violation.  During the six months following the assault, the appellant was so
totally overwhelmed by fear that he could do nothing.  For six years after the
night of torture, he was in constant fear for his life and for the lives of his
family.  He suffered major psychological distress that had a tangible and
lasting effect on his mental equilibrium and constituted serious interference
with his personal inviolability.  (b)  Personal Dignity  90                      In
its safeguard of dignity, s. 4 of the Quebec Charter addresses
interferences with the fundamental attributes of a human being that violate the
respect to which every person is entitled simply because he or she is a human
being, and the respect a person owes to him- or herself (St-Ferdinand, supra,
at para. 106).  Even temporary interference with a fundamental dimension
of a human being violates s. 4 of the Quebec Charter.  Here too,
the evidence shows that the respondents Beaumont and Thireault had profound
contempt for the appellant’s dignity.  The enumeration of the acts of torture
to which the appellant was subjected makes one wonder what value the
respondents Beaumont and Thireault placed on the simple fact that he is a human
being.  There was clearly a serious unlawful interference with the appellant’s
dignity.  2.  The Respondent Town of
Brome Lake  In my view, the first paragraph of s. 49 and
art. 1053 C.C.L.C. are based on the same legal principle of
liability associated with wrongful conduct, which is what I suggested in obiter
when examining the concept of cause as regards lis pendens (Rocois
Construction Inc. v. Québec Ready Mix Inc., [1990] 2 S.C.R. 440, at
p. 457).  It is thus clear that the
violation of a right protected by the Charter is equivalent to a civil
fault.  The Charter formalizes standards of
conduct that apply to all individuals.  The legislative recognition of these
standards of conduct has to some extent exempted the courts from clarifying
their content.  This recognition does not, however, make it possible to distinguish
in principle the standards of conduct in question from that under
art. 1053 C.C.L.C., which the courts apply to the circumstances of
each case.  The violation of one of the guaranteed rights is therefore
wrongful behaviour, which, as the Court of Appeal has recognized, breaches the
general duty of good conduct. . . . [Emphasis added.]  92                      At
the time of the delict, the respondent municipality was the employer of the
respondents, officer Beaumont and chief of police Thireault.  Section 2.1 of
the Police Act, R.S.Q., c. P-13, maintains the employer-employee
relationship between the municipality and its police officers, even when, as in
the case at bar, they are performing their duties as peace officers.  93                      There
is no doubt that at the time they brutally beat the appellant, the respondents
Beaumont and Thireault were performing the duties for which they were
employed:  they were on duty and were conducting an interrogation in the course
of a criminal investigation into allegations of theft of a safe.  If, as the
respondent municipality suggests, the employer’s liability was only engaged
where it is shown that a delict was committed by its employees in the public
interest, in the fight against crime or for the protection of the
municipality’s citizens, but was not engaged where the alleged acts are
excessive, para. 7 of art. 1054 C.C.L.C. would be totally
meaningless.  The employer would have no incentive to exercise control over the
conduct of its police officer employees.  It is very fortunate that the
respondent did not knowingly endorse the brutal acts committed by its
employees, but this does not relieve it from liability under para. 7 of art. 1054
C.C.L.C.  94                      There
is no need to determine which faults can be directly attributed to the
respondent municipality itself, as it must be held liable for the compensatory
damages owed to the appellant as a result of the acts of its employees Beaumont
and Thireault.  C.  Compensatory Damages  95                      The
quantum of the damages can be determined on the basis of the evidence in the
record, which consists basically of the appellant’s testimony and the opinions
of the two psychiatric experts heard at trial.  96                      The
appellant seeks $300,000 for the damage he suffered, which can be broken
down as follows:  (1) Physical suffering, humiliation, loss of liberty
and dignity, mental suffering and psychological terror sustained on March 1, 1982:                                                             $100,000  (2) Physical suffering beginning on March 2, 1982:                            $ 
25,000  (3) Psychological injury beginning on March 2, 1982:                        $100,000  (4) Temporary total disability for six months:                                     $ 
25,000  (5) Permanent partial physical disability:                                            $ 
50,000  97                      I
shall deal first with the pecuniary damages relating to the disabilities and
then with the moral damages.  1.  Pecuniary Damages
Relating to the Disability  98                      The
uncontradicted evidence shows that the appellant suffered a temporary total
disability for six months, which coincided with his acute post-traumatic stress
phase.  During this phase, the appellant suffered serious symptoms of traumatic
anxiety, such as traumatic nightmares, flashbacks of the torture he had
undergone, constant irritability and hypervigilance, concentration problems and
a phobia about saying or doing things that might incite his assailants to act
on their death threats.  According to Dr. Béliveau, the appellant’s expert,
owing to the intensity of his symptomatology of anxiety and traumatic
depression, the appellant would have been unable to work for at least six
months.  In my view, the sum of $15,000 would constitute reasonable
compensation for the loss of earnings resulting from his temporary total
disability, in view of its duration.  99                      The
appellant is also seeking $50,000 for a permanent partial disability
established by expert evidence at 5 percent, which is related to his state of
chronic post-traumatic stress.  His irritability and depressive state will have
an impact on his future earning capacity, and I would award $35,000 under
this head.  100                    I
would accordingly award the appellant $50,000 in pecuniary damages.  2.  Moral Damages  101                    This
Court discussed the method for calculating the amount of moral damages in
St-Ferdinand, supra.  L’Heureux-Dubé J., writing for the Court,
noted that there are three different ways in which to address the calculation
of compensation for moral damages (at paras. 72-73, 75 and 77):  These are the conceptual, personal and functional
approaches, which we shall examine briefly in turn.                                                                      . . .  Secondly, at the opposite end of
the spectrum from the conceptual approach, the personal approach to calculating
moral damages makes it possible to determine the compensation that corresponds
specifically to the loss suffered by the victim.  As Wéry wrote [A. Wéry,
“L’évaluation judiciaire des dommages non pécuniaires résultant de blessures
corporelles:  du pragmatisme de l’arbitraire?”, [1986] R.R.A. 355], at
p. 357, this approach [translation]
“assigns no objective value to the organs of the human body but rather seeks to
evaluate, from a subjective point of view, the pain and inconvenience resulting
from the injuries suffered by the victim”.                                                                     . . .  Lastly, the third method of
calculating moral damages . . . refers to the functional
approach.  As Dickson J. explained in Andrews, this approach seeks
to calculate the “physical arrangements which can make (the injured person’s)
life more endurable . . . accepting that what has been lost is
incapable of being replaced in any direct way” (p. 262).  As my colleague stated, in para. 79, these three methods
“interact, leaving the courts considerable latitude so that they can reach a
reasonable and equitable result”.  She added the following, in para. 80:  Thus, in Quebec civil law the three approaches to
calculating the amount necessary to compensate for moral prejudice
. . . apply jointly, and thereby encourage a personalized evaluation
of the moral prejudice.  In fact, this appears to me to be the best solution in
a field in which exact quantification of the prejudice suffered is extremely
difficult because of the qualitative nature of that prejudice.   103                    The
appellant suffered a severe loss of enjoyment and quality of life.  During his
period of temporary total disability, the evidence shows that he displayed a
symptomatology of traumatic depression, which [translation] “manifested itself in a loss of interest in and
motivation for any activity whatsoever, irritability, and disorders of the
appetite and libido” (report of Dr. Béliveau, Case on Appeal, at p. 48). 
His 5 percent permanent partial disability related to the chronic state of
post-traumatic stress also manifested itself in this way, according to Dr.
Béliveau:  [translation]
He apparently continued to experience traumatic nightmares about twice a month
that caused him to wake up in such a state of anxiety that he had to go check
the doors before he could go back to sleep.  He apparently continued to have
flashbacks of the night of torture of March 1, 1982 about twice a week.  He
apparently continued to be irritable, to have little interest in most
activities, especially social activities, and to feel depressed periodically,
and his personality had apparently changed so much that he was no longer the
same man.  He apparently also continues to tend to get drunk one to three times
a week after the events of 1982 through alcohol abuse.   [Report of Dr. Béliveau,
Case on Appeal, at p. 49.]   Adding to this the humiliation he suffered in the course of the
torture, the loss of dignity, the severe violation of his physical and
psychological integrity, and his physical and psychological suffering during
the night of March 1 to 2, 1982 and afterwards, it is reasonable and fair to
award $200,000 in non-pecuniary damages.  D.  Exemplary Damages under Paragraph 2 of
Section 49 of the Quebec Charter  1.  The Right to Exemplary
Damages  104                    The
appellant claims $100,000 in exemplary damages from the respondents under
para. 2 of s. 49 of the Quebec Charter.  105                    Under
para. 2 of s. 49 of the Quebec Charter, exemplary damages can
be awarded only in a case of unlawful and intentional
interference.  L’Heureux-Dubé J. defined the intentional nature of unlawful and
intentional interference within the meaning of para. 2 of s. 49 of
the Quebec Charter in St-Ferdinand, supra, at
para. 121:  . . . there will be unlawful and intentional
interference within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter
when the person who commits the unlawful interference has a state of mind
that implies a desire or intent to cause the consequences of his or her
wrongful conduct, or when that person acts with full knowledge of the immediate
and natural or at least extremely probable consequences that his or her conduct
will cause.  This test is not as strict as specific intent, but it does go
beyond simple negligence.  Thus, an individual’s recklessness, however wild
and foolhardy, as to the consequences of his or her wrongful acts will not in
itself satisfy this test.  [Emphasis added.]  Applying this test, was the unlawful interference by the respondents
intentional within the meaning of para. 2 of s. 49 of the Quebec
Charter?  (a)  The Respondents
Beaumont and Thireault  106                    It
is clear from the evidence in this case that the respondents Beaumont and
Thireault wished to cause the consequences of their unlawful interference with
the appellant’s personal inviolability and dignity.  The appellant’s profound
fear and physical and mental imbalance were merely the immediate and natural
consequences of the mistreatment by the respondents.  The number and cruelty of
the violent acts they committed show that they intended to interfere with the
plaintiff’s inviolability and dignity.  The breaches were intentional.  107                    Since
the respondents Beaumont and Thireault were the authors of unlawful and
intentional breaches of the rights to personal inviolability and dignity
protected by the Quebec Charter, this Court may order them to pay
exemplary damages under para. 2 of s. 49 of the Quebec Charter. 
What about their employer, the respondent Town of Brome Lake?  (b)  The Respondent Town of
Brome Lake  108                    Paragraph 2
of s. 49 of the Quebec Charter confers on a court the power to
order the person guilty of the unlawful and intentional breach to pay
exemplary damages.  Thus, to order the respondent employer of the respondents
Beaumont and Thireault to pay exemplary damages, it must be proven that it
intended to cause the consequences of the unlawful breach or that this
intention could be attributed to it. 109                    In
Béliveau St-Jacques, supra, at para. 65, L’Heureux-Dubé J.,
dissenting on another issue, discussed the employer’s liability for unlawful
and intentional interference by its employees under para. 2 of s. 49
of the Quebec Charter, quoting with approval the following passage by
Professor Perret on the subject:  [translation]
Punitive damages are payable by the person who committed the intentional
fault.  However, what happens where another person, who has the person who
committed the fault under his or her care, control or supervision, is normally
liable for the latter under art. 1054 of the Civil Code?  For
example, are employers, who are normally liable for the compensatory damages
payable as a result of the fault of their employees in the performance of their
duties, also liable for the exemplary damages their employees are ordered to
pay for having, in the course of their work, intentionally caused the damage
complained of by the victim?  . . . It seems highly doubtful that a
person may be punished for the intentional fault of another under any
circumstances. Does not punishment presuppose that the person being punished
had wrongful intent?  That is why I feel that employers cannot be held
jointly and severally liable for the exemplary damages payable as a result of the
intentional fault of their employees, except where there was some complicity
between them (e.g. orders given, knowledge and failure to order the wrongdoing
stopped) or where the employee in question is in fact one4 of the directing
minds of the company.  [Italics in original; underlining added.]  (L. Perret, “De l’impact de la Charte des droits
et libertés de la personne sur le droit civil des contrats et de la
responsabilité au Québec” (1981), 12 R.G.D. 121, at p. 140,
note 48.)  110                    In
Augustus v. Gosset, [1990] R.J.Q. 2641, at pp. 2655-56, the
Superior Court stated that a victim who claims exemplary damages under the Quebec
Charter must prove that the offender’s employer participated in or approved
the act in question.  The Quebec Court of Appeal (per Deschamps J.A.,
Vallerand J.A. concurring) affirmed this decision in Augustus v. Gosset,
[1995] R.J.Q. 335, at p. 359, stating that proof of an employer-employee
relationship under para. 7 of art. 1054 C.C.L.C. is not
sufficient to establish unlawful and intentional interference by the employer
giving rise to exemplary damages under para. 2 of s. 49 of the Quebec
Charter (see also Lacroutz v. Couture, [1991] R.R.A. 493 (C.A.), at
p. 495; C. Dallaire, Les dommages exemplaires sous le régime des
Chartes (1995), at pp. 59-60; K. Delwaide, “Les articles 49
et 52 de la Charte québécoise des droits et libertés:  recours et sanctions à
l’encontre d’une violation des droits et libertés garantis par la Charte
québécoise”, in Application des Chartes des droits et libertés en matière
civile (1988), 95, at pp. 104-5).  111                    Orders
given by the employer, knowledge of or failure to prohibit the unlawful acts,
failure to order that the acts cease, and the level in the employer’s
organizational hierarchy of the position of the employee who committed the
wrongful acts are factors giving rise to a presumption of fact establishing on
a preponderance of evidence that the employer had this intent with respect to
the consequences of the unlawful breach of rights under the Quebec Charter.  112                    In
my view, there is sufficient evidence in this case to conclude that the
respondent municipality can be presumed to have intended to interfere with the
appellant’s inviolability and dignity, or that this intention can be attributed
to it.  Let us consider the context.  Even before 1982, there had been several
cases of unreasonable use of force in the respondent municipality’s police
force involving the respondents Beaumont and Thireault among others.  The fact
that these criminal acts were not punished by the justice system until a few
years after the night of torture in 1982 is immaterial.  This is a small
municipality.  It would be strange if the respondent had never got wind of the
conduct of its police officers and police chief before March 1, 1982.  It took
a Police Commission inquiry to put an end to the silence that reigned with
respect to the violence in the respondent’s police force.  113                    That
having been said, ss. 64 and 67 of the Police Act place
municipalities and their police forces under certain obligations.  Section 64
of the Police Act requires every local municipality to ensure that its
territory is under the jurisdiction of a police force.  Section 67 of the same
Act reads as follows:   114                    In
light of the municipality’s obligation to ensure that its territory has a
police force responsible for maintaining peace, order and public safety in its
territory and for preventing crime and seeking out offenders, it follows, at
the very least, that this police force may not use violence and torture in
performing its duties.  115                    The
evidence established that the police force itself played an active role in the
violence against the appellant.  Three of the force’s seven members, including
police chief Thireault, actively took part in the acts of torture. 
Furthermore, the criminal participation of the chief of police, the respondent
Thireault, in the mistreatment of the appellant was greater than that of the
respondent Beaumont.  116                    Section
68 of the Police Act reads as follows:  68.  Every municipal
police force shall be under the control of a chief who shall command it.  The director general of a
municipality has no authority in any matter concerning a police inquiry.  The chief of police is responsible for performance of the duty to
maintain peace, order and public safety in the territory and to prevent crime. 
Because of the chief’s essential role in the municipality, he receives a
protection greater even than that conferred by the Cities and Towns Act,
which governs the respondent municipality pursuant to its constituting letters
patent ((1971) 103 G.O. 106, January 2, 1971), on the municipality’s
officers and employees who are not “employees” within the meaning of the Labour
Code, R.S.Q., c. C-27 (s. 1(l) “employee”), and who have
been in the employ of the municipality for at least six months, including its
director general.  The municipal council may not dismiss or reduce the salary
of its chief of police except by a resolution supported by an absolute majority
of its members (Police Act, s. 79; for the municipality’s officers
and employees who are not “employees” within the meaning of the Labour Code,
see Cities and Towns Act, s. 71).  The municipal council’s decision
may then be appealed to a three-judge panel of the Court of Québec (Police
Act, s. 98.1), while officers or employees who are not “employees”
within the meaning of the Labour Code must appeal to the Commission
municipale rather than to the Court of Québec (Cities and Towns Act,
ss. 71 and 72).  117                    I
conclude that the respondent Thireault is one of the municipality’s directing
minds.  His intent to cause the consequences of the unlawful breach is to be
attributed to the respondent municipality.  The respondent municipality is
therefore one of the persons guilty, within the meaning of para. 2 of
s. 49 of the Quebec Charter, of the unlawful and intentional breach
of the appellant’s rights to personal inviolability and dignity and may be
ordered to pay exemplary damages, together with the respondents Beaumont and
Thireault.  2.  Quantum of the Exemplary
Damages  118                    In
light of the seriousness of the unlawful and intentional interference, I set
the exemplary damages at $50,000.  E.  Interest and Additional Indemnity  119                    The
appellant asks that interest and the additional indemnity run from the date of
the cause of action rather than from the date when the action was instituted.  120                    Article 1056c
C.C.L.C. reads as follows:  The amount awarded by judgment for
damages resulting from an offence or a quasi-offence shall bear interest at
the legal rate as from the date when the action at law was instituted.  There may be added to the amount
so awarded an indemnity computed by applying to the amount, from such date, a
percentage equal to the excess of the interest rate fixed according to
section 28 of the Act respecting the Ministère du Revenu (R.S.Q., chapter M-31)
over the legal interest rate.  [Emphasis added.]  121                    Interest
is a form of moratory damages related to a debtor’s delay in performing an
obligation to pay a sum of money.  In this case, performance of the obligation
to pay the sum of money is subject to its being liquidated by judgment. 
Article 1056c C.C.L.C. provides that it is the amount awarded by
judgment that bears interest retroactively as of the date when the action
was instituted.  The appellant put the respondents in default to perform their
obligation to compensate him for his injury the day he instituted his action,
that is, on May 3, 1988.  Although it is true that it was absolutely impossible
in fact for the appellant to act until March 1988 and that he could not
therefore require that the obligation be performed before then, there is no
rule under the Civil Code of Lower Canada permitting interest to be
imposed as of March 2, 1982, the date of the cause of action.   50. 
Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, a judgment of the Court bears
interest at the rate and from the date applicable to the judgment in the same
matter of the court of original jurisdiction or at the rate and from the date
that would have been applicable to that judgment if it had included a monetary
award. [Emphasis added.]  This provision cannot be applied against a clear rule of the Civil
Code of Lower Canada that provides for moratory damages related to the debt
itself.  Interest and the additional indemnity must therefore run as of May 3,
1988, the date of service of the action, in accordance with art. 1056c
C.C.L.C.  F.  Extrajudicial Costs  123                    I
would not grant the appellant’s request that the respondents be ordered to pay
his extrajudicial costs.  Aside from the affidavit on the appellant’s financial
situation that was filed with the application for leave to appeal, there is no
evidence in the record in support of such a request.  The appellant’s financial
situation cannot alone be taken into account in order to exercise the
discretion under s. 47  of the Supreme Court Act .  Furthermore, the
trial court and the Court of Appeal, in a unanimous judgment, ruled in the
respondents’ favour.  This Court made no special order regarding costs in its
decision on the application for leave. VI.  Conclusion  124                    For
all these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
Court of Appeal and order the respondents Mario Beaumont, Alyre Thireault and
the Municipal Corporation of the Town of Brome Lake to pay the appellant, David
Allen Gauthier, jointly and severally, the sum of $300,000, with interest at
the legal rate and the additional indemnity provided for in art. 1056c
C.C.L.C. as of May 3, 1988, the whole with costs throughout.  Appeal allowed with costs, Lamer C.J. and
McLachlin J. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Bessette, Gauthier,
Bellehumeur, Sherbrooke.  Solicitors for the respondent the Town of Brome
Lake:  Lavin & Associates, Cowansville.      