Ciarlariello v. Schacter,
[1993] 2 S.C.R. 119  Vera Ciarlariello and Lena
Ciarlariello, Administrators of the Estate of Giovanna Ciarlariello, Deceased                                                      Appellants  v.  Marilyn Anne Keller, M.D., and Robert A. Greco, M.D.                                                                     Respondents  Indexed as:  Ciarlariello v.
Schacter  File No.:  22343.  1992:  November 30;
1993:  April 22.  Present:  La Forest,
Sopinka, Cory, McLachlin and Iacobucci JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for
ontario                        The patient brought
an action against the respondent physicians.  She died subsequent to the trial
of the action and appellants carried on the action.  Both the action, and an
appeal, were dismissed.  At issue here was the nature and extent of the duty of
disclosure owed by a doctor to a patient who withdraws the consent given to a
medical procedure during the course of that procedure.                     Held:  The appeal should be
dismissed.                     Appellants' action
in battery could not succeed.  There was a sound factual basis for the finding
that the patient consented to the continuation of the angiogram and that she
was capable of giving consent to continuing the procedure.  There was neither
fraud nor misrepresentation in obtaining the consent and the procedure was the
one anticipated and was identical to one performed a week earlier.                     An objective
approach should be taken in deciding whether a risk is material and therefore
one which should be explained to the patient.  The crucial question in
determining the issue is whether a reasonable person in the patient's position
would want to know of the risk.  The doctors involved conducted themselves in
an exemplary manner.  All the possible risks that could arise from the
procedure were fully explained on several occasions to both the patient and her
daughter.                     Whether or not
there has been a withdrawal of consent is a question of fact.  The words used
by a patient may be ambiguous.  Even if they are apparently clear, the
circumstances under which they were spoken may render them ambiguous.  On some
occasions, the doctors conducting the process may reasonably take the words
spoken by the patient to be an expression of pain rather than a withdrawal of
consent.                     Generally if there
is any question as to whether the patient is attempting to withdraw consent,
the doctor must ascertain whether the consent has in fact been withdrawn. 
Every patient's right to bodily integrity encompasses the right to determine
what medical procedures will be accepted and the extent to which they will be
accepted.  The right to decide what is to be done to one's own body includes
the right to be free from medical treatment to which the individual does not
consent.  The requirement that disclosure be made to the patient is based on
this concept of individual autonomy.  If, during the course of a medical
procedure a patient withdraws the consent to that procedure, then the doctors
must halt the process unless the medical evidence suggested that terminating
the process would be either life threatening or pose immediate and serious
problems to the health of the patient.                     The question as to
whether or not a consent has been withdrawn during the course of a procedure
will depend on the circumstances of each case and may require the trial judge
to make difficult findings of fact.  Expert medical evidence, while relevant,
will not necessarily be determinative of the issue.  Indeed, in cases such as
this where the patient must be conscious and cooperative in order for the
procedure to be performed, it may well be beyond doubt that the patient was
capable of withdrawing consent.  The fact that the patient had withdrawn
consent was not an issue here.                     The appropriate
approach is to focus in each case on what the patient would like to know
concerning the continuation of the process once the consent has been
withdrawn.  Looking at it objectively, a patient would want to know whether
there had been any significant change in the risks involved or in the need for
the continuation of this process which had become apparent during the course of
the procedure.  In addition, the patient will want to know if there has been a
material change in circumstances which could alter the patient's assessment of
the costs or benefits of continuing the procedure.  Changes may arise during
the course of the procedure which are not at all relevant to the issue of
consent.  Yet, the critical question will always be whether the patient would
want to have the information pertaining to those changes in order to decide
whether to continue.  The patient here was capable of giving her consent to the
continuation of the procedure based on the earlier disclosures and did so.                     The doctor must
bear the burden of showing that the patient understood the explanation and instructions
given.  The conclusion that the patient here understood and had given valid
consent to continue the procedure, notwithstanding the absence of an
interpreter, could be drawn from her demonstrated ability to comprehend the
language adequately.  There was complete and proper disclosure made by the
respondents of all the risks involved in the procedure.                     It was not necessary
to consider the issue of causation.  The risks involved in the performance of
an angiogram were far less than the risks which would flow from not locating
and treating an aneurism.  A patient in Mrs. Ciarlariello's position would not
have declined the angiography.  The evidence supported the conclusion the
patient's quadriplegia was caused by contrast induced toxicity.  The other
possible causes were investigated and ruled out as causes of the paralysis.                     The appellants'
action in negligence must also fail.  When a patient withdraws consent during a
procedure to its continuation the procedure must be stopped unless to do so
would seriously endanger the patient.  However, the patient may still consent
to the renewal or continuation of the process.  That consent must also be
informed.  Although it may not be necessary that the doctors review with the
patient all the risks involved in the procedure, the patient must be advised of
any material change in the risks which has arisen and would be involved in continuing
the process.  In addition, the patient must be informed of any material change
in the circumstances which could alter his or her assessment of the costs or
benefits of continuing the procedure.  Here, there had been no material change
in the circumstances and a valid consent was given to the continuation of the
process.  Cases Cited                     Considered:  Reibl v. Hughes, [1980] 2
S.C.R. 880; Mitchell v. McDonald (1987), 40 C.C.L.T. 266; Nightingale
v. Kaplovitch, [1989] O.J. No. 585; referred to:  Fleming v.
Reid (1991), 4 O.R. (3d) 74; Schanczl v. Singh, [1988] 2 W.W.R. 465.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (1991), 44 O.A.C. 385, 76 D.L.R. (4th)
449, 5 C.C.L.T. (2d) 221, dismissing an appeal from a judgment of
Dupont J. (1987), 7 A.C.W.S. (3d) 51.  Appeal dismissed.                     E. A. Cherniak, Q.C., and Patricia D.
Jackson, for the appellants.                     F. Paul
Morrison, Kevin C.
McLoughlin and Tracey Pearce, for the respondents.  //Cory J.//                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered by                     Cory
J. -- At issue in this
appeal is the nature and the extent of the duty of disclosure owed by a doctor
to a patient who withdraws the consent given to a medical procedure during the
course of that procedure.  I - Factual Background                         Dr. Keller
then outlined the principal risks involved in the procedure.  The first was
blindness, which could result if a clot broke from the end of the catheter and
blocked an artery supplying blood to an eye; the others were the risk of
paralysis which could be transient or permanent, or a stroke.  She explained
that while there was a very low incidence of these events occurring the risks
were real and she should be aware of them.  Further, she advised
Mrs. Ciarlariello that there was a risk of death, which although low,
could occur as a result of a reaction to the dye.                     Dr. Keller
described Mrs. Ciarlariello as a bit drowsy, probably from sedation, but
relatively calm and normally anxious.  She appeared to understand all that she
was told and did not seem to react adversely to the risks involved.  The doctor
then asked her to sign a consent to the proposed procedure, and this she did.                     Despite her
impression that Mrs. Ciarlariello understood all that had been explained
to her, Dr. Keller was left with some misgivings pertaining to the
consent.  Therefore, Dr. Keller destroyed the consent form signed by
Mrs. Ciarlariello.  She then spoke on the phone to an intern in
Dr. Schacter's service and Dr. Schacter at the Mount Sinai Hospital. 
She suggested that the family be consulted with regard to the consent to make
sure Mrs. Ciarlariello understood it completely.  She was advised that a
family member was available for that purpose.                     Dr. Keller
then told Mrs. Ciarlariello about her decision to return her to Mount
Sinai Hospital so that she could talk to her family about the test.  Although,
Mrs. Ciarlariello wished to proceed without consulting her family,
Dr. Keller insisted that she do so.                     Mrs. Ciarlariello
returned to Toronto General Hospital at 2:00 p.m. on the same day with a
consent signed by her daughter, Vera.  The angiogram was then conducted.  Two
injections were made in each of the left and right carotid and left vertebral
arteries.  Although the procedure failed to demonstrate a definite aneurism,
the test results did reveal a particular area which was suspected to contain
the aneurism.  It was decided that a second angiogram was needed to investigate
this suspected area.                      On December 29,
1980, the second angiogram was performed by the respondent, Dr. Greco,
another experienced radiologist who worked with Dr. Keller at Toronto
General Hospital.  Prior to the commencement of the test, Dr. Greco spoke
with Mrs. Ciarlariello and explained why the test was required, and how it
was to be performed.  He outlined what sensations she might experience as the
injections were made.  These might involve a burning sensation, flashing
lights, a warm taste at the back of the throat, and increased pressure in the
head.  He then explained the risks involved in the use of the dye, which included
the possibility of a skin rash, and on rare occasions death, blindness, stroke
and paralysis.  Mrs. Ciarlariello appeared to understand all that was said
to her and to consent to the procedure.                      At this point, the
test, which had been interrupted by this episode, was stopped, and the catheter
was withdrawn from the abdominal artery although it remained in
Mrs. Ciarlariello's body.  Dr. Greco explained to Dr. Keller
that he had completed both carotid arteries.  Dr. Keller then talked to
Mrs. Ciarlariello trying to reassure her and calm her. 
Mrs. Ciarlariello complained that her right hand was numb.  On examination
she was not able to move or grasp with it.  The left hand was also weak,
although to a lesser degree.                     Dr. Keller
concluded that Mrs. Ciarlariello's weakness resulted from the tetany which
in turn had been caused by the hyperventilation.  Dr. Keller tested
Mrs. Ciarlariello's sensory functions with pinpricks to her arms and
legs.  She could feel the pin pricks everywhere, including her right hand.  Dr. Keller
then tested Mrs. Ciarlariello's motor functions in all four extremities. 
Her left hand grip had returned to normal.  The strength in both legs was
normal as was the strength in both arms; but the right hand remained weak.  Her
temperature perception on arms and legs with a hot towel was normal.                     Dr. Keller
decided that the sole remaining deficit, the weakness in the right hand, was
purely a motor problem rather than a sensory one.  She concluded that the cause
of the weakness in the right hand was the tetany which in turn resulted from
the hyperventilation.  She felt strengthened in that conclusion by the
improvement in all the extremities which, with the exception of the right hand,
had returned to normal.  She fully expected that the right hand would also
improve.                      Dr. Keller,
administered the final injection.  Mrs. Ciarlariello suffered an immediate
reaction to the injection of the dye which rendered her a quadriplegic. 
Dr. Keller testified that such a reaction was extremely rare and that
never, before or since, had she seen such a reaction.                     Mrs. Ciarlariello
brought an action in the Supreme Court of Ontario against the respondent
physicians.  Subsequent to the trial of the action, Mrs. Ciarlariello
died, and the action was continued by the appellants.  II - The Courts Below  Supreme Court of Ontario (Dupont J.)                     The trial judge
conducted an extensive and thorough review of the evidence, which lead to very
clear and detailed findings of facts.  The issue of consent was relevant to
both the claim of battery and negligence.  It was this issue that was dealt
with first.                     Dupont J. observed
that Mrs. Ciarlariello had not suggested that the angiogram was undertaken
without her consent until some "considerable period of time after she was
rendered quadriplegic".  He found that the risk of paralysis had been
explained to both Mrs. Ciarlariello and her daughter by all the doctors
involved.  He concluded that any failure to use the precise term
"quadriplegic" should not vitiate the consent which had been given
after the clear warning of the risk of paralysis.  He determined that
Mrs. Ciarlariello was well aware that her daughter had, with her knowledge
and approval, signed a consent to the two angiograms and that
Mrs. Ciarlariello had given her consent to both procedures.                     On the question as
to whether consent had been given to the final injection during the second
angiogram, he held that "Mrs. Ciarlariello did agree to the final
injection and the completion of the angiogram".  He found that, although
her consent had been "suspended" for a period of time, it was
reactivated without the need to once again explain the risks, which remained
the same as they had been at the beginning of the procedure.  On this he wrote:                      He concluded that
in the circumstances, the action in battery failed.                     He then turned to a
consideration of the issue of informed consent as it relates to negligence.  He
referred to the decision of this Court in Reibl v. Hughes, [1980] 2
S.C.R. 880, at p. 892, where Laskin C.J. wrote that "a failure to
disclose the attendant risks, however serious, should go to negligence rather
than battery.  Although such a failure relates to an informed choice of
submitting to or refusing recommended and appropriate treatment, it arises as
the breach of an anterior duty of care."  The trial judge found that the
respondents, in this case, had not breached the duty to disclose the material
risks of the procedure to Mrs. Ciarlariello.                     Although, as a
result of his conclusion that the patient had been advised of the risks it was
not necessary to consider causation, the trial judge did so nonetheless.  He
noted that the appropriate standard was an objective one namely "would a
reasonable person in Mrs. Ciarlariello's position, on a balance of
probabilities, have refused the angiogram if there had been proper
disclosure?"  He held that in light of the evidence which clearly
indicated that the risks involved in an angiogram were far outweighed by those
which would arise from the failure to treat the aneurysm, a reasonable person
in the position of Mrs. Ciarlariello would not have declined to undergo
the angiogram procedure, even if all the risks including quadriplegia, had been
disclosed to her.                     He found that the
respondent doctors had not fallen below the appropriate standard of medical
practice in treating Mrs. Ciarlariello and dismissed the negligence claim
brought against them.  Court of Appeal (1991), 76 D.L.R. (4th) 449                       Like the trial
judge, he expressed the opinion that Dr. Keller had exercised proper
medical judgment in deciding to proceed, and that the consent given by
Mrs. Ciarlariello to continue was, under the circumstances, an informed
consent.  In his view, the elements of risk had not changed from the time of
the commencement of the proceeding until it began again with the last
injection.  III - Points in Issue                     The parties take the
position that the following issues are raised on this appeal:                     (a)did
the courts below err in holding that the Final Injection, which followed the
withdrawal of Mrs. Ciarlariello's consent, did not constitute a battery?                     (b)in
the alternative, did the courts below err in failing to find that the defendant
doctors breached their duty of disclosure in obtaining Mrs. Ciarlariello's
consent to the Final Injection?                     (c)did
the learned trial judge err in failing to find that a reasonable person in
Mrs. Ciarlariello's position would not have consented to the Final
Injection?  IV - Analysis  (1)  Liability for
Battery                     Prior to Reibl
v. Hughes, supra, there was some confusion as to whether the failure
to inform a patient adequately of the risks that might flow from a medical
procedure (a) vitiated consent and constituted a battery or (b) constituted
negligence.                     In this case the
trial judge found that Mrs. Ciarlariello's consent was suspended when she
asked that the test be stopped.  It follows that the subsequent completion of
the test which resulted in Mrs. Ciarlariello becoming a quadriplegic would
have constituted battery if it had been established that Mrs. Ciarlariello did
not give her consent to the completion of the test.  This was not done.  The
trial judge found that the necessary consent was given.  He was satisfied that
Mrs. Ciarlariello was in every way capable of expressing her consent to
the continuation of the procedure.  There was certainly no evidence of fraud or
misrepresentation.  Nor did the doctors engage in or carry out, a different
procedure than the one which the patient had anticipated.  The second angiogram
was identical to the one performed seven days earlier and was the very
procedure that she was told it would be necessary to repeat.  There was then a
sound factual basis for the finding that Mrs. Ciarlariello consented to
the continuation of the angiogram.                     It is therefore clear
that the appellants' action in battery cannot succeed.  It remains to be
considered whether the information provided to Mrs. Ciarlariello regarding
the completion of the test was inadequate to such an extent that it constituted
negligence.  (2)  Negligence                     (a)The
Standard for Disclosure                     Reibl v. Hughes, supra, indicates that the
disclosure which must be made to a patient will often be more than that which
the medical profession might consider appropriate to divulge.  Although expert
medical evidence on this issue is still relevant, it is no longer decisive in
determining whether or not sufficient information was given to a patient to
enable that patient to make an informed consent.  The test now focuses on what
the patient would want to know.  Laskin C.J. put the position in these words at
pp. 894-95:  To
allow expert medical evidence to determine what risks are material and, hence,
should be disclosed and, correlatively, what risks are not material is to hand
over to the medical profession the entire question of the scope of the duty of
disclosure, including the question whether there has been a breach of that
duty.  Expert medical evidence is, of course, relevant to findings as to the
risks that reside in or are a result of recommended surgery or other
treatment.  It will also have a bearing on their materiality but this is not a
question that is to be concluded on the basis of the expert medical evidence
alone.  The issue under consideration is a different issue from that involved
where the question is whether the doctor carried out his professional
activities by applicable professional standards.  What is under consideration
here is the patient's right to know what risks are involved in undergoing or
foregoing certain surgery or other treatment.                     In deciding whether
a risk is material and therefore, one which should be explained to the patient,
an objective approach should be taken.  The crucial question in determining the
issue is whether a reasonable person in the patient's position would want to
know of the risk.                     In the present
case, there can be no doubt that the doctors involved conducted themselves in
an exemplary manner.  All the possible risks that could arise from the
procedure were fully explained on several occasions to both Mrs. Ciarlariello
and her daughter.  The only outstanding question is whether
Mrs. Ciarlariello's withdrawal of her consent during the second angiogram
required the doctors to repeat their complete explanations concerning this
procedure in order to obtain her consent to proceed.  In general terms, the
question can be put in this way:  to what extent must disclosure be made to the
patient who, during the course of a procedure, withdraws consent, in order to
resume the procedure with the informed consent of the patient?  In order to
answer that question, it will be necessary to first consider the effect of the
withdrawal of consent.                     (b)Withdrawal
of Consent                     Whether or not
there has been a withdrawal of consent will always be a question of fact.  The
words used by a patient may be ambiguous.  Even if they are apparently clear,
the circumstances under which they were spoken may render them ambiguous.  On
some occasions, the doctors conducting the process may reasonably take the
words spoken by the patient to be an expression of pain rather than a
withdrawal of consent.  Obviously, these are questions of fact which will have
to be resolved by the trial judge.                     For example, in Mitchell
v. McDonald (1987), 40 C.C.L.T. 266 (Alta. Q.B.), the plaintiff was
suffering from acute muscular pain in her chest.  She consented to receive a
cortisone injection directly into the chest muscle.  Unfortunately, the
injection punctured a lung resulting in its partial collapse.  At one point in
the procedure, the plaintiff cried out "For God's sake, stop".  She
argued not unreasonably, that this constituted a withdrawal of consent. 
However, the trial judge, at p. 289, interpreted it as but a cry of pain:                     With
respect to the suggestion that the consent might have been withdrawn by her
exclamation, "For God's sake, stop," it is beyond dispute that the
damage had already been done before her cry.  On the evidence, in any event,
such a cry could well have been interpreted to mean, "My God, stop hurting
me."                     While the doctor's
interpretation of the patient's cries in Mitchell v. McDonald may have
been reasonable in that case, generally if there is any question as to whether
the patient is attempting to withdraw consent, it will be incumbent upon the
doctor to ascertain whether the consent has in fact been withdrawn.  It should
not be forgotten that every patient has a right to bodily integrity.  This
encompasses the right to determine what medical procedures will be accepted and
the extent to which they will be accepted.  Everyone has the right to decide
what is to be done to one's own body.  This includes the right to be free from
medical treatment to which the individual does not consent.  This concept of
individual autonomy is fundamental to the common law and is the basis for the
requirement that disclosure be made to a patient.  If, during the course of a
medical procedure a patient withdraws the consent to that procedure, then the
doctors must halt the process.  This duty to stop does no more than recognize
every individual's basic right to make decisions concerning his or her own
body.                     This principle has
been recognized before.  It was very aptly described by Robins J.A. in Fleming
v. Reid (1991), 4 O.R. (3d) 74 (C.A.), at p. 85, where he stated:                      The same principle
was recognized in Nightingale v. Kaplovitch, [1989] O.J. No. 585 (QL). 
In that case the patient was undergoing sigmoidoscopic examination.  At one
point the examination became extremely painful and the patient screamed
"Stop, I can't take this any more".  In spite of the patient's cries
the doctor continued.  The patient made a sudden movement caused by pain and
suffered a punctured bowel.  R.E. Holland J. of the Ontario High Court stated:  I
conclude on a balance of probabilities that the perforation occurred after
Dr. [Kaplovitch] had been asked to stop. . . .                     I
conclude that the perforation occurred after consent had been withdrawn. This
amounted to a battery and liability would generally follow. . . .  Quite apart
from the question of battery, Dr. Kaplovitch was negligent in continuing
the procedure when the plaintiff was obviously suffering extreme pain and when
he had been asked to stop.                     An individual's
right to determine what medical procedures will be accepted must include the
right to stop a procedure.  It is not beyond the realm of possibility that the
patient is better able to gauge the level of pain or discomfort that can be
accepted or that the patients premonitions of tragedy or mortality may have a
basis in reality.  In any event, the patient's right to bodily integrity
provides the basis for the withdrawal of a consent to a medical procedure even
while it is underway.  Thus, if it is found that the consent is effectively
withdrawn during the course of the proceeding then it must be terminated.  This
must be the result except in those circumstances where the medical evidence
suggests that to terminate the process would be either life threatening or pose
immediate and serious problems to the health of the patient.                     The issue as to
whether or not a consent has been withdrawn during the course of a procedure
may require the trial judge to make difficult findings of fact.  If sedatives
or other medication were administered to the patient then it must be determined
if the patient was so sedated or so affected by the medication that consent to
the procedure could not effectively have been withdrawn.  The question whether
a patient is capable of withdrawing consent will depend on the circumstances of
each case.  Expert medical evidence will undoubtedly be relevant, but it will
not necessarily be determinative of the issue.  Indeed, in cases such as this
where the patient must be conscious and cooperative in order for the procedure
to be performed, it may well be beyond doubt that the patient was capable of
withdrawing consent.                     In the case at bar,
the issue of withdrawal of consent is not an issue.  Both the trial judge and
the Court of Appeal found that the patient had withdrawn her consent and the
respondents have not taken issue with those findings.  (c)Once
Consent to the Process has been Withdrawn, Under what Circumstances May Consent
Be Given to have it Continued?                     Once a patient
withdraws consent to the procedure the question then becomes under what
circumstances a valid consent to the continuation of the process can be given. 
The appellants contend that before a valid consent to the continuation of the
process can be given the patient must be advised, once again of all the risks
involved in the process.  The respondents argue that in the absence of any
changes in the circumstances which would result in a greater risk for the
patient, no further disclosure need be made.                     The argument that
the entire disclosure need not be repeated rests on two bases.  First, the
consent is not referrable to a precise moment in time but rather it is a
relationship that exists between patient and doctor.  That is to say consent is
a process, not an instant in time.  As a result, once consent to the procedure
has been obtained, then the doctor need not explain and disclose all the risks
over again.  Rather, all that is necessary is an explanation of any new
circumstances which may have arisen which require an explanation.                     In this case, the
respondents point to six occasions prior to the final injection, when the risks
of the procedure were discussed with the patient and an informed consent was
given to the process.  They note that in Mitchell v. McDonald, supra, it
was held that the patient's past experience with, and informed consent given to
cortisone shots meant that the doctor did not need to go over in detail the
risks of those shots each time one was administered.  However, the presumption
that patients have reasonably good memories and have consistently consented to
the repetition of a treatment does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that
they will also consent when those same patients are in a highly anxious or
confused state.                     The second argument
of the respondents as to why full disclosure need not be repeated addresses the
anxiety issue in this way:  since the patient is in an emotional state, it
would be both pointless and dangerous to increase the patient's fear by
outlining all the risks once again.  The trial judge gave effect to this
submission in these words:                     There
is no doubt that when a patient is lying on a table and is in the very process
of undergoing a surgical procedure, it is not the most desirable point at which
to obtain their consent to the continuation  of that procedure.  Obviously,
doctors should avoid obtaining consents under such circumstances.  It is
difficult, however, to determine beforehand what they should do when such a
scenario arises.  I have no doubt that whether or not to continue the test is
really a matter of medical judgment.                     Similarly, the
Court of Appeal indicated that once the doctors commenced the angiogram
procedure, the issue of informed consent did not arise.  In that court's view,
the doctors were entitled to exercise their medical judgment and proceed
accordingly.                     On this issue, I
cannot accept the reasoning of the trial judge or the Court of Appeal.  Their
position constitutes a return to the medical judgment standard which was specifically
disapproved in Reibl v. Hughes, supra.  To give effect to it
would permit the doctors to interfere with the bodily integrity of the patients
if in their opinion, from a medical point of view, it would be preferable to
override the patient's objections and specific refusal to continue the
process.  Although from the point of view of the medical profession this would
undoubtedly be done in the best interest of the patient, nonetheless, it cannot
be accepted.                     The appropriate
approach is, once again, to focus on what the patient would like to know
concerning the continuation of the process once the consent has been
withdrawn.  Looking at it objectively, a patient would want to know whether
there had been any significant change in the risks involved or in the need for
the continuation of this process which had become apparent during the course of
the procedure.  In addition, the patient will want to know if there has been a
material change in circumstances which could alter the patient's assessment of
the costs or benefits of continuing the procedure.  For example, have the
circumstances changed in such a way that the procedure is no longer as
important to making a diagnosis as it was earlier?  Each case, of course,  will
have to be determined on its own facts.  Changes may arise during the course of
the procedure which are not at all relevant to the issue of consent.  Yet, the
critical question will always be whether the patient would want to have the
information pertaining to those changes in order to decide whether to continue.  (d)Application
to the Case                     Here the trial
judge found that after Mrs. Ciarlariello had calmed down, Dr. Keller
explained to her that one more area needed investigation which would take five
minutes.  Dr. Keller then asked her if she wished the test completed and
Mrs. Ciarlariello told her to go ahead.  This evidence was corroborated by
Dr. Greco and provided a sound basis for the findings of the trial judge
on this issue.                     There was no
evidence that sedatives, medication, or a deterioration in her condition had
made it impossible for Mrs. Ciarlariello to give her consent to the
continuation of the process.  Significantly, there was no evidence that the
hyperventilation or tetany suffered by Mrs. Ciarlariello had increased the
risk associated with any further angiogram injections.  The trial judge was
therefore correct in his conclusion that there was no need to repeat the
details of the procedure or its attendant risks before carrying out the last
injection.  There had been no significant change in circumstances since the
procedure had been stopped.  The hyperventilation, although extreme in this
case, was not unusual.  The patient's recovery from it was normal.  There were
no additional factors which had arisen which needed to be brought to the
attention of the patient.  Mrs. Ciarlariello was, therefore, capable of
giving her consent to the continuation of the procedure based on the earlier
disclosures.  This she did.  (e)The
Patient's Understanding of the Information                     Prior to Reibl
v. Hughes, there was some doubt as to whether the doctor had the duty to
ensure that he was understood.  However, Laskin C.J. made it quite clear in
that case that it was incumbent on the doctor to make sure that he was
understood, particularly where it appears that the patient had some difficulty
with the language spoken by the doctor.                     Indeed, it is
appropriate that the burden should be placed on the doctor to show that the
patient comprehended the explanation and instructions given.  See as an example,
Schanczl v. Singh, [1988] 2 W.W.R. 465 (Alta. Q.B.).  In the case at
bar, the trial judge very carefully considered the ability of
Mrs. Ciarlariello to comprehend the medical information given to her by
the doctor.  He took into account Mrs. Ciarlariello's difficulties with
the English language, and the stress that she was undergoing.  With those
factors in mind he came to the conclusion that she understood the nature of the
procedure that she was to undergo.  He found that she had a basic understanding
of English which was manifested by her ability to converse with and respond
appropriately to questions and instructions given to her by the doctors.  Thus,
although a translator was not present during the angiogram, in light of her
demonstrated ability to adequately comprehend the language, it was appropriate
to conclude that Mrs. Ciarlariello had given a valid consent to the
continuation of the procedure.                     There was then
ample evidence upon which the trial judge could properly base his findings that
Mrs. Ciarlariello was aware of all the risks and was able to give a valid
consent to the continuation of the process.                     (f)Causation                     There was complete
and proper disclosure made by the respondents of all the risks involved in the
procedure.  Mrs. Ciarlariello gave an informed consent to the angiogram
and the continuation of the second angiogram.    (3) Conclusion                     The appellants'
action against the respondents in battery must fail.  The patient consented to
both the angiograms and to the continuation of the second one.  There was no
fraud or misrepresentation inducing her to do so and the procedure in its
continuation was no different from that to which she had previously given her
consent.                     The appellants'
action in negligence must also fail.  When a patient withdraws consent during a
procedure to its continuation the procedure must be stopped unless to do so
would seriously endanger the patient.  However, the patient may still consent
to the renewal or continuation of the process.  That consent must also be
informed.  Although it may not be necessary that the doctors review with the
patient all the risks involved in the procedure, the patient must be advised of
any material change in the risks which has arisen and would be involved in
continuing the process.  In addition, the patient must be informed of any
material change in the circumstances which could alter his or her assessment of
the costs or benefits of continuing the procedure.  Here, there had been no
material change in the circumstances and a valid consent was given to the
continuation of the process.  V - Disposition                     Accordingly, the
appeal must be dismissed.  There will be no order as to costs.                     Appeal dismissed.                     Solicitors for the
appellants:  Tory, Tory, DesLauriers & Binnington, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
respondents:  McCarthy, Tétrault, Toronto.   