Granville Savings and Mortgage Corp. v.
Slevin, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 279  Granville Savings and Mortgage
Corporation                                 Appellant  v.  Fraser G. Campbell, Rudy V.
Maxwell, Robert M. Kozminski and
Robert L. Zaparniuk                              Respondents  Indexed as:  Granville
Savings and Mortgage Corp. v. Slevin  File No.:  23210.  1993:  November 2.  Present:  La Forest,
Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for
manitoba                       APPEAL from a
judgment of the Manitoba Court of Appeal (1992), 78 Man. R. (2d) 241, 93 D.L.R.
(4th) 268, [1992] 5 W.W.R. 1, 24 R.P.R. (2d) 185, 6 B.L.R. (2d) 192, allowing
an appeal from a judgment of Dureault J. (1990), 68 Man. R. (2d) 241, 50
B.L.R. 284.  Appeal allowed.                     W. S. Gange, for the appellant.                     Richard W.
Schwartz, for the
respondents.                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered orally by                      The appellant was
requested to lend money on a mortgage to be given by Mr. Smith, a client
of the respondents.  The appellant agreed to lend the money.  It confirmed this
in a letter to the respondents setting out some nine conditions to the
disposition of the mortgage funds particularly that the mortgage would be a
first charge on the property of Smith.                     We agree with the
finding of the trial judge that the respondents were retained by the appellant
to act on its behalf to obtain a first charge.  There was ample evidence to
properly support that finding.                     There was clearly a
special relationship existing between the appellant and respondents.  Indeed
this was conceded by the respondents.  It follows that the respondents were
required to exercise their special skills on behalf of the appellant.                     The respondents
argue that the appellant did not rely upon them.  This contention cannot be
accepted.  It is true that the appellant did not specifically request the
respondents to protect their interest.  Nevertheless, the correspondence makes
it clear that the appellant was relying upon the respondents to ensure that
their mortgage was a first charge on the property.  The respondents did not do
so.  They were thus negligent and in breach of their duty to the appellant.                     In the
circumstances presented by this case, the respondents as lawyers had clear
options open to them.  They could have attempted to secure a first charge for
the appellant by obtaining postponement of the judgments against their client
Smith.  They were well aware at all material times of these outstanding
judgments.  If they could not obtain a postponement they should have advised
the appellant.  Alternatively, they could have refused to act for the appellant
so that it could have retained other solicitors to act on its behalf.                     What was not open
to the respondents was to act for the appellant and fail to advise them of the
potential problems that could arise from the existing judgments against Smith.                     The respondents are
then liable to the appellant for the damages flowing from the breach of their
duty.  Those damages included the costs incurred in the law suits brought by
the appellant seeking to maintain the priority of their charge.  These were the
only damages seriously contested by the respondents.                     In light of these
conclusions it is not necessary for us to consider the issue of fiduciary duty
although the trial judge may well have been correct in finding that there was
as well a fiduciary duty owed by the respondents to the appellant.                     In the result, the
appeal will be allowed, the order of the Court of Appeal set aside and the
judgment at trial restored.  The appellant will have its costs of these
proceedings throughout.                     Judgment
accordingly.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Thompson, Dorfman, Sweatman, Winnipeg.                     Solicitors for the
respondents:  Wolch, Pinx, Tapper, Scurfield, Winnipeg.  