Hall v. Hebert, [1993] 2 S.C.R.
159  Vincent Hall      Appellant  v.  Jean Hebert, also known as Joseph Jean
Claude Hebert               Respondent  Indexed as:  Hall v.
Hebert  File No.:  22399.  1992:  October 6;
1993:  April 29.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                        Respondent, who
owned a "souped-up" muscle car, and his passenger (appellant) had
been drinking.  When the car stalled on an unlit and particularly rough gravel
road with a sharp drop off to one side, respondent decided the only way to
start it was "a rolling start" when he could not find the keys after
they had shaken out of the ignition.  At appellant's request, respondent
allowed appellant to drive when they tried the rolling start.  Respondent had
been aware that appellant had consumed 11 or 12 bottles of beer that evening,
three within the last hour prior to the accident.  Despite this, he did not
consider the appellant drunk.  Appellant lost control of the car; it left the
road, went down the steep slope and turned upside down.  Both were able to walk
away from the accident and reached the house of an acquaintance who described
them as being drunk.  It was later discovered that the appellant had suffered
significant head injuries.                     The trial judge
allowed appellant's action for civil damages and apportioned liability at 75
percent to the respondent and 25 percent to the appellant.  The Court of Appeal
allowed respondent's appeal.  At issue here are:  (1) whether a person
having the care and control of a motor vehicle owes a duty of care to another
who is known to be impaired to deny that impaired person permission to drive
the vehicle; (2) whether ex turpi causa non oritur actio provides
respondent with a complete defence to this action; and (3) whether the
trial judge erred in his apportionment of liability.                     Held (Sopinka J.
dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed.                     The defence of ex
turpi causa non oritur actio should not be replaced with a judicial
discretion to negate or refuse to consider a duty of care on a policy basis. 
Shifting the analysis to the issue of duty provides no new insight into the
fundamental question of when the courts should be entitled to deny recovery in
tort to a plaintiff on the ground of the plaintiff's immoral or illegal
conduct.  It would also introduce a series of new problems.                     The duty approach
does not fully capture the sense of the principle of ex turpi causa. 
The ex turpi causa principle operates most naturally as a defence
because its purpose is to frustrate what would be, had ex turpi causa no
role, a complete cause of action.                     The relationship
between plaintiff and defendant which gives rise to their respective
entitlement and liability arises in tort from a duty predicated on foreseeable
consequences of harm.  This duty of care is owed to all persons who may
reasonably be foreseen to be injured by the negligent conduct.  The legality or
morality of the plaintiff's conduct is therefore an extrinsic consideration. 
Use of ex turpi causa as a defence rather than a distortion of the notion
of the duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff is preferable in the
rare cases where concerns for the administration of justice require that the
extrinsic consideration of the character of the plaintiff's conduct be
considered.  The notion that the courts cannot, in certain circumstances,
consider whether a duty of care arises has the practical effect of denying a
duty which would otherwise arise, and hence, in substance, of violating the
principle against making certain parties outlaws in civil proceedings.                     Practical reasons
exist for treating ex turpi causa as a defence.  First, to treat it as
going to the duty of care would inappropriately place on the plaintiff the onus
of showing the absence of disentitling conduct.  Second, the duty of care
approach is an all or nothing approach, and cannot be applied selectively to
discreet heads of damages.  Finally, the consideration of illegal or immoral
conduct at the stage of determining the duty of care would raise procedural
problems where concurrent claims are made in tort and contract.  The onus would
be on the defendant to prove the relevance of the plaintiff's conduct in
contract but on the plaintiff to disprove the relevance of the conduct in tort,
unnecessarily complicating the task of the trial judge and the parties.                     The appellant need
not be denied recovery here because the compensation sought was for injuries
received.  This compensation can be reduced to the extent of the appellant's
contributory negligence, but cannot be wholly denied by reason of his
disreputable or criminal conduct.                     Per Cory J.:  This Court has
approved the two stage test for considering foreseeability, proximity and duty
of care:  (i) is there a sufficiently close relationship between the
parties so that, in the reasonable contemplation of a party, carelessness on
its part might cause damage to another person, and if so, (ii) are there
any considerations which should negate or limit (a) the scope of the duty
and (b) the class of persons to whom it is owed or (c) the damages to
which a breach of it may give rise.  This test, particularly the second branch,
is broad enough to take into account policy considerations which may in fact
negate the existence of a duty of care.  Damages have been awarded in many
cases where the plaintiff has been guilty of illegal acts.                     The old common law
defence of contributory negligence that stood as an absolute bar to recovery in
tort actions has been legislated out of existence.  The Negligence Acts of all
the common law provinces provide a basis for a fair assessment and distribution
of the liability.  The defence of volenti, also a complete bar to
recovery, has been confined to a narrow scope by this Court but may provide a
valid defence in cases of economic tort.  The doctrine of ex turpi causa
should be eliminated in its application to tort cases.  It would be better to
consider the issue as a question to be resolved on considerations of public
policy.                     The respondent as
the owner of the vehicle, was charged with its care and control and clearly
owed a duty to the appellant to refuse to permit him to drive his vehicle. 
Common sense dictates that one who has the care and control of a vehicle should
not permit another person that he knows or should know is unfit to drive to
take over the control of his vehicle.  Particularly this is so where the
vehicle is high powered, the driving conditions are difficult and the proposed
driver is clearly impaired.                     The doctrine of ex
turpi causa should not be applied under any guise.  The issue of
"public policy" should not be considered under the archaic Latin
rubric of ex turpi causa but honestly and frankly under the designation
of public policy.  Generally, decisions in which the ex turpi causa
defence has been applied have required the existence of joint illegal conduct
by the parties.  If a plaintiff's conduct was in contravention of the law and
if this conduct was a factor in producing his or her injury, the plaintiff may
well be found guilty of contributory negligence or indeed of being the author
of his or her own misfortune.  Yet simply because the plaintiff was a wrongdoer
does not necessarily mean that the plaintiff can have no remedy at law for harm
done to him or her.                     Appellant should be
allowed to recover compensation on the grounds of public policy.  To permit him
to recover would not offend or shock the conscience of reasonable right
thinking members of the community fully apprised of the facts.                     There was little to
choose between the negligence of the appellant and that demonstrated by the
respondent.  Individuals must take responsibility for their actions.  It was
the appellant who sought permission to drive the vehicle.  He must or should
have been aware of his impairment.  He knew of the powerful nature of the
vehicle and the problems involved in roll starting it.  He was aware of the
dangers presented by the dark inclined gravel road sloping off steeply to the
gravelpit on one side.  He must accept responsibility for seeking permission to
drive the car and for the manner in which he drove it.  The liability should be
divided equally between the appellant and the respondent.                     Per Gonthier J.:  For the reasons given
by Cory and McLachlin JJ., the appellant, on the facts of this case, had a
duty of care and a defence of ex turpi causa was not open to him, be it
viewed as such or as a matter of public policy.  A restricted and more
carefully circumscribed application of the defence of ex turpi causa must
lie in tort cases.  Its principle, properly applied, has a valid and important
role to play in limited circumstances but it is not appropriate to define
exhaustively a priori the circumstances for its application.                     Per Sopinka J. (dissenting):  The defence
of ex turpi causa does not apply.  The appeal and the action should be
dismissed because of the plaintiff's failure to establish that the defendant
owed a duty of care to the plaintiff in the circumstances.  The traditional
incremental approach to the development of new categories of liability, whereby
liability is extended in particular circumstances by analogy to existing
categories, did not give rise to a duty of care.  The special circumstances
calling for the creation of a positive duty of care in Dunn v. Dominion
Atlantic Railway, Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow and Crocker v.
Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd. were totally absent here.  Extending
liability would not amount to an incremental extension of liability, but a
quantum leap. The approach in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council did
not give rise to a duty of care either.  This approach involves, first, a
recognition of a broad prima facie duty of care based on foreseeability
of harm followed by the application of a second step to determine whether there
is a sound policy reason why the duty should be negated or limited.  No
unifying principle has been developed for the application of the second step.                     The doctrines of ex
turpi causa and volenti non fit injuria are examples of limitations
on the duty of care which have been supported, at least in part, by reference
to the policy not to recognize a duty of care in circumstances in which none
could reasonably be expected.  Ex turpi causa, properly understood,
applies to deny recovery where lending the court's assistance to persons
involved in serious criminal activity would reflect adversely on the
administration of justice.  Such is not the case here.  Volenti applies
only if the plaintiff has assumed both the physical and legal risk, but it does
not exhaust the operation of the policy not to find a duty of care where none
could reasonably be expected.  Apart from ex turpi causa and volenti
there is a policy not to recognize a duty of care in circumstances in which the
plaintiff cannot have any reasonable expectation of receiving care nor of the
defendant's providing it.  Criminal conduct can be the basis for negating a
duty of care not because it is criminal but because it can be inferred from the
conduct itself, apart from its criminal character, that no reasonable
expectation of care existed on the part of the person injured.  The absence of
reasonable expectation can be established on the basis of the relationship of
the parties and their conduct in all the circumstances of the case.                     The plaintiff, when
making the request, could not at the same time have had any expectation that
the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty to take care for his safety by refusing
the request.  This was not a case of the plaintiff's being guilty of
contributory negligence in having such an expectation but rather one in which
the plaintiff had no such expectation.  It was, therefore, not a case for
apportionment of liability because no liability arose.  Cases Cited  By McLachlin J.                     Considered:  Canada Cement LaFarge Ltd. v.
British Columbia Lightweight Aggregate Ltd., [1983] 1 S.C.R. 452;   referred
to:  Smith v. Jenkins (1970), 119 C.L.R. 397; Lane v. Holloway,
[1967] 3 All E.R. 129; Gala v. Preston (1991), 172 C.L.R. 243; Pitts
v. Hunt, [1990] 3 All E.R. 344; Joubert v. Toronto General Trusts Corp.
(1955), 15 W.W.R. 654; Rondos v. Wawrin (1968), 64 W.W.R. 690; Tallow
v. Tailfeathers, [1973] 6 W.W.R. 732; Foster v. Morton (1956), 4
D.L.R. (2d) 269; Mack v. Enns (1983), 44 B.C.L.R. 145; Betts v.
Sanderson Estate (1988), 31 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1; Dube v. Labar, [1986] 1
S.C.R. 649; Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1 S.C.R.
1186; Car and General Insurance Corp. v. Seymour, [1956] S.C.R. 322; Lehnert
v. Stein, [1963] S.C.R. 38; Burns v. Edman, [1970] 1 All E.R. 886; Meadows
v. Ferguson, [1961] V.R. 594; Lewis v. Brannen, 65 S.E. 189 (1909); Harper
v. Grasser, 150 P. 1175 (1915); McNichols v. J. R. Simplot Co., 262
P.2d 1012 (1953); Katco v. Briney, 183 N.W.2d 657 (1971); Colburn v.
Patmore (1834), 1 C.M. & R. 73, 149 E.R. 999; Norberg v. Wynrib,
[1992] 2 S.C.R. 226; Tomlinson v. Harrison, [1972] 1 O.R. 670; Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Kamloops (City of) v.
Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Donoghue v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562; Henwood
v. Municipal Tramways Trust (1938), 60 C.L.R. 438.  By Cory J.                     Considered:  Canada Cement LaFarge Ltd. v.
British Columbia Lightweight Aggregate Ltd., [1983] 1 S.C.R. 452; referred
to:  Donoghue v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562; Anns v. Merton London
Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International
Ltd., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299; Dorset Yacht Co. v. Home Office, [1969] 2
Q.B. 412; Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow, [1974] S.C.R. 239; Hempler v.
Todd (1970), 14 D.L.R. (3d) 637; Ontario Hospital Services Commission v.
Borsoski (1973), 54 D.L.R. (3d) 339; Betts v. Sanderson Estate
(1988), 31 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1; Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd.,
[1988] 1 S.C.R. 1186; Butterfield v. Forrester (1809), 11 East. 60, 103
E.R. 926; Davies v. Mann (1842), 10 M. & W. 546, 152 E.R. 588; 
Car and General Insurance Corp. v. Seymour, [1956] S.C.R. 322; Lehnert
v. Stein, [1963] S.C.R. 38; Eid v. Dumas, [1969] S.C.R. 668; Dube
v. Labar, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 649;  Norberg v. Wynrib, [1992] 2 S.C.R.
226; Smith v. Jenkins (1970), 119 C.L.R. 397; Pitts v. Hunt,
[1990] 3 All E.R. 344; Progress and Properties Ltd. v. Craft (1976), 135
C.L.R. 651; Hegarty v. Shine (1878), 14 Cox C.C. 145; Lewis v. Sayers,
[1970] 3 O.R. 591; Jackson v. Harrison (1978), 138 C.L.R. 438; Gala
v. Preston (1991), 172 C.L.R. 243; National Coal Board v. England,
[1954] 1 All E.R. 546; Tallow v. Tailfeathers, [1973] 6 W.W.R. 732; Harris
v. Toronto Transit Commission, [1967] S.C.R. 460; Miller v. Decker,
[1957] S.C.R. 624.  By Gonthier J.                     Referred to:  Norberg v. Wynrib, [1992] 2
S.C.R. 226; Mack v. Enns (1981), 30 B.C.L.R. 337.  By Sopinka J. (dissenting)                     Anns v. Merton
London Borough Council,
[1978] A.C. 728; Sutherland Shire Council v. Heyman (1985), 60 A.L.R. 1;
Caparo Industries p.l.c. v. Dickman, [1990] 1 All E.R. 568; Murphy v.
Brentwood District Council, [1991] 1 A.C. 398; Kamloops (City of) v.
Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2
S.C.R. 1228; Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow, [1974] S.C.R. 239; Crocker
v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1 S.C.R. 1186; Dunn v.
Dominion Atlantic Railway Co. (1920), 60 S.C.R. 310; Gala v. Preston
(1991), 172 C.L.R. 243; Norberg v. Wynrib, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 226.  Authors Cited  Clerk,
John Frederic.  Clerk & Lindsell on Torts, 16th ed.  Common Law
Library No. 3.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1989.  Crago,
Neville. H.  "The Defence of Illegality in Negligence Actions"
(1964), 4 Melbourne U.L.R. 534.    Fleming,
John G.  The Law of Torts, 7th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1987.   Fridman,
G. H. L.  "The Wrongdoing Plaintiff" (1972), 18 McGill
L.J. 275.  Gibson, Dale. 
"Comment:  Illegality of Plaintiff's Conduct as a Defence" (1969), 47
Can. Bar Rev. 89  Klar,
Lewis N.  Tort Law.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1991.  Legrand,
Pierre, jr., "La dynamique de l'impunité:  autour de la défense d'ex
turpi causa en common law des délits civils" (1991), 36 McGill
L.J. 609.  Linden,
Allen M.  Canadian Tort Law, 4th ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths,
1988.  MacDougall,
Bruce.  "Ex Turpi Causa:  Should a Defence Arise From a Base
Cause?" (1991), 55 Sask. L. Rev. 1.   Salmond,
Sir John William.  Salmond on Torts, 17th ed.  By
R. F. V. Heuston.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1977.  Salmond,
Sir John William.  Salmond and Heuston on the Law of Torts,
19th ed.  By R. F. V. Heuston and R. A. Buckley. 
London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1987.  Swanton,
Jane P.  "Plaintiff a Wrongdoer:  Joint Complicity in an Illegal
Enterprise as a Defence to Negligence" (1981), 9 Sydney L. Rev.
304.  Weinrib,
Ernest J.  "Illegality as a Tort Defence" (1976), 26 U.T.L.J.
28.  Weinrib,
Ernest J.  "The Special Morality of Tort Law" (1989), 34 McGill
L.J. 403.  Williams,
Glanville L.  Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence.  London: 
Stevens & Sons, 1951.  Winfield,
Sir Percy Henry.  Winfield and Jolowicz on Tort, 12th ed.  By
M. V. H. Rogers.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1984.  Wright,
Cecil A.  "Introduction to the Law of Torts" (1944), 8 Cambridge
L.J. 238.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (1991), 53 B.C.L.R. (2d) 201,
6 C.C.L.T. (2d) 294, 46 C.P.C. (2d) 192, 28 M.V.R. (2d) 94, allowing an appeal
from a judgment of Spencer J. (1989), 14 A.C.W.S. (3d) 102, with
supplementary reasons (1989), 15 A.C.W.S. (3d) 382.  Appeal allowed,
Sopinka J. dissenting.                     Steven H.
Heringa and Robert D.
Kirkham, for the appellant.                     James S.
Carfra, Q.C.,
and Dean P. J. Lawton, for the respondent.                     The judgment of La
Forest, L'Heureux-Dubé, McLachlin and Iacobucci JJ. was delivered by  //McLachlin J.//                     McLachlin
J. -- I have had the
advantage of reading the reasons of my colleague Justice Cory.  While I agree
with much of what he has said, I find myself unable to agree with certain
aspects of his reasons from the point of view of theory as well as practice.                     This case is one of
great importance.  The Court is asked to rule on the question of whether and,
if so, in what circumstances and under what doctrinal rubric courts may prevent
a plaintiff from recovering compensation in tort for loss suffered by the fault
of another on the ground that the plaintiff's conduct violated legal or moral
rules.                     My colleague would
"eliminate" the doctrine of ex turpi causa non oritur actio: 
at p. 000.  In place of the doctrine he would give the courts a power to
reject claims on considerations of public policy.  Where the plaintiff's claim
arises in the context of negligence, the courts would apply this public policy
rationale at the stage of deciding whether a cause of action lies, i.e., in
determining whether the plaintiff is owed a duty of care.                      My own view is that
courts should be allowed to bar recovery in tort on the ground of the
plaintiff's immoral or illegal conduct only in very limited circumstances.  The
basis of this power, as I see it, lies in duty of the courts to preserve the
integrity of the legal system, and is exercisable only where this concern is in
issue.  This concern is in issue where a damage award in a civil suit would, in
effect, allow a person to profit from illegal or wrongful conduct, or would
permit an evasion or rebate of a penalty prescribed by the criminal law.  The
idea common to these instances is that the law refuses to give by its right
hand what it takes away by its left hand.  It follows from this that, as a
general rule, the ex turpi causa principle will not operate in tort to
deny damages for personal injury, since tort suits will generally be based on a
claim for compensation, and will not seek damages as profit for illegal or
immoral acts.  As to the form the power should take, I see little utility and
considerable difficulty in saying that the issue must be dealt with as part of
the duty of care.  Finally, I see no harm in using the traditional label of ex
turpi causa non oritur actio, so long as the conditions that govern its use
are made clear.                     These conclusions
arise from a consideration of the historical uses of the power to deny recovery
on the ground of immoral or illegal conduct and the doctrinal considerations
which underlie that power.  I will first examine what role there is for a power
in the courts to deny recovery in tort because of the claimant's immoral or
illegal conduct.  My conclusion, as indicated, will be that while there is a
role, it is limited.  After indicating the nature of that limit, I will address
the manner in which the limiting rule is best introduced, whether as a defence
to an established cause of action, or as an element negating a duty of care.  I.The
Historical Use of the Power to Deny Recovery for Immoral or Illegal Conduct                      The power expressed
in the maxim ex turpi causa non oritur actio finds its roots in the
insistence of the courts that the judicial process not be used for abusive,
illegal purposes.  Thus Professor Gibson, in "Comment:  Illegality of
Plaintiff's Conduct as a Defence" (1969), 47 Can. Bar Rev. 89,
at p. 89, writes:                       Academic opinion is
generally critical of the maxim's use in tort, particularly where it is used to
prevent recovery of compensatory damages for personal injury:  see Bruce
MacDougall, "Ex Turpi Causa:  Should a Defence Arise from a Base
Cause?" (1991), 55 Sask. L. Rev. 1; Glanville
L. Williams, Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence (1951);
D. Gibson, supra.  Other commentators, while concerned that the
courts have applied the doctrine in cases where it is not justified, concede
that in some circumstances its application in tort may be appropriate:  Ernest
J. Weinrib, "Illegality as a Tort Defence" (1976), 26 U.T.L.J.
28, G. H. L. Fridman, "The Wrongdoing Plaintiff" (1972), 18 McGill
L.J. 275.                     I propose to
examine those cases where it is generally conceded that the doctrine may
properly apply, with a view to determining whether a unifying concern or theme,
sufficient to support the preservation of the maxim, can be identified.                     One situation in
which there seems to be a clear role for the doctrine is the case where to
allow the plaintiff's tort claim would be to permit the plaintiff to profit
from his or her wrong.  It is important at the outset to define what is meant
by profit.  As the cases illustrate, what is meant is profit in the narrow
sense of a direct pecuniary reward for an act of wrongdoing.  Compensation for
something other than wrongdoing, such as for personal injury, would not amount
to profit in this sense.  An instance is the situation where one wrongdoer
claims in tort against another for financial loss arising from a joint illegal
venture.  Such a situation was considered by this Court in Canada Cement
LaFarge Ltd. v. British Columbia Lightweight Aggregate Ltd., [1983] 1
S.C.R. 452.  In issue was an alleged tort of the conspiracy to injure.  The
respondent, maintaining that it was a business competitor of the appellants,
argued that its bankruptcy had been caused by the illegal combines activity of
the appellants.  Writing for the Court, Estey J. found that the tort of
conspiracy was not made out.  He went on, however, to consider whether the
respondent might be barred from claiming against the appellants on the ground
that the respondent had also participated in the illegality in issue.  In
rejecting this argument, Estey J. held that the damages suffered by the
respondent were not linked to the illegality participated in.  But he accepted
that, had the causal requirement been satisfied and the alleged tort made out,
the respondent might have been barred from recovering, on the grounds that
recovery would permit it to profit from its illegal act.                     The reasoning at work
in Canada Cement LaFarge is, as Cory J. notes, precisely the same as
that underlying the application of the ex turpi causa doctrine in
contract:  the court will not assist a wrongdoer in profiting from an illegal
scheme or act.  As Estey J. stated at p. 477:  The
benefit falling to the respondent was the opportunity to be the sole supplier
of lightweight aggregate to the combine.  If the damages which have been
suffered by the respondent flowed from its involvement in the illegal
combine or from the contracts entered into between the respondent and the
appellants affording the opportunity to the respondent to participate in
the combine, then these doctrines [of ex turpi causa non oritur actio
and of in pari delicto potior est conditio possidentis] prevent the
respondent's recovery.  [Emphasis added.]                     Cory J. suggests
that the defence of volenti non fit injuria better characterizes the
rationale underlying this conclusion.  I respectfully disagree.  The defence of
volenti is available only if it can be established that the plaintiff,
with knowledge (objectively determined) of the risk, freely accepted it:  Dube
v. Labar, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 649, and Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts
Ltd., [1988] 1 S.C.R. 1186.  It is narrowly applied:  Car and General
Insurance Corp. v. Seymour, [1956] S.C.R. 322, Lehnert v. Stein,
[1963] S.C.R. 38, and Sundance, supra.  Cory J., at p. 000, says volenti
could always be established in such a case, regardless of the particular
circumstances in issue, simply as a matter of judicial inference from the fact
of an illegal bargain.  I am not so confident.  It is not clear that it can be
said of a contract, even one found to be illegal, that one party knowingly
accepted the risks of the other party's breach.  Moreover, if courts were to
find volenti on the basis of judicial inference from the fact of an
illegal bargain, the result would be a judicial doctrine that whenever an
illegal bargain is established, there can be no claim in tort.  Whether one
describes this result by the maxim of volenti or by the maxim of ex
turpi causa is immaterial.  These considerations, coupled with the fact
that this Court and others have referred to this as an instance where the ex
turpi causa rule applies, suggest to me that it is best to continue to do
so.                     Another example of
a case in which the courts would not permit a wrongdoer to use a tort action to
profit from the wrongdoing is where one bank robber sues another for fraud or
negligent misrepresentation. If the action were brought in contract, it would
clearly be defeated on the basis of ex turpi causa non oritur actio. 
The fact that the disgruntled robber chooses to frame his or her action in tort
should make no difference.                     In some cases the
courts may disallow a particular head of damages on the basis that to award
that head of damages would be to permit the plaintiff to profit indirectly from
his or her crime, in the sense of obtaining remuneration for it.  A claim for
damages for personal injuries under the head of loss of future earnings, where
the claimed earnings are based on an illegal occupation, will not be allowed
because it would amount to the court's rewarding the plaintiff for an illegal
activity, permitting the plaintiff to profit from his or her wrong.  Courts in
other jurisdictions have refused to make such awards in cases of claims by a
burglar, a bookies' clerk, a vendor of illegal patent medicines, a fisherman
using an unlawful net, and an operator of an illegal gambling den:  Burns v.
Edman, [1970] 1 All E.R. 886 (Q.B.), Meadows v. Ferguson, [1961]
V.R. 594 (S.C), Lewis v. Brannen, 65 S.E. 189 (Ga. C.A. 1909). Harper
v. Grasser, 150 P. 1175 (Wash. S.C. 1915), and McNichols v. J.
R. Simplot Co., 262 P.2d 1012 (Idaho S.C. 1953).                       At this point it
may be useful to consider in more depth the distinction between compensatory
damages and damages which amount to profit from an illegal act.  The foregoing
comments indicate that compensatory damages are not properly awarded as
compensation for an illegal act, but only as compensation for personal injury. 
Such damages accomplish nothing more than to put the plaintiff in the position
he or she would have been in had the tort not occurred.  No part of the award
which compensates injury can be said to be the profit of, or the windfall from,
an illegal act.  It may be that had the plaintiff not committed an illegal act,
like driving while impaired as in this case, he or she would never have
suffered injury.  But the same point could be made in the context of every
tort:  had the injured party not first done X or Y, he or she would not have
been subject to the negligence of the tortfeasor.  The question that the law
asks is whether an injured party suffered a recognized sort of injury, at the
hands of someone who owed this party a duty of care, and who caused reasonably
foreseeable damage by falling below the standard of care that the law imposes. 
The plaintiff's behaviour will be relevant to the extent to which it can be
shown, according to the established principles just referred to, that the
plaintiff contributed to, or voluntarily accepted, the injury he or she
suffered; his or her  behaviour will be otherwise irrelevant, unless the
plaintiff's claim falls into that narrow group of excluded claims referred to
above.  None of the foregoing propositions changes the fact that such
compensation as a plaintiff properly recovers arises not from the character of
his or her conduct, illegal or otherwise, but from the damage caused to him or
her by the negligent act of the defendant.  He or she gets only the value of,
or a substitute for, the injuries he or she has suffered by the fault of
another.  He or she gets nothing for or by reason of the fact he or she was
engaged in illegal conduct.                     There may be cases
where the principle of ex turpi causa should be invoked to prevent tort
recovery which do not fall under the category of profit from illegality. 
Professor Weinrib, supra, suggests that the defence of ex turpi causa
may properly be invoked to prevent the "stultification of the criminal
law" or "evasion of the consequences of the criminal law":  at
pp. 52-53.  He gives the example of a burglar who, due to his partner's
negligence, is caught and required to pay a fine.  Such a person, he suggests,
should be barred from recovering damages for the fine from his partner. 
Weinrib states that this result could be justified either by saying that one
criminal owes no duty to another, or by recourse to the maxim ex turpi causa
non oritur actio.  He adds, at p. 51:                     However
the conclusion is expressed, few would quarrel with it. B has deliberately chosen to violate the criminal law by
attempting the burglary, and he has been visited with the consequences of that
choice.  Conviction and sentencing by a criminal court is the law's method of
ascribing to B the responsibility
for his action.  The assessment of the penalty is largely, though not
exclusively, a reaction to the criminal's own process of decision, and it
reflects both the blameworthiness of the criminal in choosing to act as he did
and the amount of admonishment sufficient to influence him in his future
choices. It would make no sense at all if B
were able to utilize tort law's mechanism of shifting losses in order to avoid
the very consequences which criminal law has imposed upon him for his intentionally
culpable conduct.  [Emphasis added.]                     See also the
similar facts which arose for consideration in Colburn v. Patmore
(1834), 1 C.M. & R. 73, 149 E.R. 999 (Exch.)                     While this example
cannot be explained in terms of profit, since the claim is one of compensation
for a fine incurred, it does accord with what I have called the more
fundamental rationale for the defence of ex turpi causa, that based on
the need to maintain internal consistency in the law, in the interest of
promoting the integrity of the justice system.  Again we have a situation where
permitting recovery in tort would amount to the law's giving with one hand what
it takes away with the other.  Again it can be said that to permit the claim
would be to create "an intolerable fissure in the law's conceptually
seamless web."                     There is weighty
authority which supports the proposition that the preservation of the integrity
of the justice system is the true rationale for the defence of illegality
associated with the maxim ex turpi causa non oritur actio.  My colleague
Justice Sopinka put the defence on this basis in Norberg v. Wynrib,
[1992] 2 S.C.R. 226, at p. 316:  My
colleague refers to the observation of Estey J. that the application of this
maxim to defeat a tort action has been rare.  Its use has been much less
frequent in recent times.  The courts have taken a less rigid view of its
purpose.  Emphasis is now placed on preserving the administration of justice
from the taint that would result from the approval of a transaction that a court
ought not to countenance.                     Cory J. does not
deny the importance of the integrity of the justice system as a rationale for
the defence.  He does, however, argue at p. 000 that such a rationale may be
too broad, since it is difficult to distinguish in many cases between what
Ford, infra, terms "public and merely judicial outrage", and
he adopts the warnings of Ford that "moral indignation must not be
mistaken for public policy".  On the other hand, he points out that tort
awards have been properly made in many cases where the plaintiff's conduct
might have offended a judge.  It seems to me that the narrow form of the
rationale which I have developed, premised on the need to prevent internal
inconsistency in the law, does not attract this criticism.  It is not the
judge's outrage but a concern for the coherence of the legal system which he or
she administers which is operative.                     I add a comment on
the criteria of "joint criminal activity", which has sometimes been
invoked as a condition of the application of ex turpi causa as a
defence:  see Tomlinson v. Harrison, [1972] 1 O.R. 670, and Tallow v.
Tailfeathers, supra.  Other courts have refused to adopt this
requirement, arguing against its anomalous and "paradoxical result": 
see, for example, the comments of Lambert J.A. in Betts v. Sanderson Estate,
supra, at p. 12.  When the ex turpi causa rule is understood to
be based on the need to maintain the integrity of our system of law, it becomes
clear that there is no reason to insist that both the plaintiff and the
defendant have been involved in the criminal or immoral activity in order that
the ex turpi causa maxim operate.                     I conclude that
there is a need in the law of tort for a principle which permits judges to deny
recovery to a plaintiff on the ground that to do so would undermine the
integrity of the justice system.  The power is a limited one.  Its use is
justified where allowing the plaintiff's claim would introduce inconsistency
into the fabric of the law, either by permitting the plaintiff to profit from
an illegal or wrongful act, or to evade a penalty prescribed by criminal law. 
Its use is not justified where the plaintiff's claim is merely for compensation
for personal injuries sustained as a consequence of the negligence of the
defendant.  I turn now to the question of the form in which this principle
should be cast.  (b)How
the Goal of Protecting the Integrity of the Judicial System is Best
Accomplished                     My colleague Cory
J. suggests that the defence of ex turpi causa non oritur actio should
be eliminated.  In its place, he suggests that the courts should be granted the
power to disallow a plaintiff's claim, on account of the plaintiff's wrongful
conduct, by finding that no duty of care arises.  This power is to be exercised
under the second branch of the test articulated in Anns v. Merton London
Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728, as approved and reformulated in this
Court in Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2.  On this
view, the plaintiff's illegal or immoral conduct may constitute a policy reason
for holding that the defendant owed the plaintiff no duty of care.                     A variant of this
approach has been adopted in Australia,  Gala v. Preston, supra,
and at pp. 251-55, and by the English Court of Appeal, Pitts v. Hunt, supra,
at pp. 355-56, 358.  This view holds that no duty should be postulated where it
is either impossible or improper for the courts to establish a
standard of care to govern the conduct in issue.  It is recognized that there
is no a priori reason in law why a duty cannot subsist between criminals or
wrongdoers.  However, some cases raise such "special and exceptional"
circumstances that a court cannot, or cannot in good conscience, enquire into
the standard of care needed to ground the duty of care in a particular
situation.  Unlike the view espoused by Cory J., the very possibility of a duty
arising is not denied; rather the court declines to enter into the question of
whether a duty exists.                     With great respect,
I am not sure that much is gained by replacing the defence of ex turpi causa
non oritur actio with a judicial discretion to negate, or to refuse to
consider, the duty of care.  Shifting the analysis to the issue of duty provides
no new insight into the fundamental question of when the courts should be
entitled to deny recovery in tort to a plaintiff on the ground of the
plaintiff's immoral or illegal conduct.  Moreover, it introduces a series of
new problems.  In the end I fear that it would prove more problematic than has
the defence of ex turpi causa non oritur actio.                     I begin by noting
that the duty approach, as expressed by Cory J., does not fully capture what we
mean when we invoke the principle of ex turpi causa.  If what I have
said above is correct, the ex turpi causa principle operates most
naturally as a defence because its purpose is to frustrate what would be, had ex
turpi causa no role, a complete cause of action.  Liability for tort arises
out of the relationship between the alleged tortfeasor and the injured
claimant.  The power of the court to deny recovery where it would undermine the
coherence of the legal system, on the other hand, represents concerns
independent of this relationship.  It is important, if only for the purposes of
conceptual clarity, that ex turpi causa operate, on those rare occasions
where its operation is justified, as a defence to frustrate tort claims which
could otherwise be fully made out, because this best expresses what is in fact decided. 
The courts make it clear that the defendant has acted wrongly in negligently
causing harm.  They also make it clear that responsibility for this wrong is
suspended only because concern for the integrity of the legal system trumps the
concern that the defendant be responsible.                     Donoghue v.
Stevenson, [1932]
A.C. 562 (H.L.), the source of our modern law of negligence and of the concept
of duty upon which it is founded, requires that a person exercise reasonable
care toward all his or her neighbours.  It does not say that the duty is owed
only to neighbours who have acted morally and legally.  Tort, unlike equity
which requires that the plaintiff come with clean hands, does not require a
plaintiff to have a certain moral character in order to bring an action before
the court.  The duty of care is owed to all persons who may reasonably
be foreseen to be injured by the negligent conduct.                     Policy concerns
unrelated to the legal rules which govern the relationship between the parties
to an action have not generally been considered in determining whether a duty
of care lies.  This follows from the fact that the justice which tort law seeks
to accomplish is justice between the parties to the particular action; the
court acts at the instance of the wronged party to rectify the damage caused by
a particular defendant:  See Ernest J. Weinrib, "The Special Morality of
Tort Law" (1989), 34 McGill L.J. 403, at p. 408.                     The relationship
between plaintiff and defendant which gives rise to their respective entitlement
and liability arises from a duty predicated on foreseeable consequences of
harm.  Since this is the concern, the legality or morality of the plaintiff's
conduct is an extrinsic consideration.  In the rare cases where concerns for
the administration of justice require that the extrinsic consideration of the
character of the plaintiff's conduct be considered, it seems to me that this is
better done by way of defence than by distorting the notion of the duty of care
owed by the defendant to the plaintiff.                     It can be argued
that the Australian rule avoids these doctrinal problems by recognizing that,
while a duty of care might otherwise lie, it cannot be raised because the
parties, by their conduct, have made it impossible or improper to consider the
claim.  In other words, that a duty could arise from the relationship between
the parties is not denied -- plaintiff is simply barred from relying on it. 
Thus the Australian High Court formally avoids conflict with the principle it
has articulated in earlier judgments: that no person becomes a caput lupinum,
or an outlaw, in the eyes of the civil law merely because that person was
engaged in some unlawful act: Henwood v. Municipal Tramways Trust
(1938), 60 C.L.R. 438, at p. 466.  On analysis, however, this notion that the
courts cannot, in certain circumstances, consider whether a duty of care arises
has the practical effect of denying a duty which would otherwise arise, and
hence, in substance, of violating the very principle against making certain
parties outlaws to which the court seeks to adhere.                     Beyond this, a more
practical objection can be raised:  why is it necessary to take the rather
novel step of positing judicial "inability" to investigate the
appropriate standard of care, instead of using the concept by which the law has
traditionally recognized considerations that prevent otherwise valid claims
from succeeding, that is, the concept of a defence to the action?                     The law of tort
recognizes many types of defence.  Some go to the relationship between the
parties; for example, the defence of volenti non fit injuria, the
plaintiff's assumption of risk.  But others go to matters unrelated to that
relationship.  Limitation periods, for example, are raised by way of defence. 
I see no reason to treat ex turpi causa differently.  Like a lapsed
limitation period, it represents a reason why a cause of action, which might
otherwise be fully made out,  should not succeed.                     The debate is not
purely academic.  There are practical reasons for finding that it is proper to
view ex turpi causa as a defence.  I mention three.  If the ex turpi
causa principle arises in the course of the investigation into whether
there exists a duty of care, the onus will lie on the plaintiff to show why he
or she should not be disentitled by way of his or her conduct.  It is well
established that the plaintiff bears the onus of establishing a valid cause of
action; if not, the plaintiff faces non-suit.  Thus a plaintiff whose conduct
is alleged to be immoral or illegal might be bound to disprove the illegality
or immorality in order to proceed with his or her action and avoid non-suit. 
On the other hand, if the matter is left as a defence, the onus rests on the
defendant.  As I have indicated, the power to preclude recovery on the basis of
the plaintiff's immoral or illegal conduct is an exceptional power,
operating in derogation of the general principles of tort applicable to all
persons in our society.  As such, it seems to me appropriate that the onus of
establishing the exceptional circumstances should rest with the defendant.  The
plaintiff should not be required to disprove the existence and relevance
of his or her illegal or immoral conduct; rather it should be for the defendant
to establish it.                     Second, the duty of
care approach is an all or nothing approach, and cannot be applied selectively
to discreet heads of damages.  As discussed above, cases may arise in which a
particular damage claim, e.g. for exemplary damages, or for damages for loss of
future earnings, might be seen as a claim to profit from an illegal act. 
Another damage claim in the same action, e.g., one for compensation for
personal injuries, could not be so regarded.  If the ex turpi causa
principle operates as a defence it is possible to distinguish between such claims. 
If it operates as a factor negating a duty of care, on the other hand, it is
not possible to treat an action in the selective manner that justice seems to
require.                     Finally,
consideration of illegal or immoral conduct at the stage of determining the duty
of care raises procedural problems.  A plaintiff may sue in both tort and
contract.  If the approach suggested by Cory J. is adopted, in the contract
claim, the plaintiff's illegal or immoral conduct would be raised as a defence
to the claim; in the tort claim, the same conduct would be an element of the
enquiry into the duty of care.  In other words, in contract the onus would be
on the defendant to prove the relevance of the plaintiff's conduct; in tort,
the onus would be on the plaintiff to disprove the relevance of the conduct. 
The resulting confusion would unnecessarily complicate the task of the trial
judge and the parties.                     These
considerations lead me to conclude that the important but limited power of the
court to prevent tort recovery on the ground of the plaintiff's illegal or
immoral conduct is better viewed as a defence than as a factor going to the
existence of a duty of care.  II.Application
to these Facts                     The doctrine of ex
turpi causa non oritur actio properly applies in tort where it will be
necessary to invoke the doctrine in order to maintain the internal consistency
of the law.  Most commonly, this concern will arise where a given plaintiff
genuinely seeks to profit from his or her illegal conduct, or where the claimed
compensation would amount to an evasion of a criminal sanction.  This appellant
need not be denied recovery since these grounds are not relevant to his claim. 
The compensation sought by this appellant is for injuries received.  This
compensation can be reduced to the extent of the appellant's contributory
negligence, but cannot be wholly denied by reason of his disreputable or
criminal conduct.  III.Disposition                     I share the views
of my colleague Cory J. on the issue of the appellant's contributory
negligence, and the apportionment of liability.  I would dispose of the case as
he proposes.  //Sopinka J.//                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     Sopinka
J. (dissenting) -- I have
had the opportunity of reading the reasons prepared by my colleagues Justices
Cory and McLachlin, and while I agree that the defence of ex turpi causa
does not apply, in my opinion, the appeal and the action should be dismissed on
the ground that the plaintiff failed to establish that the defendant owed a
duty to the plaintiff to take care in the circumstances.                     There are two
approaches to the development of new categories of liability in the law of
negligence.  There is the more traditional approach under which new categories
are created incrementally by extending liability in a particular case by
analogy to existing categories.  The other approach, which was enunciated by
Lord Wilberforce in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C.
728, involves two steps.  The first step recognizes a broad prima facie
duty of care based on foreseeability of harm.  This is followed by the
application of a second step to determine whether there is a sound policy
reason why the duty should be negated or limited.  The traditional approach was
reasserted by Brennan J. in Sutherland Shire Council v. Heyman
(1985), 60 A.L.R. 1, and adopted by the House of Lords in Caparo Industries
p.l.c. v. Dickman, [1990] 1 All E.R. 568, at p. 574:  We
must now, I think, recognise the wisdom of the words of Brennan J in the
High Court of Australia in Sutherland Shire Council v Heyman . . . at
43-44, where he said:                     `It
is preferable in my view, that the law should develop novel categories of
negligence incrementally and by analogy with established categories, rather
than by a massive extension of a prima facie duty of care restrained only by
indefinable "considerations which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit
the scope of the duty or the class of person to whom it is owed".'                     This approach was
further re-affirmed by the House of Lords in Murphy v. Brentwood District
Council, [1991] 1 A.C. 398, at p. 461.                     Our Court has
relied on both approaches.  The Anns approach has been applied in
dealing with the liability of public authorities while the traditional approach
has been favoured when dealing with new categories of liability relating to
private litigants.  Accordingly, Anns was applied in Kamloops (City
of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2, and in Just v. British Columbia,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228, but the traditional approach was followed in Jordan
House Ltd. v. Menow, [1974] S.C.R. 239, and Crocker v. Sundance
Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1 S.C.R. 1186.                     In my opinion, on
either approach no duty of care rested on the defendant in this case.  I will
examine this question, first on the basis of the traditional approach and then
on the basis of the Anns approach.                     The application of
the traditional approach involves an examination of the principles in Jordan
House and Sundance in order to determine whether they can be
extended to find liability in this case.  In those cases as well as this liability
was sought to be based on a failure to act as opposed to active conduct.  In
other words, it was alleged that the defendant failed to do something for the
care and safety of the plaintiff which the defendant ought to have done.  In
these circumstances the common law required special circumstances which created
a duty to act.  The good Samaritan deserves the world's accolades because he
had no legal duty to act and would not have been civilly liable if he, too, had
crossed over to the other side as did the Levite and the priest.                     In Jordan House,
the Court considered the liability of the owner of a public hotel whose
employees ejected a patron to whom they had served large quantities of beer
before turning him loose onto a busy highway knowing that he was incapable of
taking care for his own safety.  Laskin J., as he then was, who wrote the
judgment for the majority (Ritchie J., Judson J. concurring, wrote a separate
judgment agreeing in the result) stated, at pp. 247-48:  If
the hotel's only involvement was the supplying of the beer consumed by Menow,
it would be difficult to support the imposition of common law liability upon it
for injuries suffered by Menow after being shown the door of the hotel and
after leaving the hotel.  The special circumstances creating the
duty were the existence of an invitor-invitee relationship and the degree of
control exercised by the defendant.  At p. 248, Laskin J. continued:  The
hotel, however, was not in the position of persons in general who see an
intoxicated person who appears to be unable to control his steps.  It was in an
invitor-invitee relationship with Menow as one of its patrons, and it was
aware, through its employees, of his intoxicated condition, a condition which,
on the findings of the trial judge, it fed in violation of applicable liquor
licence and liquor control legislation.                     Laskin J. found
that imposing liability was analogous to the finding of liability in Dunn v.
Dominion Atlantic Railway Co. (1920), 60 S.C.R. 310, a case in which a
railway company was found to have breached a duty of care to a passenger when
it put him off the train at an unlighted station due to his unruly and drunken
behaviour.                     In Sundance,
Wilson J. found it a logical and inevitable extension of Dunn and Jordan
House to saddle a ski operator with liability when a drunken patron was
permitted to engage in a risky sport carried on at the ski resort by the
defendant operator.  At p. 1198, she states:                     The
jurisprudence in this area seems to me to make this conclusion inevitable. 
When a railway company removes a drunken passenger from one of its trains it
owes a duty of care to this passenger to take reasonable steps to see that the
passenger does not come to harm (Dunn v. Dominion Atlantic Railway Co.
. . .).  Likewise, when a hotel ejects a drunken patron, it owes a
duty of care to the patron to take certain steps to ensure that the patron
arrives home safely (Jordan House).  It would seem a fortiori that when
a ski resort established a competition in a highly dangerous sport and runs the
competition for profit, it owes a duty of care towards visibly intoxicated
participants.                     I do not find that
liability in this case is either analogous nor a logical extension of those
cases.  In each of the above the defendant derived a commercial advantage from
the presence of the plaintiff on its premises.  In Jordan House and Sundance,
there was an invitor-invitee relationship.  In Dunn, the relationship
was that of a common carrier to a passenger.  In each of these relationships
there was a positive duty to take reasonable measures for the safety of persons
who were invited to use the premises or facilities.  When, as a result of an
excessive use of some of the facilities, the patron becomes an undesirable
invitee, it would seem to follow as a logical extension of that duty that the
owner cannot simply eject the invitee especially when the latter has become
more vulnerable to injury as a result of the commercial use of the owner's
facilities.  In the case of Sundance, it was the dangerous activity on
the owner's premises which injured the plaintiff who had become unfit to
participate by excessive drinking.                     The situation here
is quite different.  No relationship of invitor-invitee nor anything similar
existed.  The defendant derived no commercial advantage from the activities of
the plaintiff.  Both were equally intoxicated and neither could be said to be
more in control of the situation than the other.  In my view, the special
circumstances which called for the creation of a positive duty of care in the
cases which I have reviewed are totally absent here.  To extend liability would
not amount to the incremental extension of liability but rather a quantum leap.                     I arrive at the
same conclusion employing the two-step Anns approach.  It was formulated
by Lord Wilberforce at pp. 751-52:                     Through
the trilogy of cases in this House -- Donoghue v. Stevenson
[1932] A.C. 562, Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. v. Heller & Partners
Ltd. [1964] A.C. 465, and Dorset Yacht Co. Ltd v. Home Office
[1970] A.C. 1004, the position has now been reached that in order to establish
that a duty of care arises in a particular situation, it is not necessary to
bring the facts of that situation within those of previous situations in which
a duty of care has been held to exist.  Rather the question has to be
approached in two stages.  First one has to ask whether, as between the alleged
wrongdoer and the person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient
relationship of proximity or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable
contemplation of the former, carelessness on his part may be likely to cause
damage to the latter -- in which case a prima facie duty of care arises. 
Secondly, if the first question is answered affirmatively, it is necessary to
consider whether there are any considerations which ought to negative, or to
reduce or limit the scope of the duty of the class of person to whom it is owed
or the damages to which a breach of it may give rise:  see Dorset Yacht
case [1970] A.C. 1004, per Lord Reid at p. 1027.                     The second step is
necessitated by the fact that if foreseeability itself were sufficient to
ground liability, the net would be cast too wide.  In the failure to act cases,
for example, liability would attach when there is no duty to act.  Accordingly,
if the defendant saw a stranger about to walk off a cliff of which the former
was aware but which was unknown to the stranger, there would be liability for
failure to warn.  This is but one example in which no liability exists
notwithstanding foreseeability of harm.  No unifying principle has been
developed for the application of the second step.  Moreover, in view of its
purpose as a policy limitation on the broad reach of the prima facie
duty of care created by the first step, it may be neither possible nor
desirable to attempt to reduce this step to one unifying principle.                     Some principles
have, however, been developed which constitute limitations on the duty of care. 
The ex turpi causa and volenti non fit injuria doctrines are
examples.  Both have been supported, at least in part, by reference to the
policy that in the circumstances calling for their application, the plaintiff
would have no reasonable expectation that the defendant would have an
obligation to exercise care for the plaintiff's safety.                     The policy of
reasonable expectation has been applied as a factor in the broad application of
the ex turpi causa principle.  For example, in Gala v. Preston
(1991), 172 C.L.R. 243, the High Court of Australia dealt with a claim for
damages for personal injuries by one of two young persons involved in a serious
accident while joy-riding in a stolen car. The majority summed up the rationale
for the application of ex turpi causa in the following passage, at p.
254:  In
the special and exceptional circumstances that prevailed, the participants
could not have had any reasonable basis for expecting that a driver of the
vehicle would drive it according to ordinary standards of competence and care.                     While the conduct
of the parties is relevant in assessing the reasonable expectation of the
parties, the fact that the conduct is punishable as a criminal offence bears
little or no relation to these expectations.  In my opinion, reasonable
expectation is not the proper basis for denying recovery by reason of
participating in criminal conduct.  The true basis for denying recovery in such
circumstances is the court's reluctance to lend its assistance to persons
involved in serious criminal activity when to do so would reflect adversely on
the administration of justice.  This explanation of ex turpi causa was
adopted by me in Norberg v. Wynrib, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 226, as pointed out
in the reasons of Justice Gonthier herein.  I would apply the same reasoning in
this case and on that basis conclude that the administration of justice would
suffer no disrepute in the eyes of the public if the Court lends its assistance
to the appellant.                     Although the
absence of reasonable expectations is not the appropriate foundation for the
application of the principles of ex turpi causa, this factor is
otherwise a material policy consideration relating to the existence of a duty
of care.  Apart from the influence of this factor in leading some courts to
extend the reach of ex turpi causa, it lies at the root of the defence
of volenti non fit injuria.                     The volenti
defence is another example of the application of policy to negate a duty of
care which would otherwise arise.  It has been seriously circumscribed by
reason of statutory apportionment provisions.  It now only applies if the
plaintiff has expressly or impliedly assumed both the physical and the legal
risk.  See Sundance, supra, at p. 1202.  Where this occurs
it is obvious that the plaintiff cannot have any expectation of any duty of
care on the part of the defendant which can form the basis of an action.  This
does not, however, exhaust the operation of the policy not to find a duty of
care in circumstances in which neither party would have any reasonable
expectation of it.  There will be other circumstances in which the policy will
and should be applied.  This does not mean that the limitations placed on the volenti
defence are being eroded by reintroducing liability through the back door.  A
passenger who consents to be driven by an obviously intoxicated driver can
still have a reasonable expectation of care on the part of the driver.  The
policy would not be applied to rule out liability in these circumstances.  The
passenger is usually found to be contributorily negligent, reflecting the fact
that having those expectations showed a lack of care for his or her own
safety.  But the circumstances out of which an action arises may be such that,
apart from consenting to an activity which can still be carried out with
reasonable care, the plaintiff cannot have any reasonable expectation of
receiving care nor the defendant of providing it.                     What emerges from
this discussion of the two examples to which I have referred, namely ex
turpi causa and volenti non fit injuria, is that there exists a
definite policy not to recognize a duty of care in circumstances in which none
could be expected.  Criminal conduct can be the basis for negating a duty of
care not because it is criminal but because it can be inferred from the conduct
itself, apart from its criminal character, that no reasonable expectation of
care existed on the part of the person injured.  Consent to a risk of harm such
as to attract the defence of volenti is another example of this policy. 
It is an example in which the absence of an expectation of care is explicitly
demonstrated by a consent to the very conduct out of which the duty would
otherwise arise.  Consent is but one example as to how the absence of
reasonable expectation can be established.  The absence of reasonable expectation
can also be established on the basis of the relationship of the parties and
their conduct in all the circumstances of the case.                     In this case, the
breach of duty alleged is that the defendant allowed the plaintiff to drive
when the plaintiff asked the defendant to do so.  It strikes me as
extraordinary to suggest that when making the request the plaintiff could at
the same time have had any expectation that the defendant owed the plaintiff a
duty to take care for his safety by refusing the request.  This is not a case
of the plaintiff's being guilty of contributory negligence in having such an
expectation, but rather, it is a case in which the plaintiff had no such
expectation.  It is, therefore, not a case for apportionment of liability
because no liability arises.                     I would dismiss the
appeal with costs.  //Gonthier J.//                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     Gonthier
J. -- I have had the
benefit of the reasons of Justices Cory and McLachlin.  I concur in their
disposition of the case and agree for the reasons which they give that on the
facts of this case the respondent had a duty of care and a defence of ex
turpi causa was not open to him, be it viewed as such or as a matter of
public policy.  I also share their reasons inasmuch as they support a
restricted and more carefully circumscribed application of the defence of ex
turpi causa in tort cases.  Even though it has given rise to some confusion
in the past, its principle, properly understood in the light of the examples of
its proper application given by my colleagues, and their comments, is in my
view valid and has an important role to play in the limited circumstances to
which it applies.  It reflects one facet of public policy which is best
captured in the statement of its purpose adopted by Justice Sopinka in his
reasons in Norberg v. Wynrib, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 226, at p. 316, from
those of Taylor J. in Mack v. Enns (1981), 30 B.C.L.R. 337 (S.C.), at
p. 345:  The
purpose of the rule today must be to defend the integrity of the legal system,
and the repute in which the courts ought to be held by law-abiding members of
the community.                     While this
statement is broad in potential scope, it is so by reason of the nature of the
concept which it expresses.  I view my colleagues' comments as helpful
guidelines for the application of the principle but, in my opinion, it is not
appropriate to define exhaustively a priori the circumstances or particular
grounds for its application.  //Cory J.//                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     Cory
J. -- Three questions
must be answered in order to resolve this appeal.  First, does a person who has
the care and control of a motor vehicle owe a duty of care to another who is
known to be impaired to deny that impaired person permission to drive the vehicle? 
Secondly, does the so-called principle of law, known by the maxim ex turpi
causa non oritur actio, provide the respondent with a complete defence to
this action?  Finally, did the trial judge err in his apportionment of
liability in this case?  Factual Background                     The respondent
Hebert owned what he described as a souped-up muscle car.  He had driven it at
speeds in excess of 200 km/hr.  No doubt it exuded a compelling seductive charm
that would attract young men of all ages.  On a Friday evening, in July of
1986, the respondent drove his car to a party.  The appellant Hall, who was
known to the respondent, was also invited.  He walked over from his residence
to join the festivities and had every intention of walking home when the party
was over.                     The respondent
Hebert drove his girlfriend home about midnight.  She testified that he did not
appear to be drunk at that time.  Hebert then returned to the party, with a
case of beer in the trunk of his car.  There is no doubt that Hebert consumed
several beers at the party.  He knew that the appellant had consumed at least
eight or nine beers by the time the party was breaking up around 1:30 a.m.  In
any event, the respondent invited the appellant to join him.  The two young men
then drove to a baseball field.  There the respondent brought out six bottles
of beer from the trunk of the car and shared these with the appellant.                     When they had
finished drinking the six bottles of beer, the respondent, with the appellant
still as a passenger, drove to Graveyard Road.  This road is a gravel spur,
which leads a few hundred feet up on an incline.  It was unlit and, more
significantly, dropped off sharply on one side to a gravel pit.  The road was
so rough that the car keys fell out of the ignition and the vehicle stalled. 
The young men could not find the car keys.  The respondent determined that the
car could only be started by "a rolling start".  To that end he
backed the car part-way down the hill and turned it around so that it was
facing downhill.  It was by then about 3:00 a.m.  At this point the appellant
asked if he could drive the car and the respondent replied, "Sure,
okay".                     With the appellant
driving the vehicle, the roll start was attempted.  The appellant perhaps over
accelerated.  In any event he lost control.  The car left the road, went down
the steep slope to the gravel pit and turned upside down.  The two young men
were able to walk away from the accident and reached the home of an
acquaintance, who described both of them as being drunk.  It was later
discovered that the appellant had suffered significant head injuries.   The Courts Below  Trial Division                     The trial judge
held that although the appellant drove the respondent's car, the respondent
could still be liable for negligence as he "had a primary obligation to
remain sober enough to preserve his ability to drive or his ability to
determine the [appellant's] or any other person's ability and competence to drive
before delivering care and control of his car to him."  He found that the
respondent was negligent in concluding that the appellant could drive and in
permitting him to drive on the unlit difficult gravel road.                     At trial the
respondent raised the defence of ex turpi causa non oritur actio
alleging that both parties were engaged in a criminal enterprise and as a
result, that he could not be held liable.  The trial judge decided that the
mere acceptance of a ride knowing that the driver was impaired did not constitute
a common enterprise.  He found that the only joint enterprise of the parties
was the consumption of alcohol in a public place contrary to the provincial
liquor act.  That conduct he found was finished well before the appellant drove
the vehicle.  He concluded that there was then no link between the illegality
of drinking in a public place and the subsequent actions of the respondent
which led to the accident.  Further, he expressed the view that a breach of the
liquor control act was not misconduct of such a moral gravity that the court
should decline to compensate the appellant.                     When he apportioned
the liability he found that the respondent was more responsible for the
accident than the appellant and apportioned negligence with 75 percent
attributable to the respondent and 25 percent to the appellant.  Court of Appeal (1991), 53 B.C.L.R. (2d) 20l                     The Court of Appeal
allowed the respondent's appeal.  The majority was of the view that the
respondent owner did not owe a duty of care to the appellant and that
accordingly, the appellant (at p. 206) "could not recover damages
against him".                     Gibbs J.A., for the
majority, concluded that the principle of ex turpi causa non oritur actio
was applicable and the action could be dismissed on that basis as well.  He
wrote, at p. 210, that "until the Supreme Court of Canada rules
otherwise there can be little doubt that the defence of ex turpi causa nor
oritur actio is available here in this kind of action".  He went further
and determined that the application of the principle did not depend upon a
joint criminal enterprise; rather, the defence was available wherever the
conduct of the plaintiff giving rise to the claim is so tainted with
criminality or culpable immorality that, as a matter of public policy, the
court will not assist him or her to recover damages.  He wrote at
pp. 210-11:  Accordingly,
to the extent that either of Funk v. Clapp [(1986), 35 B.C.L.R. (2d)
222] or Betts v. Sanderson Estate [(1988), 31 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1] leads to
the conclusion that the defence is confined to cases of joint criminal
enterprise or applies only in contracts, neither should any longer be accepted
as good law in this province. . . .                     Further,
the statement in Funk v. Clapp at p. 233 that the doctrine of ex turpi
causa no longer applies where there is legislation respecting contributory
negligence that includes both "fault" or  "conduct" as well
as "negligence" and citing with approval the decision Lewis v.
Sayers, [1973] O.R. 591 . . . can no longer be considered to be
an accurate statement of the law of this province.                     In her minority
reasons, Southin J.A. held that the principle ex turpi causa had no place
in the law of tort.  However, she found that there was no duty of care owed by
the respondent to the appellant in this case.  She wrote at p. 216:                     I
hold that a person who drives while impaired a motor vehicle belonging to
another and thereby injures himself cannot recover damages from that other on
the footing that that other person had a duty in the circumstances not to
enable him to commit the crime whereby he injured himself.  Analysis                     In order to
determine what role, if any, the doctrine of ex turpi causa should play
in tort cases, it is necessary to consider briefly the nature of a tort, its
history and development.  The Essence and Aim of Tort Law                     It is difficult to
define the nature of a tort.  Indeed one of the greatest writers in the field,
W. L. Prosser has expressed the opinion that it should not be defined.  Perhaps
it is easiest to begin by saying what it is not.  A tort is not a crime.  Although
criminal law and tort law grew from the same roots they are today quite
distinct and different.  Criminal law is designed to provide security for the
citizens of the state.  It attempts to define that conduct which society finds
abhorrent and therefore necessary to control.  Those who commit crimes are
prosecuted by the state and are subject to punishment which reflects the
state's or society's abhorrence for the particular crime.                     Nor is the law of
torts contractual in its nature.  Contract law seeks to enforce the rights
which arise out of an agreement whose parties have voluntarily agreed to be
bound by its terms.  The law of contract seeks to enforce the terms of the
agreement specifically or provide compensation for its breach.  Nor can torts
fall under the title of quasi-contractual relief.  That remedy seeks to prevent
unjust enrichment that might, for example, arise out of payment of money under
mistake.                     The law of tort
covers a much wider field than does contract or quasi- contract.  It provides a
means whereby compensation, usually in the form of damages, may be paid for
injuries suffered by a party as a result of the wrongful conduct of others.  It
may encompass damages for personal injury suffered, for example, in a motor
vehicle accident or as a result of falling in dangerous premises.  It can cover
damages occasioned to property.  It may include compensation for injury caused
to the reputation of a business or a product.  It may provide damages for
injury to honour in cases of defamation and libel.  A primary object of the law
of tort is to provide compensation to persons who are injured as a result of
the actions of others.  W. L. Prosser puts the aim of tort law this way in Handbook
of the Law of Torts (4th ed. 1971), at p. 6, quoting Cecil A. Wright,
"Introduction to the Law of Torts" (1944), 8 Cambridge L.J.
238, in this way:  . .
. in short, doing all the things that constitute modern living -- there
must of necessity be losses, or injuries of many kinds sustained as a result of
the activities of others.  The purpose of the law of torts is to adjust these
losses, and to afford compensation for injuries sustained by one person as the
result of the conduct of another.                     Allen M.
Linden, Canadian Tort Law (4th ed. 1988), describes it in this way at
p. 3:  First
and foremost, tort law is a compensator.  A successful action puts money into
the pocket of the claimant.  This payment is supposed to reimburse him for the
economic and psychic damages he has suffered at the hands of the defendant.                     Although
compensation may be the primary purpose of tort law, it must be noted that
aggravated or exemplary damages which may sometimes be awarded are aimed at
punishment and deterrence.  Tort actions fulfil a role in appeasing the victim
and may serve as a means of educating the public, as well as producers and
manufactures, as to the dangers involved in the use of certain products or
processes.  Duty of Care and Public Policy                     On what basis will
compensation be paid for damages in a tort action based upon a claim of
negligence?  In order for a court to award compensation, it must be determined
that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty of care.  Only if such a duty
exists, can the breach of that duty result in payment of compensation or
damages.  The classical expression of the duty of care was set out in Donoghue
v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562, at pp. 580-81.  There it was explained
that a duty of care arises when there is a likelihood of harm being occasioned
due to one's actions to a person in a sufficient relationship of legal
proximity to give rise to such a duty.  The notion of "legal
proximity" has been set out in terms of whether the risk of harm ought to
have been reasonably foreseeable to the defendant.  It has been recognized that
there are instances in which a person may not have actually anticipated the
harm but ought reasonably to have done so.  In those circumstances, the person
will be found liable in negligence.                     Nevertheless it has
been observed that foreseeability in and of itself is not the only element in
determining whether there is a duty of care.  In Anns v. Merton London
Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728, the House of Lords considered the
importance of considerations beyond foreseeability and proximity, setting out a
two-stage test for its determination.  This test was adopted by this Court in Kamloops
(City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2.  Wilson J., speaking for the
majority, reformulated Lord Wilberforce's test in Anns, supra, in
the following manner (at pp. 10-11):  (1)is
there a sufficiently close relationship between the parties . . . so
that, in the reasonable contemplation of the authority, carelessness on its
part might cause damage to that person?  If so,  (2)are
there any considerations which ought to negative or limit (a) the scope of the
duty and (b) the class of persons to whom it is owed or (c) the damages to
which a breach of it may give rise?                     This Court very
recently reconfirmed both its adoption of the Anns, standard and of
Wilson J.'s reformulation of it in London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel
International Ltd., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299.                     When a court
considers whether a duty of care exists, it must of course take into account
all the circumstances of the alleged wrongdoing.  That will involve a
consideration of the facts which are pertinent to each case.  The doctrine of stare
decisis means that all others in the same position as the plaintiff and
defendant in the particular case will also be affected.  This is one of the
reasons the court must take public policy into account.  This was first clearly
and frankly recognized in the dicta of Lord Denning in Dorset Yacht
Co. v. Home Office, [1969] 2 Q.B. 412, at p. 426, where he wrote:  It
is, I think, at bottom a matter of public policy which we, as judges, must
resolve.  This talk of "duty" or "no duty" is simply a way
of limiting the range of liability for negligence.                     That public policy
must be taken into consideration in tort cases was ably expressed Winfield
and Jolowicz on Tort (12th ed. 1984), by W. V. H. Rogers, at
p. 75:  The
use of the word "policy" indicates no more than that the court must
decide not simply whether there is or is not a duty, but whether there should
or should not be one, taking into account both the established framework of the
law and also the implications that a decision one way or the other may have for
the operation of the law in our society.  For long the judges, while
undoubtedly aware of it, displayed a reluctance to admit openly that the
application of a "legal" rule is insufficient to deal with novel
questions about the scope of the tort of negligence, but the post-war period
has seen an increasing readiness to admit that considerations of policy must,
from time to time, play a major part in the making of decisions.                     This same principle
was recognized and supported by Prosser in his text, supra, at pp.
325-26.  Thus it can be seen that although the Donoghue v. Stevenson principle
may be taken as the starting point for determining whether a duty of care
exists, societal concerns must also be addressed under the heading of public
policy.  Thus even if a duty of care is found to exist, the court will have to
determine whether, for public policy reasons, that duty should be limited in
part or in whole.  This approach is entirely consistent with the principle set
out in Anns, supra, which as we have seen has been adopted by
this Court.  Thus the courts in Canada have expanded the consideration of the
notion of a duty of care to meet the developing needs and concerns of society.                     The same principle
has been recognized in London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne and Nagel International
Ltd., supra.  There La Forest J. wrote at p. 319:  In
my view, the second branch of the Anns test is broad enough to allow for
the consideration, where relevant, of the factors the English courts have
considered in the context of their just and reasonable test.  It is now well
established that policy considerations may in fact negate the existence of the
duty; see Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse, [[1986] 2 S.C.R. 147]; Leigh
& Sillivan Ltd. v. Aliakmon Shipping Co., [1986] A.C. 785 (H.L.); Norwich
City Council v. Harvey, [1989] 1 All E.R. 1180 (C.A.); Pacific
Associates Inc. v. Baxter, [[1990] 1 Q.B. 993].  Public Policy and the Impaired
Plaintiff                     Tort law has
recognized society's concern for the danger posed by those who drive while
impaired.  A response to this concern has been judicial recognition that
reasonable steps must be taken to prevent those who have consumed alcohol from
driving and to make the supplier of alcohol responsible for the injuries caused
to and by the drunken driver.  See for example Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow,
[1974] S.C.R. 239.  Further, the courts have properly demonstrated their
willingness to impose a duty upon those who control a car so that they will be
properly held liable for permitting impaired persons to drive their vehicles. 
See Hempler v. Todd (1970), 14 D.L.R. (3d) 637 (Man. Q.B.); Ontario
Hospital Services Commission v. Borsoski (1973), 54 D.L.R. (3d) 339 (Ont.
H.C.); and Betts v. Sanderson Estate (1988), 31 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1 (C.A.). 
This Court cited Hempler, supra, and Borsoski, supra,
with approval in Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1
S.C.R. 1186, where a drunken plaintiff recovered damages for injuries suffered
when he was sliding downhill in an inner tube.  There Wilson J. wrote, supra,
at pp. 1196-97:                     The
general approach taken in Jordan House has been applied in a number of
cases.  Car owners who have permitted or instructed impaired persons to drive
their cars have been found liable (see:  Hempler v. Todd (1970), 14
D.L.R. (3rd) 637 (Man. Q.B.), and Ontario Hospital Services Commission v.
Borsoski (1973), 54 D.L.R. (3rd) 339 (Ont. H.Ct.)) as has the owner of a
motorcycle who allowed a young unlicensed driver to use it (see:  Stermer v.
Lawson (1977), 70 D.L.R. (3d) 366 (B.C.S.C.)).  The common thread running
through these cases is that one is under a duty not to place another person in
a position where it is foreseeable that that person could suffer injury.  The
plaintiff's inability to handle the situation in which he or she has been
placed--either through youth, intoxication or other incapacity--is an element
in determining how foreseeable the injury is.                     These cases clearly
demonstrate that the impairment of the plaintiff does not necessarily
constitute a bar to recovery of damages.                     In sum it can be
seen that the remedy provided by the law of tort is a flexible one.  It is
based upon a desire to achieve fairness by compensating, in appropriate cases,
those who have been injured by the conduct of others.  It must remain flexible
and be permitted to grow with a changing society.                     Similarly tort
cases, which would necessarily involve the consideration of public policy as a
bar to recovery, should determine the applicable principles on a case by case
basis.  These principles, like those applicable in the law of tort, should be
flexible and evolve with our ever changing society.  What may be contrary to
public policy in our decade may be perfectly acceptable in the next.  Contributory Negligence                     During the course
of the development of tort various concepts have been put forward which were
aimed at limiting its scope.  In earlier days  the defence of contributory
negligence constituted an absolute bar to recovery in a tort action. 
Contributory negligence has been defined as "unreasonable conduct on the
part of a victim which, along with the negligence of others, has in law
contributed to the victim's own injuries" (see Lewis N. Klar, Tort
Law, at p. 299).  It is hard to say how the doctrine grew or upon what
foundation it was based.  Perhaps it arose from the court's desire either to
control the tendency of juries to find in favour of plaintiffs or to use it as
a means of exercising a type of public policy control over recovery in tort
cases.  In any event, it was first enunciated in Butterfield v. Forrester
(1809), 11 East. 60, 103 E.R. 926 (K.B.).  This decision it should be noted,
coincides with the Duke of Wellington's Peninsula campaign when muskets were
still one of the principal military weapons.                      It was the
recognition of the basic unfairness of the contributory negligence defence that
led to the passage of Acts providing for apportionment of liability (Negligence
Acts) in most common law jurisdictions including all the common law provinces
of Canada.  This legislation recognized that accidents are frequently caused by
the negligence of two or more parties and that fairness requires that the
liability for the damages should be apportioned among all the parties who are
responsible in accordance with the extent of their responsibility.                     There is in my view
a great deal to be said for the position that apportionment legislation goes
far towards removing ex turpi causa as a defence.  So far as possible
the doctrine should be confined to the contractual sphere where it serves a
useful purpose.  Volenti Non Fit Injuria                     Another mechanism
aimed at limiting the scope of tort actions is the defence known by the maxim volenti
non fit injuria.  The maxim stands for the proposition that no injury is
done to one who consents.  The defence applies both to intentional and
accidental harms.  Salmond on Torts, supra, at p. 496 ff. would
draw a distinction between the two, characterizing the defence as either a
negation of the duty of care or as a bar to recovery.  See also the reasons of
Justice McLachlin in London Drugs, supra; Clerk & Lindsell
on Torts (16th ed. 1989), at pp. 112-13; Fleming, The Law of Torts
(7th ed. 1987), at p. 265; Salmond and Heuston on the Law of Torts
(19th ed. 1987) at pp. 557-58; Linden, supra, at pp. 448-49. 
No matter how the maxim or principle is characterized, volenti non fit
injuria, like the common law defence of contributory negligence,
constituted an absolute bar to recovery.  While apportionment legislation such
as the various negligence acts has reduced or removed entirely the draconian
effects of the contributory negligence defence, volenti remains as a
complete defence.  Yet it has, in recent years, been severely restricted in its
application.                     In order for the
doctrine of volenti to apply, there must be either an express or implied
assumption of the risk of the activity which caused the damage.  That is to
say, both parties to the activity must have agreed that they would participate
in it regardless of the risk of injury and give up their right to sue should
injury occur as a result of the agreed upon activity.  It must be observed that
the consent goes to the legal as opposed to the physical risk of harm (see Lehnert
v. Stein, [1963] S.C.R. 38).                     The defence of volenti
was advanced in this Court in several cases, particularly pertaining to
passengers in motor vehicles.  However, it is significant that the defence has
rarely been accepted.  See for example Car and General Insurance Corp. v.
Seymour, [1956] S.C.R. 322; Lehnert v. Stein, supra; and Eid
v. Dumas, [1969] S.C.R. 668.                     In Dube v. Labar,
[1986] 1 S.C.R. 649, at p. 658, Estey J. described the very limited scope
of the doctrine in these words:  . .
. volenti will arise only where the circumstances are such that it is
clear that the plaintiff, knowing of the virtually certain risk of harm, in
essence bargained away his right to sue for injuries incurred as a result of
any negligence on the defendant's part.  The acceptance of the risk may be
express or may arise by necessary implication from the conduct of the parties,
but it will arise ... only where there can truly be said to be an understanding
on the part of both parties that the defendant assumed no responsibility to
take due care for the safety of the plaintiff, and that the plaintiff did not
expect him to.                     The volenti
defence acts as a complete bar to recovery.  Although it has not been the
subject of legislation, it has been very severely limited in its application. 
Perhaps the judicial limitation was well merited in light of the harsh academic
criticism of the defence.  See Prosser, supra, at p. 454.  Before
it can operate as a defence, the plaintiff must not only consent to accept the
risk of harm but also must bargain away his or her right to sue for injuries
that may result from the dangerous activity.  The doctrine will only be applied
where it can truly be said that there is an understanding on the part of both
parties that the defendant assumed no responsibility to take care for the
safety of the plaintiff and the plaintiff did not expect him or her to do so. 
Clearly, the volenti defence will only be applicable in a narrow range
of cases.                     Thus the defence of
contributory negligence has been eliminated by legislation and that of volenti
severely restricted by the courts.  There remains to be considered the third
defence put forward as an absolute bar to recovery in tort actions.  That
defence skulks furtively behind the Latin maxim ex turpi causa non oritur
actio.  Ex Turpi Causa Non Oritur Actio                     The maxim has been
translated to mean "no right of action arises from a base cause". 
Its effect is to provide that wrong doing on the part of a plaintiff can be
used to bar recovery.  Historically, the doctrine first arose, and in my view
was correctly applied, in contract cases to bar a plaintiff from using the
court to enforce an illegal contract.  Unfortunately, the doctrine has found
its way into the realm of tort law.  The application of the principle by way of
defence completely bars recovery.  Because the results may often be disastrous
and manifestly unfair, various methods have been used by courts in an attempt
to either circumscribe or avoid its application.  Application of the Doctrine                     The defence has not
been frequently advanced in tort cases.  When it has been put forward its
consideration by the courts has been so inconsistent that it has given rise to
a great deal of well merited criticism.  See G. H. L. Fridman,
"The Wrongdoing Plaintiff" (1972), 18 McGill L.J. 275;
Ernest J. Weinrib, "Illegality as a Tort Defence" (1976),
26 U.T.L.J. 28; D. Gibson, "Comment:  Illegality of
Plaintiff's Conduct as a Defence" (1969), 47 Can. Bar Rev. 89;
Jane P. Swanton, "Plaintiff a Wrongdoer:  Joint Complicity in an
Illegal Enterprise as a Defence to Negligence" (1981), 9 Sydney L.
Rev. 304; W. J. Ford, "Tort and Illegality:  The Ex
Turpi Causa Defence in Negligence Law" (1977-78), 11 Melbourne
U.L.R. 32, 164; Charles Debattista, "Ex Turpi Causa Returns to
the English Law of Torts:  Taking Advantage of a Wrong Way Out" (1984), 13
Anglo-Am. L.R. 15; Neville H. Crago, "The Defence of Illegality in
Negligence Actions" (1964), 4 Melbourne U.L.R. 534; Harold S.
Davis, "The Plaintiff's Illegal Act as a Defense in Actions of Tort"
(1904-05), 18 Harv. L. Rev. 505; Bruce MacDougall, "Ex
Turpi Causa:  Should a Defence Arise From a Base Cause?" (1991), 55 Sask.
L. Rev. 1; P. Legrand Jr., "La dynamique de l'impunité: 
autour de la défense d'ex turpi causa en common law des délits
civils" (1991), 36 McGill L.J. 609.                     The inconsistency
in the application of ex turpi causa makes it somewhat difficult to
summarize the approaches that the courts have taken.  However, there do appear
to be four distinct opinions expressed regarding the effect of a plaintiff's illegal
act.  In early American cases, the illegal act of the plaintiff was said to go
to causation.  (See Harold S. Davis, "The Plaintiff's Illegal Act as a
Defense in Actions of Tort", supra.)  This approach has sometimes
been adopted in Canada (see, e.g., Canada Cement LaFarge Ltd. v. British
Columbia Lightweight Aggregate Ltd., [1983] 1 S.C.R. 452, at p. 477
and the reasons of La Forest J. in Norberg v. Wynrib, [1992] 2
S.C.R. 226, at p. 262.  In other cases the illegal act is said to negate
the duty of care (see, e.g., the Australian case Smith v. Jenkins
(1970), 119 C.L.R. 397 (Aust. H.C.), at p. 400).  In still others the
illegal act is said to make the determination of a standard of care impossible
(see, e.g., Pitts v. Hunt, [1990] 3 All E.R. 344 (C.A.), and Progress
and Properties Ltd. v. Craft (1976), 135 C.L.R. 651 (Aust. H.C.)). 
Finally, others have suggested that illegal acts of the plaintiff should act as
a bar to recovery of damages.  (See discussion in MacDougall, supra.)  Justification for the Application of
the Doctrine in Tort                     No matter how
inconsistently it has been applied, there have been three principal
justifications put forward for the application of ex turpi causa in
tort.  These can be roughly described as: (a) a plaintiff should not be able to
profit from his or her illegal actions; (b) that the maxim should be used to
support the aims of the criminal justice system; (c) that allowing recovery by
wrongdoing plaintiffs would have the effect of throwing the administration of
justice into disrepute or of hampering the operation of justice.  It may be
convenient to now consider each of these "justifications".  (a)Profiting
from an Illegal Wrong                     This justification
is based upon the proposition that a plaintiff should not be permitted to
profit from his or her own wrongdoings.  This principle is, I think, more
properly applicable to the law of contract than of tort.  As we have seen the
prime purpose of modern tort law is to provide compensation for injuries caused
by the conduct or fault of others.  It attempts to put the plaintiff back in
the same position he or she would have been in had the tortious acts not been
committed.  A "wrongdoing plaintiff" who recovers damages in tort is
not receiving the benefit for the wrongful act but is merely being compensated
for a harm that occurred as a result of a breach of duty of care owed to the
plaintiff.  The plaintiff's wrongdoing would be taken into consideration in
assessing the extent of the liability for which the plaintiff would be responsible
under the applicable Negligence Act.                     The policy reasons
put forward for the maintenance of the doctrine of ex turpi causa form
the proper rationale for the application of the doctrine in contract law.  In
those cases where an agreement is voluntarily made, giving benefits to each
side, the courts are properly justified in refusing to enforce those agreements
which are illegal.                     One of the rare
instances in which ex turpi causa may be helpfully considered is in the
context of economic torts.  This is best exemplified by Canada Cement
LaFarge Ltd., supra.  There the plaintiff-respondent claimed to have
suffered damages as a result of a conspiracy to injure it.  The
plaintiff-respondent who in the course of its business was allegedly a
co-conspirator of the appellants, argued that it had been driven into
bankruptcy by the illegal combines activity of the appellants.  Writing for the
Court, Estey J. found that the tort of conspiracy was not made out.  He went
on, however, to consider whether the plaintiff might be barred from claiming
against the appellants on the ground that it had also participated in the
illegality at issue.  In rejecting this argument, Estey J. relied on lack of
causation stating that the damages suffered were not linked to the illegality
in which the plaintiff had participated.  However, Estey J. accepted that had
the causal link been present, the respondent would have been barred from
recovering (supra, at pp. 475 ff.)  In his reasons, Estey J. noted
the controversy with respect to the application of ex turpi causa to
tort but went on to state, at p. 479:  "If the loss suffered by the
respondent was occasioned by his voluntary participation in an illegal
transaction, the courts should not come to his assistance."                     Of all the cases in
which ex turpi causa has been considered this one is the most akin to
the area in which ex turpi causa is properly applied, that is,
contract.  Essentially, by seeking damages the respondent was trying to recover
the profit of its illegal bargain.  This is exactly the situation which ex
turpi causa rightly prevents in the contractual domain.  As Estey J.
explains, at p. 477:  The
benefit falling to the respondent was the opportunity to be the sole supplier
of lightweight aggregate to the combine.  If the damages which have been
suffered by the respondent flowed from its involvement in the illegal
combine or from the contracts entered into between the respondent and the
appellants affording the opportunity to the respondent to participate in
the combine, then these doctrines prevent the respondent's recovery.  [Emphasis
added.]  Had the causal connection that was
lacking in that case been present, then indeed that would seem to be an
occasion in which there should not be recovery.  Allowing such recovery in this
very restricted type of economic tort would not achieve compensation, but
rather would permit the plaintiff to acquire illegal profits.                     However, this would
be, in my opinion, an instance in which the volenti defence will
properly apply.  This is indeed a situation where a court will be able to find
tacit voluntary assumption of risk.  When a party enters into an illegal
bargain there is clearly an agreement that in the event of an inability to
recover illegal profits due to negligence of one of the parties to the illegal
agreement, no law suit would be brought.  No party to an illegal combine would
think that it could sue to recover the profits it should have been able to make
from its illegal activities.  While it would be inappropriate for profits on
illegal bargains to be recoverable in tort when they cannot be recovered in
contract, this does not necessitate the retention of the ex turpi causa
defence in tort.  The tortious illegal bargain situation lends itself very
conveniently to the application of the volenti defence which,
appropriately, serves to bar recovery entirely.                     However, the
profiting from an illegal bargain rationale generally cannot be readily
transferred to the realm of tort.  The case of Hegarty v. Shine (1878),
14 Cox C.C. 145 (Irish C.A.), is perhaps a notorious example of the
unfairness which results from transferring the doctrine from contract to tort
law.  In that case a woman sought damages as a result of becoming infected with
a venereal disease as a result of what was said to be illicit sexual
intercourse.  She was denied recovery on the basis that the courts should not
provide a remedy for immoral and illegal acts.  Yet the woman could in no sense
be said to be profiting from her immoral action if she were simply compensated
for the physical injury she sustained as a result of contracting the venereal
disease.  Could it possibly be argued today that a prostitute who became
infected with AIDS, by a carrier of that disease who was aware that he or she
was a carrier, should be prevented from recovering compensation for contracting
AIDS because of the fact that he or she was a prostitute?  The better solution
would be to provide compensation for the prostitute subject, of course, to a
consideration of the effect of any contributory negligence.  This, I hasten to
add, would not prevent the prosecution of both parties for any breach of the
criminal law they might have committed.  (b)  Reinforcement
of Criminal Law                     The second
justification put forward for the application of the ex turpi causa
maxim is that it serves to re-enforce criminal law.  According to proponents of
this position, the tort system can and should support the workings of the
criminal justice system by providing penalties for illegal behaviour.  This
position should be rejected.  A court when sentencing must consider the nature
of the crime and the offender and impose a penalty that is appropriate for the
crime and the offender all within the limits for sentencing provided by the Criminal
Code .  There does not seem to be any rational basis for a court to impose
an additional sanction upon a convicted person by denying what may well be fair
and just compensation for injuries received as a result of a tortious act.  See
Wynrib, supra; MacDougall, supra; and Gibson,
supra, at p. 92.  In sum it seems unfair and unreasonable to impose
a sanction beyond that which has been set out by the Criminal Code  in
the guise of reinforcing criminal law.  (c)Integrity
of the Justice System                     The final
justification put forward for the use of the doctrine is that it protects the
integrity of the justice system.  It is said that use of the ex turpi causa
defence satisfactorily addresses two concerns.  The first concern is that the
judicial system's scarce resources should not be employed to allow a plaintiff
to recover for injuries suffered during the commission of an illegal or immoral
act.  Secondly, it would be unseemly for the court to attempt to resolve some
of the issues that would arise in such a claim.  An example of this last
concern is set out in Progress and Properties Ltd. v. Craft, supra,
at p. 668, a decision of the High Court of Australia.  There
Jacobs J. made the following observation:  Where
there is a joint illegal activity the actual act of which the plaintiff in a
civil action may be complaining as done without care may itself be a criminal
act of a kind in respect of which a court is not prepared to hear evidence for
the purpose of establishing the standard of care which was reasonable in the
circumstances.  A court will not hear evidence nor will it determine a standard
of care owing by a safe blower to his accomplice in respect of the explosive
device.                     The concern
expressed as to claims put forward which can amount to an abuse of the court
processes may well be valid.  It was this justification which was considered by
Justice Sopinka in his reasons in Norberg, supra, in which he
stated at p. 316:  My
colleague refers to the observation of Estey J. that the application of this
maxim to defeat a tort action has been rare.  Its use has been much less frequent
in recent times.  The courts have taken a less rigid view of its purpose. 
Emphasis is now placed on preserving the administration of justice from the
taint that would result from the approval of a transaction that a court ought
not to countenance.  In this regard, I agree with the statement of Taylor J. in
Mack v. Enns (1981), 30 B.C.L.R. 337 (S.C.), at p. 345:  The
purpose of the rule today must be to defend the integrity of the legal system,
and the repute in which the courts ought to be held by law-abiding members of
the community.  It is properly applied in those circumstances in which it would
be manifestly unacceptable to fair-minded, or right-thinking, people that a
court should lend assistance to a plaintiff who has defied the law.                     Yet I wonder if the
use of the defence is the best means of protecting the courts.  The ex turpi
causa defence by its very nature invites the pronouncement of arbitrary and
personalized conclusions from the bench.  W. J. Ford points out the
difficulty of applying this concept in "Tort and Illegality:  The Ex
Turpi Causa Defence in Negligence Law (Part Two)," supra, at
p. 184:                     While
a refusal to entertain actions which would have the effect of shocking the
public conscience might be defensible, it is often difficult to distinguish
between public and merely judicial outrage, a problem which lends added force
to Starke J.'s warning that `moral indignation must not be mistaken for public
policy'.                     Furthermore,
compensation should not be looked upon as a judicial approbation of a
plaintiff's illegal activities.  Criminal prosecution serves the purpose of
expressing judicial and, more importantly, society's condemnation of the
illegal activities.                     Let us consider
some examples of situations where the plaintiff, although guilty of an immoral
or illegal act, was injured by the tortious acts of the defendant and should
still recover damages.  Take first a Norberg-type scenario where drugs
were provided by a doctor in return for sexual favours.  Clearly the tortious
acts of the doctor can be recognized and the plaintiff compensated for them
without any risk of the court's being seen as giving its approval of the
drug-abusing behaviour of the plaintiff.  Neither the offence of "double
doctoring", of which the plaintiff was guilty in that case, nor any sense
of immorality which might be attributed to some of her activities, is relevant
to the court's determination of her tort claim.  Any consideration of the
culpability of the plaintiff in those circumstances would be irrelevant to the
issue of compensation.  In a situation in which the plaintiff's conduct is
relevant to the issue of damages, it will be best considered either in the
context of contributory negligence or in the admittedly rare case of a
voluntary assumption of the risk of injury from engaging in the dangerous
activity.                     Another example is
that of the plaintiff who is driving while impaired and is injured by the
negligent acts of another or the situation presented in Crocker v. Sundance
Northwest Resorts Ltd., supra, where the drunken plaintiff was
injured while sliding downhill on an innertube.  In these examples the
culpability of the plaintiff for being impaired while driving a motor vehicle
or for being drunk in a public place is irrelevant to the issue of damages for
compensation arising out of the tortious acts of others.  Once again the
impaired driving or drunkenness may be taken into account in considering
contributory negligence and in rare circumstances in the voluntary assumption
of the risk; yet, unless the plaintiff truly assumed the risk he or she may
recover damages.  Thus it can be seen that there are many examples of cases in
which the Court has awarded compensation although the plaintiff has been guilty
of an illegal act.                     The extreme example
of the claim for damages brought by a bank robber injured in an explosion
caused by the negligent handling of the explosives by his partner can be
readily resolved and dismissed by the application of public policy
considerations.                     Further, I do not
think that the concern represented by Progress and Properties Ltd. v. Craft,
supra, poses a serious problem.  Courts are expected to hear and do in
fact hear cases that are frequently unpleasant, unsavoury and sordid.  Yet they
manage to determine standards of care in the most difficult of circumstances. 
There does not seem to be any reason for a court to refuse to consider the
standard of care on the ground of unseemliness.  Can the "Justifications" be
Justified?                     None of the three
justifications is particularly convincing.  A better mechanism for assessing
the actions of the plaintiff in most tort cases will be by means of either the
operation of the appropriate Negligence Act, the application of the volenti
defence, or in considering whether a duty of care exists.                     The Negligence Acts
by the principle of apportionment of responsibility are aimed at achieving that
fairness which the tort remedy seeks to provide.  It might have reasonably been
thought that this legislation would spell the end of ex turpi causa defence. 
Yet despite the passage of apportionment legislation, the doctrine of ex
turpi causa stubbornly and somewhat irrationally has survived.  Like many
noxious weeds, it appears to be difficult to eradicate.                     Some judges have,
with good reason, suggested that the doctrine of ex turpi causa is not
only anachronistic but also has been specifically eliminated by the enactment
of apportionment legislation.  In Lewis v. Sayers, [1970] 3 O.R. 591, at
p. 598, Gould Dist. Ct. J. stated:                     It
appears to me that in a case to which, by reason of its facts, s. 4 of the Negligence
Act applies, the Ontario Legislature has quite deliberately substituted for
the ex turpi causa rule a positive direction that the Court shall make a
finding as to the degree of fault or negligence to be attributed to each party
and shall apportion the damages accordingly.  I realize of course that
s. 4 was enacted primarily to do away with the absolute defence formerly
available in cases of contributory negligence, but the wording is equally apt
in relation to the defence now under discussion, to which the added words
"fault or" seem to apply with particular force.  The defence ex
turpi causa non oritur actio seems necessarily to involve a situation where
both parties are alleged to be at fault, and so long as it is remembered that
s. 4 applies only where the fault of each has contributed to the damages,
in my opinion the section leaves no room for the application of the maxim.  MacDougall, supra, cites Gould
Dist. Ct. J. and agrees at p. 41:  Ex
turpi causa is
anachronistic in light of the existence of contributory negligence
legislation.  In fact, the finding that ex turpi causa applies where
contributory negligence legislation also applies undermines the purpose of the
contributory negligence legislation.                     It must be
remembered that the finding that a duty of care exists is the crucial first
step in the court's consideration of a defendant's negligence.  Even when that
duty is found to exist it has now been clearly recognized that the issue of
public policy will come into play which can provide immunity for the defendant
or limit the extent of the duty of care.  In those jurisdictions which still
maintain the ex turpi causa defence in tort, examination shows that the
issue of illegality really goes to public policy.  See for example, the
Australian cases of Smith v. Jenkins, supra; Progress and
Properties Ltd. v. Craft, supra; Jackson v. Harrison (1978),
138 C.L.R. 438; Gala v. Preston (1991), 172 C.L.R. 243.                     I find support for
the position that ex turpi causa has no place in the law of tort from
the decision of the House of Lords in National Coal Board v. England,
[1954] 1 All E.R. 546.  There Lord Porter wrote at p. 552:  . .
. I cannot believe that a breach of a statutory obligation drafted to ensure
the adoption of a careful method of working is a "turpis causa"
within the meaning of the rule.  Indeed, the adage itself is generally applied
to a question of contract, and I am by no means prepared to concede where
concession is not required that it applies also to the case of a tort.  See as well, Fleming, supra, at
p. 278, footnote 1 notes:  1.The
maxim "ex turpi causa non oritur actio" is nowadays handled with
caution.  According to a widely held view, it's sole legitimate function is to
deny a plaintiff legal aid for accomplishing an illegal object, like enforcing
a contract; at most to preclude him from relying on an illegal transaction
necessary to establish his claim.  Neither is generally applicable to
negligence claims.  G. H. L. Fridman, supra,
comments at p. 293:                     However,
the cases which suggest ex turpi causa non oritur actio as a ground for
rejection of a plaintiff's claim must now be read in the light of the comments
and strictures raised by Windeyer, J. in Smith v. Jenkins.  These must
surely make it difficult to accept that maxim as a satisfactory basis for
decision-making in this area, if indeed, in the light of the comments of the [National
Coal Board v. England] case any further critique was necessary.                     Glanville Williams,
in his Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence (1951), says in his
chapter "The Scope of the Contributory Negligence Act", at p. 333:                     Plaintiff's
illegality.  The
notion that it is an effective riposte in tort to show that the plaintiff was a
wrongdoer should long ago have been killed by the arguments of Sir Frederick
Pollock; but it has lingered on in some cases, aided by oft-repeated maxims
like Ex turpi causa non oritur actio.                     The law of tort is
continuing to grow.  It provides a remedy of compensation that can stand on its
own.  It has no need at this stage of its development to be fettered by the
application of somewhat archaic doctrines expressed in Latin maxims.  Such
maxims, clothed in their Latin mystique, lead to confusion in their definition
and application.  It would be better if any limitation of the duty of care were
recognized in the courts by the application of public policy considerations.  Summary                     From this review
perhaps some principles and conclusions may be derived.  (1)The
remedy of tort is based upon a concept of compensation arising from a breach of
duty.  It aims to put the injured party in the same position that he or she
would have been in had the tortious act not occurred.  (2)The
remedy is a flexible one that has responded to the problems arising in our
increasingly complex society.  (3)Compensation
in tort is based primarily upon a duty of care.  Traditionally, the duty of
care is said to be present when there is a likelihood of harm arising due to
one's actions to a person in a relationship of sufficient legal proximity to
give rise to such a duty.  (4)The
notion of legal proximity has been traditionally formulated in terms of whether
the risk of harm ought to have been reasonably foreseeable to the defendant.  (5)This
Court has approved the two stage test for considering foreseeability, proximity
and duty of care.  It is:  (i) is there a sufficiently close relationship
between the parties so that, in the reasonable contemplation of a party,
carelessness on its part might cause damage to another person; if so, (ii) are
there any considerations which should negate or limit (a) the scope of the duty
and (b) the class of persons to whom it is owed or (c) the damages to which a
breach of it may give rise.  (6)It
has been recognized that this test, particularly the second branch, is broad
enough to take into account policy considerations which may in fact negate the
existence of a duty of care.  (7)Damages
have been awarded in many cases where the plaintiff has been guilty of illegal
acts.  (8)The
old common law defence of contributory negligence that stood as an absolute bar
to recovery in tort actions has been legislated out of existence.  In many
cases, two or more parties are responsible for the tortious act and should
share responsibility.  The Negligence Acts of all the common law provinces
provide a basis for a fair assessment and distribution of the liability.  (9)The
defence of volenti, which provides a complete bar to recovery, has been
confined to a narrow scope by this Court .  (10)Volenti
may provide a valid defence in cases of economic tort.  See Canada Cement
LaFarge Ltd., supra.  (11)The
doctrine of ex turpi causa should be eliminated from application to tort
cases.  (12)It
would be better to consider the issue as a question to be resolved on
considerations of public policy.  Application of the Principles to this
Case                      There was a breach
of the duty owed by the respondent to the appellant when he permitted the
appellant to drive the car.  Next it must be considered if there is a basis,
for public policy reasons, for denying the plaintiff the right to recover all
or any part of his claim.  To repeat, the defence of ex turpi causa
should not be applied in tort cases.  The issue of "public policy"
should not be considered under the archaic Latin rubric of ex turpi causa but
honestly and frankly under the designation of public policy.  In this case
there is no basis for the application of the doctrine under any guise.                     Even if, contrary
to my views, ex turpi causa were to be applied, it must be observed that
the majority of the Court of Appeal has gone further than any other court in
applying the doctrine to a situation where there was not a joint criminal
activity.  Generally speaking decisions in which the ex turpi causa
defence has been applied have required the existence of joint illegal conduct
by the parties.  See for example: Betts v. Sanderson Estate, supra,
Canada Cement LaFarge Ltd., supra, Norberg v. Wynrib, supra,
and Tallow v. Tailfeathers, [1973] 6 W.W.R. 732.  The majority allowed
the defence based solely on the illegality of the conduct of the plaintiff. 
This would seem to be contrary to decisions of this court in Harris v.
Toronto Transit Commission, [1967] S.C.R. 460, and Miller v. Decker,
[1957] S.C.R. 624, at pp. 627-28.  In any event I can see no reason for
extending this anachronistic defence.  It remains then to determine if recovery
should be denied on the grounds of public policy.                     If a plaintiff's
conduct was in contravention of the law and if this conduct was a factor in
producing his injury, he may well be found guilty of contributory negligence or
indeed of being the author of his own misfortune.  Yet simply because the
plaintiff was a wrongdoer does not necessarily mean that he can have no remedy
at law for harm done to him.  There have been, as we have seen, numerous cases
where a plaintiff who has either been impaired while driving or drunk in a
public place as in Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., supra,
has been permitted to recover.                     There is no reason
why the appellant should be prevented from recovering compensation on the
grounds of public policy.  To permit him to recover would not offend or shock
the conscience of reasonable right thinking members of the community fully
apprised of the facts.                     In sum, public
policy should not constitute an absolute bar to the recovery of compensation
for the injuries suffered in an accident by an impaired driver.  Apportionment of Liability                     The trial judge
attributed 75 per cent of the responsibility of the accident to the respondent
and 25 per cent to the appellant.  I cannot agree with that assessment. 
Individuals must take responsibility for their actions.  It was the appellant
who sought permission to drive the vehicle.  He must or should have been aware
of his impairment.  He knew of the powerful nature of the vehicle and the
problems involved in roll starting it.  He was aware of the dangers presented
by the dark inclined gravel road sloping off steeply to the gravel pit on one
side.  Nevertheless he sought permission to drive the car and obtained it.  He
must accept responsibility for seeking permission to drive the car and for the
manner in which he drove it.  In my view, there is little to choose between the
negligence of the appellant and that demonstrated by the respondent.  The
liability should be divided equally between the appellant and the respondent.  Disposition                     In the result the
appeal is allowed, the order of the Court of Appeal set aside and the trial
judgment restored but varied to provide for an equal division of liability. 
The appellant has achieved substantial success in this appeal, and should
therefore have his costs here and in the courts below.                     Appeal allowed with
costs, Sopinka J. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Paine, Edmonds, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
respondent:  Carfra & Lawton, Victoria.   