SCC Case Information: 34100   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: Clements v. Clements, 2012 SCC 32, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 181 Date:
  20120629 Docket:
  34100  Between: Joan
Clements, by her Litigation Guardian, Donna Jardine Appellant and Joseph
Clements Respondent -
and - Attorney
General of British Columbia Intervener  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Rothstein,
Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 54)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 55 to 63)  McLachlin C.J. (Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Cromwell,
  Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)  LeBel J. (Rothstein J. concurring)     Clements v. Clements, 2012 SCC 32, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 181 Joan
Clements, by her litigation guardian, Donna Jardine                         Appellant v. Joseph Clements                                                                                           Respondent and Attorney
General of British Columbia                                                         Intervener Indexed as:  Clements v. Clements 2012 SCC 32 File No.:  34100. 2012:  February 17; 2012:  June 29. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella,
Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia                     Torts
— Negligence — Causation — Motor vehicle accident — Motorcycle passenger
injured in crash — Passenger alleging driver’s negligence in operation of
motorcycle caused injury — Whether trial judge erred in insisting on scientific
reconstruction evidence to prove causation, and in applying “material
contribution” test rather than “but for” test to determine causation.                     C
was driving his motorcycle in wet weather, with his wife riding behind on the
passenger seat.  The bike was about 100 pounds overloaded.  Unbeknownst to C, a
nail had punctured the rear tire.  Though in a 100 km/h zone, C
accelerated to at least 120 km/h in order to pass a car; the nail fell
out, the rear tire deflated, and the bike began to wobble.  C was unable to
bring the bike under control and it crashed; his wife suffered a severe
traumatic brain injury.  She then sued C, alleging that her injury was caused
by his negligence in driving an overloaded bike too fast.  The trial judge
found that C’s negligence in fact contributed to the injury.  However, he also
found that C’s wife, through no fault of her own, was unable to prove “but for”
causation, due to the limitations of scientific reconstruction evidence.  The
trial judge applied a material contribution test instead and found C liable on
this basis.  The Court of Appeal set aside the judgment and dismissed the
action, on the basis that “but for” causation had not been proved and the
material contribution test did not apply.                     Held
(LeBel and Rothstein JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed, and a
new trial ordered.                     Per
McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver and
Karakatsanis JJ.:  On its own, proof by an injured plaintiff that a
defendant was negligent does not make that defendant liable for the loss.  As a
general rule, a plaintiff cannot succeed unless she shows as a matter of fact
that she would not have suffered the loss “but for” the negligent act or acts
of the defendant.  Exceptionally, however, a plaintiff may be able to recover
on the basis of material contribution to risk of injury, without showing
factual “but for” causation.  Elimination of proof of causation as an element
of negligence is a radical step that goes against the fundamental principle
that a defendant in an action in negligence is a wrongdoer only in respect of
the damage which he actually causes to the plaintiff.  Therefore, recourse to a
material contribution to risk approach is justified only where it is required
by fairness and conforms to the principles that ground recovery in tort.  The
cases that have dispensed with the usual requirement of “but for” causation in
favour of a less onerous material contribution to risk approach are generally
cases with a number of tortfeasors where, “but for” the negligent act of one or
more of the defendants, the plaintiff would not have been injured.  It is only
when it is applied separately to each defendant that the “but for” test breaks
down because it cannot be shown which of several negligent defendants actually
launched the event that led to the injury.  In these circumstances, permitting
the plaintiff to succeed on a material contribution to risk basis meets the
underlying goals of the law of negligence.  The plaintiff has shown that she is
in a correlative relationship of doer and sufferer of the same harm with the
group of defendants as a whole, if not necessarily with each individual
defendant.                     Per LeBel and
Rothstein JJ. (dissenting):  There is no basis in fact and law for
ordering a new trial.  The key finding of fact made by the trial judge was that
the plaintiff had not proven causation on the basis of the “but for” test.  The
trial judge’s finding that the material contribution test was satisfied cannot
be reinterpreted as a finding that “but for” causation was established.                     On
policy grounds, this Court and courts of appeal should be mindful of the need
for finality and efficiency in the civil litigation process.  In this appeal,
there is no basis in the trial judge’s judgment for inferring that the
overloading of the motorcycle and excessive speed could have been the “cause”
of the accident as that term is understood in the context of the “but for”
test.  Nor is this a case in which it would be appropriate to send the matter
back for a new trial. Cases Cited By McLachlin C.J.                     Distinguished:  Sienkiewicz
v. Greif (UK) Ltd., [2011] UKSC 10, [2011] 2 All
E.R. 857; referred to:  Wilsher v. Essex Area Health
Authority, [1988] A.C. 1074; Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311; Athey
v. Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458; Betts v. Whittingslowe (1945), 71
C.L.R. 637; Bennett v. Minister of Community Welfare (1992), 176 C.L.R.
408; Flounders v. Millar, [2007] NSWCA 238, 49 M.V.R. 53; Roads
and Traffic Authority v. Royal, [2008] HCA 19, 245 A.L.R. 653; MacDonald v. Goertz, 2009 BCCA 358, 275 B.C.A.C. 68; Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke, 2007 SCC 7, [2007] 1 S.C.R.
333; Mooney v. British Columbia (Attorney
General), 2004 BCCA 402, 202 B.C.A.C. 74; Cook v. Lewis, [1951]
S.C.R. 830; Walker Estate v. York Finch General Hospital, 2001 SCC 23,
[2001] 1 S.C.R. 647; Fairchild v. Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd.,
[2002] UKHL 22, [2002] 3 All E.R. 305; Barker v. Corus UK Ltd., [2006]
UKHL 20, [2006] 2 A.C. 572. Authors Cited Weinrib, Ernest J.  The Idea of Private Law.  Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard University Press, 1995.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (Frankel, Tysoe and
Garson JJ.A.), 2010 BCCA 581, 12 B.C.L.R. (5th) 310, 79 C.C.L.T. (3d) 6, 4
M.V.R. (6th) 1, 327 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 298 B.C.A.C. 56, 505 W.A.C. 56, [2010]
B.C.J. No. 2532 (QL), 2010 CarswellBC 3477, reversing a decision of Grauer J., 2009 BCSC 112, [2009] B.C.J.
No. 166 (QL), 2009 CarswellBC 202.  Appeal allowed, LeBel and
Rothstein JJ. dissenting.                     Dick Byl and Kimi
Aimetz, for the appellant.                     Robert A. Easton, Ryan W. Morasiewicz and Greg A. Cavouras,
for the respondent.                     Jonathan Eades, for
the intervener.                     The
judgment of McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver and
Karakatsanis JJ. was delivered by                     The Chief Justice — I.       Introduction [1]                             
The parties to this appeal, Mr. and Mrs.
Clements, were motorbike enthusiasts.  August 7th, 2004, found them en route
from their home in Prince George, British Columbia, to visit their daughter in
Kananaskis, Alberta.  The weather was wet.  Mr. Clements was driving the bike
and Mrs. Clements was riding behind on the passenger seat.  The bike was about
100 pounds overloaded.  Unbeknownst to Mr. Clements, a nail had punctured the
bike’s rear tire.  Though Mr. Clements was travelling in a 100 km/h zone,
he accelerated to at least 120 km/h in order to pass a car. As he crossed the
centre line to commence the passing manoeuvre, the nail fell out, the rear tire
deflated, and the bike began to wobble.  Mr. Clements was unable to bring
the bike under control and it crashed, throwing Mrs. Clements off.  Mrs.
Clements suffered a severe traumatic brain injury.  She now sues Mr. Clements,
claiming that her injury was caused by his negligence in the operation of the
bike. [2]                             
Mr. Clements’ negligence in driving an
overloaded bike too fast is not disputed.  The only issue is whether his
negligence caused Mrs. Clements’ injury.  Mr. Clements called
an expert witness, Mr. MacInnis, who testified that the probable cause of the
accident was the tire puncture and deflation, and that the accident would have
happened even without the negligent acts of Mr. Clements. [3]                             
The trial judge rejected this conclusion, and
found that Mr. Clements’ negligence in fact contributed to
Mrs. Clements’ injury.  However, he held that the plaintiff “through no
fault of her own is unable to prove that ‘but for’ the defendant’s breaches,
she would not have been injured”, due to the limitations of the scientific
reconstruction evidence (2009 BCSC 112 (CanLII), at para. 66).  The trial judge
went on to hold that in view of this impossibility of precise proof of the
amount each factor contributed to the injury, “but for” causation should be
dispensed with and a “material contribution” test applied.  He found Mr.
Clements liable on this basis. [4]                             
The British Columbia Court of Appeal, per
Frankel J.A., set aside the judgment against Mr. Clements on the basis that “but
for” causation had not been proved and the material contribution test did not
apply (2010 BCCA 581, 12 B.C.L.R. (5th) 310). [5]                             
The legal issue is whether the usual “but for”
test for causation in a negligence action applies, as the Court of Appeal held,
or whether a material contribution approach suffices, as the trial judge held. 
For the reasons that follow, I conclude that a material contribution test was
not applicable in this case. I would return the matter to the trial judge to be
dealt with on the correct basis of “but for” causation. II.     Outline A.     Causation in the Law of
Negligence: The Basic Rule of “But For”
Causation B.     The
Material Contribution to Risk Approach          1.      The
Canadian Cases          2.      The
United Kingdom Cases          3.      When
Is a Material Contribution to Risk Approach Available? C.     Summary D.     Application III.    Discussion A.     Causation
in the Law of Negligence: The Basic Rule of “But For” Causation [6]                             
On its own, proof by an injured plaintiff that a
defendant was negligent does not make that defendant liable for the loss.  The
plaintiff must also establish that the defendant’s negligence (breach of the
standard of care) caused the injury.  That link is causation. [7]                             
Recovery in negligence presupposes a
relationship between the plaintiff and defendant based on the existence of a
duty of care — a defendant who is at fault and a plaintiff who has been injured
by that fault.  If the defendant breaches this duty and thereby causes injury
to the plaintiff, the law “corrects” the deficiency in the relationship by
requiring the defendant to compensate the plaintiff for the injury suffered. 
This basis for recovery, sometimes referred to as “corrective justice”, assigns
liability when the plaintiff and defendant are linked in a correlative
relationship of doer and sufferer of the same harm:  E. J. Weinrib, The
Idea of Private Law (1995), at p. 156. [9]                             
The “but for” causation test must be applied in
a robust common sense fashion. There is no need for scientific evidence of the
precise contribution the defendant’s negligence made to the injury.  See Wilsher
v. Essex Area Health Authority, [1988] A.C. 1074 (H.L.), at p. 1090,
per Lord Bridge; Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311. [10]                         
A common sense inference of “but for” causation
from proof of negligence usually flows without difficulty. Evidence connecting the breach of duty to the injury suffered may
permit the judge, depending on the circumstances, to infer that the defendant’s
negligence probably caused the loss.  See Snell and Athey v.
Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458.  See also the discussion on
this issue by the Australian courts: Betts v.
Whittingslowe (1945), 71 C.L.R. 637 (H.C.), at p. 649; Bennett v.
Minister of Community Welfare (1992), 176 C.L.R. 408 (H.C.), at
pp. 415-16; Flounders v. Millar, [2007] NSWCA 238, 49 M.V.R.
53; Roads and Traffic Authority v. Royal, [2008] HCA 19, 245
A.L.R. 653, at paras. 137-44. [11]                         
Where “but for” causation is established by
inference only, it is open to the defendant to argue or call evidence that the
accident would have happened without the defendant’s negligence, i.e. that the
negligence was not a necessary cause of the injury, which was, in any event,
inevitable.  As Sopinka J. put it in Snell, at p. 330:                             The
legal or ultimate burden remains with the plaintiff, but in the absence of
evidence to the contrary adduced by the defendant, an inference of causation
may be drawn although positive or scientific proof of causation has not been
adduced.  If some evidence to the contrary is adduced by the defendant,
the trial judge is entitled to take account of Lord Mansfield’s famous precept
[that “all evidence is to be weighed according
to the proof which it was in the power of one side to have produced, and in the
power of the other to have contradicted” (Blatch v. Archer (1774), 1
Cowp. 63, 98 E.R. 969, at p. 970)].  This is, I believe, what Lord Bridge had in mind in Wilsher
when he referred to a “robust and pragmatic approach to the . . . facts” (p.
569).  [Emphasis added.] [12]                         
In some cases, an injury — the loss for which
the plaintiff claims compensation — may flow from a number of different
negligent acts committed by different actors, each of which is a necessary or
“but for” cause of the injury.  In such cases, the defendants are said to be
jointly and severally liable.  The judge or jury then apportions liability
according to the degree of fault of each defendant pursuant to contributory
negligence legislation. [13]                         
To recap, the basic rule of recovery for
negligence is that the plaintiff must establish on a balance of probabilities
that the defendant caused the plaintiff’s injury on the “but for” test.  This
is a factual determination.  Exceptionally, however, courts have accepted that
a plaintiff may be able to recover on the basis of “material contribution to
risk of injury”, without showing factual “but for” causation. As will be
discussed in more detail below, this can occur in cases where it is impossible
to determine which of a number of negligent acts by multiple actors in fact
caused the injury, but it is established that one or more of them did in fact
cause it. In these cases, the goals of tort law and the underlying theory of
corrective justice require that the defendant not be permitted to escape
liability by pointing the finger at another wrongdoer.  Courts have therefore
held the defendant liable on the basis that he materially contributed to the
risk of the injury. [14]                         
“But for” causation and liability on the basis
of material contribution to risk are two different beasts.  “But for” causation
is a factual inquiry into what likely happened.  The material contribution to
risk test removes the requirement of “but for” causation and substitutes proof
of material contribution to risk.  As set out by Smith J.A. in MacDonald v.
Goertz, 2009 BCCA 358, 275 B.C.A.C. 68, at para. 17: . . . “material
contribution” does not signify a test of causation at all; rather it is a
policy-driven rule of law designed to permit plaintiffs to recover in such
cases despite their failure to prove causation. In such cases, plaintiffs are
permitted to “jump the evidentiary gap”: see “Lords a’leaping
evidentiary gaps” (2002), Torts Law Journal 276, and “Cause-in-Fact and the
Scope of Liability for Consequences” (2003), 119 L.Q.R. 388, both by Professor
Jane Stapleton. That is because to deny liability “would offend basic notions
of fairness and justice”: Hanke v. Resurfice Corp., para. 25. [15]                         
While the cases and scholars have sometimes
spoken of “material contribution to the injury” instead of “material
contribution to risk”, the latter is the more accurate formulation.  As will
become clearer when we discuss the cases, “material contribution” as a substitute
for the usual requirement of “but for” causation only applies where it is
impossible to say that a particular defendant’s negligent act in fact caused
the injury.  It imposes liability not because the evidence establishes that the
defendant’s act caused the injury, but because the act contributed to the risk
that injury would occur. Thus, this Court in Snell and Resurfice
Corp. v. Hanke, 2007 SCC 7, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 333, raised the possibility of a material contribution to risk approach. 
The English law takes the same approach, as discussed below. [16]                         
Elimination of proof of causation as an element
of negligence is a “radical step that goes against the fundamental principle
stated by Diplock, L.J., in Browning v. War Office, [1962] 3 All
E.R. 1089 (C.A.), at 1094-95: ‘. . . A defendant in an
action in negligence is not a wrongdoer at large: he is a wrongdoer only in
respect of the damage which he actually causes to the plaintiff’”:  Mooney
v. British Columbia (Attorney General), 2004 BCCA 402, 202 B.C.A.C. 74, at
para. 157, per Smith J.A., concurring in the result.  For that reason, recourse to a
material contribution to risk approach is necessarily rare, and justified only
where it is required by fairness and conforms to the principles that ground
recovery in tort. B.     The Material Contribution
to Risk Approach          1.      The
Canadian Cases [17]                         
The possibility of material contribution as an
exceptional substitute for “but for” causation has arisen in a variety of
contexts involving multiple tortfeasors. [18]                         
One of the earliest cases on the issue is
Cook v. Lewis, [1951] S.C.R. 830.  Three men were out hunting.  Two
of them fired shots, virtually simultaneously.  One of the shots struck a
fourth hunter, Mr. Lewis, who was injured and sued both defendants in
negligence.  On the evidence, it could not be established which defendant’s gun
had fired the shot that injured Mr. Lewis.  Clearly, one of the men had caused Mr. Lewis’ injury, and one had
not.  But which one?  The evidence shed no light on this.  The defendants
contended that the plaintiff’s action must be dismissed because he had not
proved “but for” causation against either defendant, relying on the classic
“point the finger at someone else” defence.  Both defendants were found jointly
and severally liable.  The majority reasons in this Court spoke of reversing
the onus in these circumstances, rather than material contribution to risk. [19]                         
The Court in Cook relaxed the usual “but
for” test for causation on the basis that fairness required this. It was
“impossible” for the plaintiff to prove on a balance of probabilities that
either man had injured him on the “but for” test; both defendants could say it
was just as likely the other had caused Mr. Lewis’ injury, precluding the
plaintiff from discharging his burden against either.  Only one of the
defendants had in fact injured the plaintiff.  But both defendants had
breached their duty of care to Mr. Lewis and subjected him to unreasonable risk
of the injury that in fact materialized.  The plaintiff was the victim of
negligent conduct “but for” which he would not have been injured.  To deny him
recovery, while allowing the negligent defendants to escape liability by
pointing the finger at each other, would not have met the goals of negligence
law of compensation, fairness and deterrence, in a manner consistent with
corrective justice. [20]                         
Cook was
considered in Snell. The plaintiff in Snell had undergone surgery
to remove a cataract.  Bleeding occurred.  When the bleeding cleared up nine
months later, it was found that the plaintiff’s optic nerve had atrophied,
causing loss of sight in her right eye.  Neither of the expert witnesses was
able to state what caused the atrophy or when it had occurred.  The trial
judge, upheld by the Court of Appeal, did not apply the usual “but for” test,
but applied a reverse onus test.  This Court affirmed recovery, but on the basis
of a robust and common sense application of the “but for” test.  However,
Sopinka J. suggested that had it been necessary and appropriate, a material
contribution to risk approach might have been applicable:                     I
have examined the alternatives arising out of [McGhee v. National Coal Board,
[1973] 1 W.L.R. 1 (H.L.)]. They were that the plaintiff simply prove that the
defendant created a risk that the injury which occurred would occur. Or, what
amounts to the same thing, that the defendant has the burden of disproving
causation. If I were convinced that defendants who have a substantial
connection to the injury were escaping liability because plaintiffs cannot
prove causation under currently applied principles, I would not hesitate to
adopt one of these alternatives. In my opinion, however, properly applied,
the principles relating to causation are adequate to the task. [Emphasis added;
pp. 326-27.] [21]                         
Sopinka J. went on to underline the importance
of establishing a substantial connection between the injury and the
defendant’s negligence.  The usual requirement of proof of “but for” causation
should not be relaxed where the result would be to permit plaintiffs to recover
in the absence of evidence connecting the defendant’s fault to the plaintiff’s
injury.  Thus, Sopinka J. stated that if the injury likely was brought about by
“neutral” factors, that is, it would have occurred absent any negligence, the
plaintiff cannot succeed.  To allow recovery where the injury was the result of
neutral factors would neither further the goals of compensation, fairness and
deterrence, nor comport with the theory of corrective justice that underlies
the law of negligence. [22]                         
These ideas were again taken up in Athey. 
The plaintiff, who suffered from pre-existing back problems, suffered a
herniated disc after two motor vehicle accidents.  He sued the drivers of the
motor vehicles in negligence for his injury.  The trial judge held that
although the accidents were “not the sole cause” of the disc herniation, they
played “some causative role” (para. 8).  She accordingly found the defendants
liable for 25 percent of the plaintiff’s loss.  In the Court of Appeal, the
plaintiff sought to uphold the result on the basis of material contribution,
but that court declined to consider the issue as it had not been raised at
trial. [23]                         
This Court, per Major J., discussed the
limitations of the “but for” test and the propriety of exceptionally using a
material contribution test.  Major J. emphasized that a robust common sense
approach to the “but for” test permits an inference of “but for” causation from
evidence that the defendant’s conduct was a significant factor in the injury,
and concluded that “[t]he plaintiff must prove causation by meeting the ‘but
for’ or material contribution test” (para. 41).  Major J. concluded that the 25
percent contribution found by the trial judge was a “material contribution”
sufficient to meet the “but for” test.  The term “material contribution”, read
in context, does not detract from the fact that the Court in the end applied a
robust, common sense application of the “but for” test, in accordance with Snell. [24]                         
The problem of proof of causation where there
are two or more possible tortfeasors arose in a slightly different manner in Walker
Estate v. York Finch General Hospital, 2001 SCC 23, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 647. 
Ms. Walker contracted HIV from tainted blood.  Her estate sued the supplier of
the blood for negligence in failing to screen out donors with a high risk of
HIV by warning them not to give blood.  In defence, the suppliers argued that
“but for” causation was not established, because even if they had taken the
required steps to screen, persons with HIV who did not know of their condition
or who did not wish to disclose it might have donated blood in any event.  The
Court rejected this defence and found the supplier liable. [25]                         
In Walker Estate, as in Athey,
Major J. once again alluded to the inadequacy of the “but for” test in some
situations, in particular in cases where multiple independent causes may bring
about a single harm (para. 87).  He found that causation in the usual sense
could be established on the trial judge’s findings (paras. 89-98).  In obiter,
however, Major J. adopted the reasoning of Sopinka J. in Snell to
the effect that, in an appropriate case, where the ordinary principles of
causation are inadequate to the task and result in unfairness and inconsistency
with the underlying principles of negligence, it might be possible to dispense
with factual proof of “but for” causation and apply a less onerous “material
contribution” test (para. 99). [26]                         
This brings us to Resurfice.  The plaintiff, whose job was to maintain
ice surfaces, mistakenly poured water into the gas tank of the machine used for
that purpose.  Gasoline vapour was sparked, causing an explosion and fire, and
the plaintiff was badly burned.  He sued the manufacturer and distributor of
the machine, alleging negligence in not arranging or marking the machine in a
way that would have avoided confusion between the water tank and the gas tank. 
The trial judge found that the plaintiff had not proved that the accident had
been caused by the manufacturer or the distributor and dismissed the action. 
The Court of Appeal ordered a new trial on the basis that the trial judge had
erred in his treatment of foreseeability and causation. [27]                         
This Court endorsed the trial judge’s conclusion
that the plaintiff had failed to establish causation on the “but for” test, and
held that a material contribution approach was inapplicable.  The decision
affirmed that in “special circumstances”, the law has recognized that the “but
for” test for causation should be replaced by a material contribution approach
(para. 24). This may occur where it is “impossible” for the plaintiff to
prove causation on the “but for” test, and where it is clear that the defendant
breached his duty of care in a way that exposed the plaintiff to an
unreasonable risk of injury.  The basis for the exception in these
circumstances is that requiring “but for” causation “would offend basic notions
of fairness and justice” (para. 25).          2.      The
United Kingdom Cases [29]                         
The courts of the United Kingdom have adopted a
material contribution to risk approach to the problem of toxic agent cases
involving negligence by more than one employer: Fairchild v. Glenhaven
Funeral Services Ltd., [2002] UKHL 22, [2002] 3 All E.R. 305; and Barker
v. Corus UK Ltd., [2006] UKHL 20, [2006] 2 A.C. 572.  Recently, the United
Kingdom Supreme Court decided that a material contribution to risk approach can
apply as well when a single negligent employer has exposed a plaintiff to asbestos:
see Sienkiewicz v. Greif (UK) Ltd., [2011] UKSC 10, [2011] 2 All E.R. 857.  I will return to
this case later in these reasons. [30]                         
The plaintiffs in Fairchild and Barker
had developed diseases related to toxic workplace agents, but were unable
to prove which of several possible sources of the agents had caused their
disease.  In both cases, the plaintiffs had been exposed to asbestos at
different times when working for different employers.  A single fibre of
asbestos could have caused the disease.  As all the employers had exposed the
employee to the same risk, it was impossible to say which employer’s negligence
in fact led to the disease.  In each case, the defendants pointed the finger at
the negligence of others.  And in each case, the court rejected this defence
and found liability on the basis of material contribution. [31]                         
The U.K. toxic agent cases debated whether the
defendants in these circumstances were held liable because they materially
contributed to the injury, or to the risk of the injury. 
Lord Hoffmann, in Barker, stated that the purpose of the Fairchild
exception was “to provide a cause of action against a defendant who has
materially increased the risk that the claimant will suffer damage and may have
caused that damage, but cannot be proved to have done so because it is
impossible to show, on a balance of probability, that some other exposure to
the same risk may not have caused it instead” (para. 17). [32]                         
Viewed generally, the toxic agent cases up to Sienkiewicz hold that resort may be had
to the concept of material contribution to the risk of injury where it is plain
that any or all of a number of tortfeasors could have caused the plaintiff’s
injury, but it is impossible to say that any particular one in fact did so. In
this situation, fairness and policy support relaxation of the “but for” test. 
In each case, the plaintiff would not have contracted the disease, “but for”
the negligence of the defendants as a group.  As I will discuss further below,
to allow the defendants to each escape liability by pointing the finger at one
another would have been at odds with the fairness, deterrence, and corrective
justice objectives of the law of negligence.          3.      When
Is a Material Contribution to Risk Approach Available? [33]                         
We have seen that the jurisprudence establishes
that while tort liability must generally be founded on proof that “but for” the
defendant’s negligence the injury would not have occurred, exceptionally proof
of factual causation can be replaced by proof of a material contribution to the
risk that gave rise to the injury. [34]                         
In Resurfice, this Court summarized the
cases as holding that a material contribution approach may be appropriate where
it is “impossible” for the plaintiff to prove causation on the “but for” test
and where it is clear that the defendant breached its duty of care (acted
negligently) in a way that exposed the plaintiff to an unreasonable risk of
injury.  As a summary of the jurisprudence, this is accurate.  However, as a
test it is incomplete.  A clear picture of when “but for” causation can be
replaced by material contribution to risk requires further exploration of what
is meant by “impossible to prove” (Resurfice, at para. 28) and what
substratum of negligence must be shown.  I will discuss each of these related
concepts in turn.          (a)     “Impossibility” [35]                         
The idea running through the jurisprudence that
to apply the material contribution approach it must be “impossible” for the
plaintiff to prove that the defendant’s negligence caused the plaintiff’s
injury using the “but for” test has produced uncertainty in this case and
elsewhere. [36]                         
Some have suggested that “but for” proof must be
logically or conceptually impossible before material contribution to risk is
available, arguing that Cook and the toxic agent cases show impossibility
in this sense.  But it is difficult to know what this means.  As a matter of
pure logic, it is conceivable that ballistics tests could have revealed which
shotgun fired the shot that injured Mr. Lewis.  It is also conceivable
that with further understanding, medical science may someday be able to say
which employer supplied the particle of asbestos that caused the plaintiffs in Barker
to develop mesothelioma.  Clearly the impossibility in those examples was
related to difficulties with factual proof, not to logical problems inherent in
the peculiarities of the case. [37]                         
However, the option of finding that a material
contribution to risk approach is available whenever proof of “but for”
causation cannot be made on the facts is equally problematic.  First, how does
one distinguish between a case of true impossibility of factual proof and a
situation where the plaintiff simply fails to meet her burden of establishing
“but for” causation on the evidence?  Unless one can make a clear distinction,
one effectively undermines the requirement that the plaintiff bears the burden
of showing that, “but for” the defendant’s negligence, she would not have been
injured.  In any difficult case, the plaintiff would be able to claim
impossibility of proof of causation.  Such a result would fundamentally change
the law of negligence and sever it from its anchor in corrective justice that
makes the defendant liable for the consequences, but only the consequences, of
his negligent act. [38]                         
“Scientific impossibility”, relied on by the trial
judge in this case, is merely a variant of factual impossibility and attracts
the same objections.  In many cases of causal uncertainty, it is conceivable
that with better scientific evidence, causation could be clarified. Scientific
uncertainty was referred to in Resurfice in the course of explaining the
difficulties that have arisen in the cases.  However, this should not be
read as ousting the “but for” test for causation in negligence actions.  The
law of negligence has never required scientific proof of causation; to repeat
yet again, common sense inferences from the facts may suffice.  If
scientific evidence of causation is not required, as Snell makes plain,
it is difficult to see how its absence can be raised as a basis for ousting the
usual “but for” test. [39]                         
What then are the cases referring to when they
say that it must be “impossible” to prove “but for” causation as a precondition
to a material contribution to risk approach?  The answer emerges from the facts
of the cases that have adopted such an approach.  Typically, there are a number
of tortfeasors.  All are at fault, and one or more has
in fact caused the plaintiff’s injury.  The plaintiff would
not have been injured “but for” their negligence, viewed globally.  However,
because each can point the finger at the other, it is impossible for the
plaintiff to show on a balance of probabilities that any one of them in fact
caused her injury.  This is the impossibility of which Cook and the
multiple-employer mesothelioma cases speak.          (b)     Substratum
of Negligence Involving Multiple Possible Tortfeasors [40]                         
The cases that have dispensed with the usual
requirement of “but for” causation in favour of a less onerous material
contribution to risk approach are generally cases where, “but for” the
negligent act of one or more of the defendants, the plaintiff would not have
been injured.  This excludes recovery where the injury “may very well be due to
factors unconnected to the defendant and not the fault of anyone”:  Snell,
per Sopinka J., at p. 327.  The plaintiff effectively has
established that the “but for” test, viewed globally, has been met.  It is only
when it is applied separately to each defendant that the “but for” test breaks
down because it cannot be shown which of several negligent defendants actually
launched the event that led to the injury.  The plaintiff thus has shown
negligence and a relationship of duty owed by each defendant, but faces failure
on the “but for” test because it is “impossible”, in the sense just discussed,
to show which act or acts were injurious.  In such cases, each defendant who
has contributed to the risk of the injury that occurred can be faulted. [41]                         
In these circumstances, permitting the plaintiff
to succeed on a material contribution to risk basis meets the underlying goals
of the law of negligence.  Compensation for injury is achieved.  Fairness is
satisfied; the plaintiff has suffered a loss due to negligence, so it is fair
that she turns to tort law for compensation.  Further, each defendant failed to
act with the care necessary to avoid potentially causing the plaintiff’s loss,
and each may well have in fact caused the plaintiff’s loss.  Deterrence is also
furthered; potential tortfeasors will know that they cannot escape liability by
pointing the finger at others.  And these goals are furthered in a manner
consistent with corrective justice; the deficit in the relationship between the
plaintiff and the defendants viewed as a group that would exist if the
plaintiff were denied recovery is corrected.  The plaintiff has shown that she
is in a correlative relationship of doer and sufferer of the same harm with the
group of defendants as a whole, if not necessarily with each individual
defendant. [42]                         
The only case to apply a material contribution
to risk approach to a single tortfeasor is Sienkiewicz.  A plaintiff suffering from mesothelioma
had only been exposed to asbestos from a single negligent source and on
the trial judge’s findings, “but for” causation could not be inferred.  The
United Kingdom Supreme Court took the view that it was bound by precedent to
apply a material contribution to risk approach in all mesothelioma cases.
Several members of the court in Sienkiewicz noted the difficulty with
such a result.  Lady Hale observed that she found it hard to believe that a
defendant “whose wrongful exposure might or might not have led to the disease
would be liable in full for the consequences even if it was more likely than not
that some other cause was to blame (let alone that it was not more likely than
not that he was to blame)” (para. 167).  In my view, nothing compels a similar
result in Canada, and thus far, although Sopinka J.’s remarks in Snell
(quoted above at para. 20) do not preclude it, courts in Canada have not
applied a material contribution to risk test in a case with a single
tortfeasor. [43]                         
It is important to reaffirm that in the usual
case of multiple agents or actors, the traditional “but for” test still applies. 
The question, as discussed earlier, is whether the plaintiff has shown that the
negligence of one or more of the defendants was a necessary cause of the
injury.  Degrees of fault are reflected in calculations made under contributory
negligence legislation.  By contrast, the material contribution to risk
approach applies where “but for” causation cannot be proven against any of
multiple defendants, all negligent in a manner that might have in fact caused
the plaintiff’s injury, because each can use a “point the finger” strategy to
preclude a finding of causation on a balance of probabilities. [44]                         
This is not to say that new situations will not
raise new considerations.  I leave for another day, for example, the scenario
that might arise in mass toxic tort litigation with multiple plaintiffs, where
it is established statistically that the defendant’s acts induced an injury on
some members of the group, but it is impossible to know which ones. [45]                         
The Court of Appeal reached a similar view of
the law to that here proposed.  It  pointed out that the material contribution
to risk exception to “but for” causation is not a test for proving factual
causation, but a basis for finding “legal” causation where fairness and justice
demand deviation from the “but for” test.  It correctly identified the critical
element for application of a material contribution to risk approach — the
impossibility of proving which of two or more possible tortious causes is in
fact the cause of the injury.  And it correctly suggested that the approach
could apply to situations where, as in Walker Estate, a defendant
attempts to defeat “but for” causation by pointing the finger at the
hypothetical negligence of a third party that might have caused the loss in any
event.  It was unnecessary, in my view, to hang the analysis on “circular
causation”, and “dependency causation”, which may complicate the matter rather
than simplify it.  However, in broad terms, the Court of Appeal correctly
identified the circumstances where a material contribution to risk approach may
exceptionally be imposed. C.     Summary [46]                         
The foregoing discussion leads me to the
following conclusions as to the present state of the law in Canada: (1)        As a general rule, a plaintiff cannot succeed unless she
shows as a matter of fact that she would not have suffered the loss “but for”
the negligent act or acts of the defendant.  A trial judge is to take a robust
and pragmatic approach to determining if a plaintiff has established that the
defendant’s negligence caused her loss.  Scientific proof of causation is not
required. (2)        Exceptionally, a plaintiff may
succeed by showing that the defendant’s conduct materially contributed to risk
of the plaintiff’s injury, where (a) the plaintiff has established that her
loss would not have occurred “but for” the negligence of two or more
tortfeasors, each possibly in fact responsible for the loss; and (b) the
plaintiff, through no fault of her own, is unable to show that any one of the
possible tortfeasors in fact was the necessary or “but for” cause of her
injury, because each can point to one another as the possible “but for” cause
of the injury, defeating a finding of causation on a balance of probabilities
against anyone. D.     Application [47]                         
The trial judge made two errors. [48]                         
The first error was to insist on scientific
reconstruction evidence as a necessary condition of finding “but for”
causation.  The trial judge stated, at para. 66, that                     the
plaintiff through no fault of her own is unable to prove that “but for” the
defendant’s breaches, she would not have been injured.  This is because after
the fact, it is not possible through accident reconstruction modeling to
determine at what combination of lower speed and lesser weight recovery from
the weave instability would have been practicable. [49]                         
As discussed above, the cases consistently hold
that scientific precision is not necessary to a conclusion that “but for”
causation is established on a balance of probabilities.  It follows that the
trial judge erred in insisting on scientific precision in the evidence as a
condition of finding “but for” causation. [50]                         
The trial judge’s second error was to apply a
material contribution to risk test.  The special conditions that permit resort
to a material contribution approach were not present in this case.  This is not
a case where we know that the loss would not have occurred “but for” the
negligence of two or more possible tortfeasors, but the plaintiff cannot
establish on a balance of probabilities which negligent actor or actors caused
the injury.  This is a simple single-defendant case:  the only issue was
whether “but for” the defendant’s negligent conduct, the injury would have been
sustained. [51]                         
The judge accepted evidence to the effect that
overloading would have increased instability in the event of a weave caused by tire
deflation (para. 41).  He also noted expert evidence to the effect that
instability due to tire deflation increases with speed and that it was
impossible to predict without tests whether the capsize would have occurred at
a lower speed (para. 42).  However, the trial judge rejected the evidence of
the expert witness, Mr. MacInnis, that the accident would have happened even if
the defendant had not negligently overloaded his bike and driven too fast
(para. 62).  He gave a number of reasons for rejecting this
evidence.  The judge noted that his own findings of fact on the issues of
speed and weight were markedly different than the facts assumed by the expert
in formulating his opinion.  The judge found as a fact that the motorcycle
was overloaded to the extent of more than 100 pounds, in other words by a
factor of nearly 10 percent, while the expert assumed considerably less
overloading — no more than 5
percent.  The judge found as a fact that the defendant had exceeded a
proper speed by at least 30 km/h (based on a safe travelling speed of
approximately 90 km/h in all of the circumstances, as found by the trial
judge), whereas the expert assumed an excess speed of about 12.5 km/h
(para. 60).  The judge further noted that the expert had “readily
conceded” that his opinion that the excess speed and weight were
non-contributing factors was “largely conjectural” because it “could
not be supported scientifically” (para. 60 (emphasis added)). [52]                         
Having rejected the defendant’s expert evidence that the accident
would have happened regardless of the excess speed and excess weight, the judge
was left with the fact that while there was no scientific proof one way or the
other, “[o]rdinary common sense” supported the causal relationship between
the injury and the excessive speed and weight (paras. 63-64).  He noted, at para. 64, that the motorcycle’s manual itself
stated that “[h]igh speed
increases the influence of any other condition affecting stability and
possibility of loss of control”, and that the defendant agreed the speed at
which he was travelling and the load he was carrying were factors that
contributed to the accident (para. 33).  Finally, the trial judge used language
tantamount to finding actual “but for” causation, stating (at para. 67):                             I
conclude on all of the evidence that the defendant’s breaches of duty
materially contributed to the injuries suffered by the plaintiff as a result of
the accident. In short, her injuries were the result of her husband driving
too fast with too heavy a load when his rear tire unexpectedly deflated.
Causation is therefore established within the parameters discussed by the
Supreme Court of Canada in Athey and Resurfice. [Emphasis added.] [53]                         
We cannot be certain what the trial judge would
have concluded had he not made the errors I earlier described.  All that can be
said is that the parties did not receive a trial based on correct legal
principles.  In my view, the appropriate remedy in these circumstances is an
order for a new trial. [54]                         
I would allow the appeal and order a new trial. 
The appellant will have her costs in this Court.  The orders for costs below
are set aside.                     The reasons of LeBel and
Rothstein JJ. were delivered by [55]                         
LeBel J. (dissenting) — I have read the Chief Justice’s reasons. I agree
with the substance of her analysis of the law of causation and the nature of
the “but for” test. But, in my respectful opinion, there is no basis in fact
and law for ordering a new trial. I would uphold the judgment of the Court of
Appeal and dismiss the appeal. [56]                         
The key finding of fact made by the trial judge
was that the plaintiff had not proven causation on the basis of the “but for”
test. The trial judge specifically stated, at para. 66, that the plaintiff
had been “unable to prove that ‘but for’ the defendant’s breaches, she would
not have been injured” (2009 BCSC 112 (CanLII)). Given this finding, it would
be exceedingly difficult to draw a common sense inference that those breaches
caused the accident. Such inferences cannot be pulled out of thin air at the
whim of the trier of fact. They must have a reliable factual foundation. [57]                         
In this case, a factual foundation that would
support an inference that the overloading of the motorcycle and excessive speed
caused the accident is quite simply lacking. The only evidence directly related
to the issue came from the respondent’s expert, Mr. MacInnis. According to his
evidence, the accident would have happened even if the motorcycle had been
travelling at a lower, legal speed and without a pound of excess baggage. The
trial judge evidently rejected this opinion. The fact remains, however, that no
evidence was adduced regarding the exact (or even approximate) speed and weight
at which the respondent would have been able to regain control of his
motorcycle. The state of the evidence therefore leaves precious little room for
speculating about robust common sense inferences as to the cause of the
accident. [58]                         
The Chief Justice takes a different view. She
states, at para. 52, that the trial judge “used language tantamount to finding
actual ‘but for’ causation”. She quotes the following passage from para. 67 of
the trial judge’s reasons:                            I
conclude on all of the evidence that the defendant’s breaches of duty
materially contributed to the injuries suffered by the plaintiff as a result of
the accident. In short, her injuries were the result of her husband driving too
fast with too heavy a load when his rear tire unexpectedly deflated. Causation
is therefore established within the parameters discussed by the Supreme Court
of Canada in Athey [v. Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R.
458] and Resurfice [Corp. v. Hanke, 2007 SCC 7, [2007] 1
S.C.R. 333]. [59]                         
The trial judge’s comments must be read in the
context of his decision as a whole. He had determined that, in view of the
impossibility of proving how, or whether, each factor had contributed to the
accident, “but for” causation should be dispensed with and a “material
contribution” test applied. The quoted comments were made in the context of his
application of the latter test. They constituted his conclusion that the
material contribution test had been satisfied. [60]                         
For the reasons given by the Chief Justice, the
application of the material contribution test by the trial judge was
inappropriate. Further, as the Chief Justice states, at para. 14, the “but for”
and material contribution tests are “two different beasts”. The material
contribution test does not require a factual inquiry into what likely happened,
but imposes liability as a matter of policy. The trial judge’s finding that the
material contribution test was satisfied cannot be reinterpreted as a finding
that “but for” causation was established without seriously undermining the
important distinction between the two tests and the clarity of the analysis
pertaining to causation. [61]                         
Moreover, I wonder whether the order for a new
trial itself represents sound judicial policy. I am not arguing that this Court
lacks jurisdiction to issue this order and that the order is therefore illegal.
But, on policy grounds related to the administration of justice and the conduct
of civil appeals, this Court and courts of appeal should be mindful of the need
for finality and efficiency in the civil litigation process. Where it is
appropriate to do so, an attempt should be made to resolve the issues and
thereby avoid sending the matter back for a new trial, which might itself
trigger a new round of appeals. [62]                         
In this appeal, I am unable to find any basis in
the trial judge’s judgment for inferring that the overloading of the motorcycle
and excessive speed could have been the “cause” of the accident as that term is
understood in the context of the “but for” test. Nor is this a case in which it
would be appropriate to send the matter back for a new trial. [63]                         
For those reasons, I would dismiss the appeal
with costs.                     Appeal
allowed, LeBel and Rothstein JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors
for the appellant:  Dick Byl Law Corporation, Prince George.                     Solicitors
for the respondent:  Miller Thomson, Vancouver.                     Solicitor for the intervener:  Attorney
General of British Columbia, Vancouver.   