Housen v. Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, 2002 SCC 33  Paul Housen                                                                                                      Appellant  v.  Rural Municipality of Shellbrook No. 493                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Housen v. Nikolaisen  Neutral citation: 2002 SCC 33.  File No.: 27826.  2001: October 2; 2002: March 28.   on appeal from the court of appeal for saskatchewan    Appeals -- Courts -- Standard of appellate review
-- Whether Court of Appeal properly overturning trial judge’s finding of
negligence -- Standard of review for questions of mixed fact and law.  The appellant was a passenger in a vehicle operated by
N on a rural road in the respondent municipality.  N failed to negotiate a
sharp curve on the road and lost control of his vehicle.  The appellant was
rendered a quadriplegic as a result of the injuries he sustained in the
accident.  Damages were agreed upon prior to trial in the amount of
$2.5 million, but at issue were the respective liabilities, if any, of the
municipality, N and the appellant.  On the day before the accident, N had
attended a party at the T residence not far from the scene of the accident.  He
continued drinking through the night at another party where he met up with the
appellant.  The two men drove back to the T residence in the morning where N
continued drinking until a couple of hours before he and the appellant drove
off in N’s truck.  N was unfamiliar with the road, but had travelled on it
three times in the 24 hours preceding the accident, on his way to and from the
T residence.  Visibility approaching the area of the accident was limited due
to the radius of the curve and the uncleared brush growing up to the edge of
the road.  A light rain was falling as N turned onto the road from the T
property.  The truck fishtailed a few times before approaching the sharp curve
where the accident occurred.  Expert testimony revealed that N was travelling
at a speed of between 53 and 65 km/hr when the vehicle entered the curved
portion of the road, slightly above the speed at which the curve could be
safely negotiated under the conditions prevalent at the time of the accident.   Held (Gonthier, Bastarache, Binnie and LeBel JJ. dissenting): The
appeal should be allowed and the judgment of the trial judge restored.    Questions of mixed fact and law involve the
application of a legal standard to a set of facts.  Where the question of mixed
fact and law at issue is a finding of negligence, it should be deferred to by
appellate courts, in the absence of a legal or palpable and overriding error. 
Requiring a standard of “palpable and overriding error” for findings of
negligence made by either a trial judge or a jury reinforces the proper
relationship between the appellate and trial court levels and accords with the
established standard of review applicable to a finding of negligence by a
jury.  Where the issue on appeal involves the trial judge’s interpretation of
the evidence as a whole, it should not be overturned absent palpable and
overriding error.  A determination of whether or not the standard of care was
met by the defendant involves the application of a legal standard to a set of
facts, a question of mixed fact and law, and is thus subject to a standard of
palpable and overriding error, unless it is clear that the trial judge made
some extricable error in principle with respect to the characterization of the
standard or its application, in which case the error may amount to an error of
law, subject to a standard of correctness.  Here, the municipality’s standard of care was to
maintain the road in such a reasonable state of repair that those requiring to
use it could, exercising ordinary care, travel upon it with safety.  The trial
judge applied the correct test in determining that the municipality did not
meet this standard of care, and her decision should not be overturned absent
palpable and overriding error.  The trial judge kept the conduct of the
ordinary motorist in mind because she stated the correct test at the outset, 
and discussed implicitly and explicitly the conduct of a reasonable motorist
approaching the curve.  Further, her apportionment of negligence indicates that
she assessed N’s conduct against the standard of the ordinary driver as does
her use of the term “hidden hazard” and her consideration of the speed at which
motorists should have approached the curve.  The Court of Appeal’s finding of a palpable and
overriding error by the trial judge was based on the erroneous presumption that
she accepted 80km/h as the speed at which an ordinary motorist would approach
the curve, when in fact she found that a motorist exercising ordinary care
could approach the curve at greater than the speed at which it would be safe to
negotiate it.  This finding was based on the trial judge’s reasonable and
practical assessment of the evidence as a whole, and is far from reaching the
level of palpable and overriding error.  The trial judge did not err in finding that the
municipality knew or ought to have known of the disrepair of the road.  Because
the hazard in this case was a permanent feature of the road, it was open to the
trial judge to draw the inference that a prudent municipal councillor ought to
be aware of it.  Once this inference has been drawn, then unless the
municipality can rebut the inference by showing that it took reasonable steps
to prevent such a hazard from continuing, the inference will be left
undisturbed.  Prior accidents on the road do not provide a direct basis for
finding that the municipality had knowledge of the particular hazard, but this
factor, together with knowledge of the type of drivers using this road, should
have caused the municipality to investigate the road which would have resulted
in actual knowledge.  To require the plaintiff to provide concrete proof of the
municipality’s knowledge of the state of disrepair of its roads is to set an
impossibly high burden on the plaintiff.  Such information was within the
particular sphere of knowledge of the municipality, and it was reasonable for
the trial judge to draw an inference of knowledge from her finding that there
was an ongoing state of disrepair.  The trial judge’s conclusion on the cause of the
accident was a finding of fact subject to the palpable and overriding error
standard of review.  The abstract nature of the inquiry as to whether N would
have seen a sign had one been posted before the curve supports deference to the
factual findings of the trial judge.  The trial judge’s factual findings on
causation were reasonable and thus should not have been interfered with by the
Court of Appeal.   Section 192 of the Rural Municipality Act, 1989,
requires the trial judge to examine whether the portion of the road on which
the accident occurred posed a hazard to the reasonable driver exercising
ordinary care.  Here, the trial judge failed to ask whether a reasonable driver
exercising ordinary care would have been able to safely drive the portion of
the road on which the accident occurred.  This amounted to an error of law. 
The duty of the municipality is to keep the road in such a reasonable state of
repair that those required to use it may, exercising ordinary care, travel upon
it with safety.  The duty is a limited one as the municipality is not an insurer
of travellers using its streets.  Although the trial judge found that the
portion of the road where the accident occurred presented drivers with a hidden
hazard, there is nothing to indicate that she considered whether or not that
portion of the road would pose a risk to the reasonable driver exercising
ordinary care.  Where an error of law has been found, the appellate court has
jurisdiction to take the factual findings of the trial judge as they are and to
reassess these findings in the context of the appropriate legal test. Here, the
portion of the road on which the accident occurred did not pose a risk to a
reasonable driver exercising ordinary care because the condition of the road in
general signalled to the reasonable driver that caution was needed.   With respect to her conclusions on causation, which
are conclusions on matters of fact, the trial judge ignored evidence that N had
swerved on the first curve he negotiated prior to the accident, and that he had
driven on the road three times in the 18 to 20 hours preceding the accident. 
She further ignored the significance of the testimony of the forensic alcohol
specialist which pointed overwhelmingly to alcohol as the causal factor which
led to the accident, and erroneously relied on one statement by him to support
her conclusion that a driver at N’s level of impairment would have reacted to a
warning sign.  The finding that the outcome would have been different had N
been forewarned of the curve ignores the fact that he already knew the curve
was there.  The fact that the trial judge referred to some evidence to support
her findings on causation does not insulate them from review by this Court.  An
appellate court is entitled to assess whether or not it was clearly wrong for
the trial judge to rely on some evidence when other evidence points
overwhelmingly to the opposite conclusion.  Whatever the approach to the issue of the duty of
care, it is only reasonable to expect a municipality to foresee accidents which
occur as a result of the conditions of the road, and not, as in this case, as a
result of the condition of the driver.  To expand the repair obligation of
municipalities to require them to take into account the actions of unreasonable
or careless drivers when discharging this duty would signify a drastic and
unworkable change to the current standard.  Cases Cited  By Iacobucci and Major JJ.   By Bastarache J. (dissenting)   Statutes and Regulations Cited    Authors Cited  American Bar Association. Judicial
Administration Division.  Standards Relating to Appellate Courts. 
Chicago: American Bar Association, 1995.  Cambridge International
Dictionary of English.  Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996, “palpable”.  Gibbens, R. D.  “Appellate Review
of Findings of Fact” (1991-92), 13 Advocates’ Q. 445.  Goodhart, A. L.  “Appeals on
Questions of Fact” (1955), 71 L.Q.R. 402.  Kerans, Roger P. Standards of
Review Employed by Appellate Courts.  Edmonton: Juriliber,
1994.  New Oxford Dictionary of
English.  Edited by Judy Pearsall. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998, “palpable”.  Random House Dictionary of the
English Language, 2nd ed.  Edited by Stuart Berg
Flexner.  New York: Random House, 1987, “palpable”.  Wright, Charles Alan.  “The
Doubtful Omniscience of Appellate Courts” (1957), 41 Minn. L. Rev. 751.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Saskatchewan Court of
Appeal, [2000] 4 W.W.R. 173, 189 Sask. R. 51, 9 M.P.L.R. (3d) 126, 50 M.V.R.
(3d) 70, [2000] S.J. No. 58 (QL), 2000 SKCA 12, setting aside a decision
of the Court of Queen’s Bench, [1998] 5 W.W.R. 523, 161 Sask. R. 241, 44
M.P.L.R. (2d) 203, [1997] S.J. No. 759 (QL).  Appeal allowed, Gonthier,
Bastarache, Binnie and LeBel JJ. dissenting.  Gary D. Young, Q.C.,
Denis I. Quon and M. Kim Anderson, for the appellant. Michael Morris and G.
L. Gerrand, Q.C., for the respondent.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and L’Heureux-Dubé,
Iacobucci, Major and Arbour JJ. was delivered by  Iacobucci and Major
JJ. -- I.  Introduction  1                                  
A proposition that should be unnecessary to state is that a court of
appeal should not interfere with a trial judge’s reasons unless there is a
palpable and overriding error.  The same proposition is sometimes stated as
prohibiting an appellate court from reviewing a trial judge’s decision if there
was some evidence upon which he or she could have relied to reach that conclusion.  2                                  
Authority for this abounds particularly in appellate courts in Canada
and abroad (see Gottardo Properties (Dome) Inc. v. Toronto (City)
(1998), 162 D.L.R. (4th) 574 (Ont. C.A.); Schwartz v. Canada, [1996] 1
S.C.R. 254; Toneguzzo-Norvell (Guardian ad litem of) v. Burnaby Hospital,
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 114; Van de Perre  v. Edwards, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 1014,
2001 SCC 60).  In addition scholars, national and international, endorse it
(see C. A. Wright in “The Doubtful Omniscience of Appellate Courts” (1957), 41 Minn.
L. Rev. 751, at p. 780; and the Honourable R. P. Kerans in Standards of
Review Employed by Appellate Courts (1994); and American Bar Association,
Judicial Administration Division, Standards Relating to Appellate Courts
(1995), at pp. 24-25).  3                                  
The role of the appellate court was aptly defined in Underwood v.
Ocean City Realty Ltd. (1987), 12 B.C.L.R. (2d) 199 (C.A.), at p. 204,
where it was stated:  The appellate court must not retry a case and must not substitute its
views for the views of the trial judge according to what the appellate court
thinks the evidence establishes on its view of the balance of probabilities.  4                                  
While the theory has acceptance, consistency in its application is
missing.  The foundation of the principle is as sound today as 100 years ago. 
It is premised on the notion that finality is an important aim of litigation. 
There is no suggestion that appellate court judges are somehow smarter and thus
capable of reaching a better result.  Their role is not to write better
judgments but to review the reasons in light of the arguments of the parties
and the relevant evidence, and then to uphold the decision unless a palpable
error leading to a wrong result has been made by the trial judge.  5                                  
What is palpable error?  The New Oxford Dictionary of English
(1998) defines “palpable” as “clear to the mind or plain to see” (p. 1337). 
The Cambridge International Dictionary of English (1996) describes it as
“so obvious that it can easily be seen or known” (p. 1020).  The Random
House Dictionary of the English Language (2nd ed. 1987) defines it as
“readily or plainly seen” (p. 1399).  6                                  
The common element in each of these definitions is that palpable is
plainly seen.  Applying that to this appeal, in order for the Saskatchewan
Court of Appeal to reverse the trial judge the “palpable and overriding” error
of fact found by Cameron J.A. must be plainly seen.  As we will discuss, we do
not think that test has been met.  II.  The
Role of the Appellate Court in the Case at Bar  7                                  
Given that an appeal is not a retrial of a case, consideration must be
given to the applicable standard of review of an appellate court on the various
issues which arise on this appeal. We therefore find it helpful to discuss
briefly the standards of review relevant to the following types of questions:
(1) questions of law; (2) questions of fact; (3) inferences of fact; and (4)
questions of mixed fact and law.  A.  Standard
of Review for Questions of Law  8                                  
On a pure question of law, the basic rule with respect to the review of
a trial judge’s findings is that an appellate court is free to replace the
opinion of the trial judge with its own.  Thus the standard of review on a
question of law is that of correctness: Kerans, supra, at p. 90.  9                                  
There are at least two underlying reasons for employing a correctness
standard to matters of law.  First, the principle of universality requires
appellate courts to ensure that the same legal rules are applied in similar
situations.  The importance of this principle was recognized by this Court in Woods
Manufacturing Co. v. The King, [1951] S.C.R. 504, at p. 515:  It is fundamental to the due administration of justice that the
authority of decisions be scrupulously respected by all courts upon which they
are binding.  Without this uniform and consistent adherence the administration
of justice becomes disordered, the law becomes uncertain, and the confidence of
the public in it undermined.  Nothing is more important than that the law as
pronounced . . . should be accepted and applied as our tradition requires; and
even at the risk of that fallibility to which all judges are liable, we must
maintain the complete integrity of relationship between the courts.  A second and
related reason for applying a correctness standard to matters of law is the
recognized law-making role of appellate courts which is pointed out by Kerans, supra,
at p. 5:  The call for universality, and the law-settling
role it imposes, makes a considerable demand on a reviewing court.  It expects
from that authority a measure of expertise about the art of just and practical
rule-making, an expertise that is not so critical for the first court. 
Reviewing courts, in cases where the law requires settlement, make law for
future cases as well as the case under review.  Thus, while
the primary role of trial courts is to resolve individual disputes based on the
facts before them and settled law, the primary role of appellate courts is to
delineate and refine legal rules and ensure their universal application. In
order to fulfill the above functions, appellate courts require a broad scope of
review with respect to matters of law.  B.  Standard
of Review for Findings of Fact  10                              
The standard of review for findings of fact is that such findings are
not to be reversed unless it can be established that the trial judge made a
“palpable and overriding error”: Stein v. The Ship “Kathy K”, [1976] 2
S.C.R. 802, at p. 808; Ingles v. Tutkaluk Construction Ltd.,
[2000] 1 S.C.R. 298, 2000 SCC 12, at para. 42; Ryan v. Victoria
(City), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 201, at para. 57.  While this standard is often
cited, the principles underlying this high degree of deference rarely receive
mention.  We find it useful, for the purposes of this appeal, to review briefly
the various policy reasons for employing a high level of appellate deference to
findings of fact.  11                              
A fundamental reason for general deference to the trial judge is
the presumption of fitness -- a presumption that trial judges are just as
competent as appellate judges to ensure that disputes are resolved justly. 
Kerans, supra, at pp. 10-11, states that:  If we have confidence in these systems for the
resolution of disputes, we should assume that those decisions are just.  The
appeal process is part of the decisional process, then, only because we
recognize that, despite all effort, errors occur.  An appeal should be the
exception rather than the rule, as indeed it is in Canada.   12                              
With respect to findings of fact in particular, in Gottardo
Properties, supra, Laskin J.A. summarized the purposes underlying a
deferential stance as follows (at para. 48):  Deference is desirable for several reasons: to limit the number and
length of appeals, to promote the autonomy and integrity of the trial or motion
court proceedings on which substantial resources have been expended, to
preserve the confidence of litigants in those proceedings, to recognize the
competence of the trial judge or motion judge and to reduce needless
duplication of judicial effort with no corresponding improvement in the quality
of justice.  Similar
concerns were expressed by La Forest J. in Schwartz, supra, at
para. 32:  It has long been settled that appellate courts must
treat a trial judge’s findings of fact with great deference.  The rule is
principally based on the assumption that the trier of fact is in a privileged
position to assess the credibility of witnesses’ testimony at trial. . . . 
Others have also pointed out additional judicial policy concerns to justify the
rule.  Unlimited intervention by appellate courts would greatly increase the
number and the length of appeals generally.  Substantial resources are
allocated to trial courts to go through the process of assessing facts.  The
autonomy and integrity of the trial process must be preserved by exercising
deference towards the trial courts’ findings of fact; see R. D. Gibbens,
“Appellate Review of Findings of Fact” (1992), 13 Adv. Q. 445, at pp.
445-48; Fletcher v. Manitoba Public Insurance Co., [1990] 3 S.C.R. 191,
at p. 204.  See also in
the context of patent litigation, Consolboard Inc. v. MacMillan Bloedel
(Saskatchewan) Ltd., [1981] 1 S.C.R. 504, at p. 537.  13                              
In Anderson v. Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564 (1985), at pp. 574-75,
the United States Supreme Court also listed numerous reasons for deferring to
the factual findings of the trial judge:  The rationale for deference to the original finder
of fact is not limited to the superiority of the trial judge’s position to make
determinations of credibility.  The trial judge’s major role is the
determination of fact, and with experience in fulfilling that role comes
expertise.  Duplication of the trial judge’s efforts in the court of appeals
would very likely contribute only negligibly to the accuracy of fact
determination at a huge cost in diversion of judicial resources.  In addition,
the parties to a case on appeal have already been forced to concentrate their
energies and resources on persuading the trial judge that their account of the
facts is the correct one; requiring them to persuade three more judges at the
appellate level is requiring too much.  As the Court has stated in a different
context, the trial on the merits should be “the ‘main event’ . . . rather than
a ‘tryout on the road.’” . . . For these reasons, review of factual findings
under the clearly-erroneous standard -- with its deference to the trier of fact
-- is the rule, not the exception.   14                              
Further comments regarding the advantages possessed by the trial judge
have been made by R. D. Gibbens in “Appellate Review of Findings of Fact”
(1991-92), 13 Advocates’ Q. 445, at p. 446:  The trial judge is said to have an expertise in assessing and weighing
the facts developed at trial. Similarly, the trial judge has also been exposed
to the entire case.  The trial judge has sat through the entire case and his
ultimate judgment reflects this total familiarity with the evidence.  The
insight gained by the trial judge who has lived with the case for several days,
weeks or even months may be far deeper than that of the Court of Appeal whose
view of the case is much more limited and narrow, often being shaped and
distorted by the various orders or rulings being challenged.   The corollary
to this recognized advantage of trial courts and judges is that appellate
courts are not in a favourable position to assess and determine factual
matters.  Appellate court judges are restricted to reviewing written
transcripts of testimony.  As well, appeals are unsuited to reviewing
voluminous amounts of evidence.  Finally, appeals are telescopic in nature,
focussing narrowly on particular issues as opposed to viewing the case as a
whole.  15                              
In our view, the numerous bases for deferring to the findings of fact of
the trial judge which are discussed in the above authorities can be grouped
into the following three basic principles.  (1)   Limiting the Number, Length and Cost of Appeals  16                              
Given the scarcity of judicial resources, setting limits on the scope of
judicial review is to be encouraged.  Deferring to a trial judge’s findings of
fact not only serves this end, but does so on a principled basis.  Substantial
resources are allocated to trial courts for the purpose of assessing facts.  To
allow for wide-ranging review of the trial judge’s factual findings results in
needless duplication of judicial proceedings with little, if any improvement in
the result.  In addition, lengthy appeals prejudice litigants with fewer
resources, and frustrate the goal of providing an efficient and effective
remedy for the parties.  (2)  Promoting the Autonomy and Integrity of Trial Proceedings  17                              
The presumption underlying the structure of our court system is that a
trial judge is competent to decide the case before him or her, and that a just
and fair outcome will result from the trial process.  Frequent and unlimited
appeals would undermine this presumption and weaken public confidence in the
trial process.  An appeal is the exception rather than the rule.  (3)   Recognizing the Expertise of the Trial
Judge and His or Her Advantageous Position  18                              
The trial judge is better situated to make factual findings owing to his
or her extensive exposure to the evidence, the advantage of hearing testimony
viva voce, and the judge’s familiarity with the case as a whole. 
Because the primary role of the trial judge is to weigh and assess voluminous
quantities of evidence, the expertise and insight of the trial judge in this
area should be respected.  C.  Standard
of Review for Inferences of Fact 19                              
We find it necessary to address the appropriate standard of review for
factual inferences because the reasons of our colleague suggest that a lower
standard of review may be applied to the inferences of fact drawn by a trial
judge.  With respect, it is our view, that to apply a lower standard of review
to inferences of fact would be to depart from established jurisprudence of this
Court, and would be contrary to the principles supporting a deferential stance
to matters of fact.  20                              
Our colleague acknowledges that, in Geffen v. Goodman Estate,
[1991] 2 S.C.R. 353, this Court determined that a trial judge’s inferences of
fact and findings of fact should be accorded a similar degree of deference. 
The relevant passage from Geffen  is the following (per Wilson
J., at pp. 388-89):  It is by now well established that findings of fact
made at trial based on the credibility of witnesses are not to be reversed on
appeal unless it is established that the trial judge made some palpable and
overriding error which affected his assessment of the facts . . . .  Even
where a finding of fact is not contingent upon credibility, this Court has
maintained a non-interventionist approach to the review of trial court
findings. . . .  And even in those cases where a finding of fact is
neither inextricably linked to the credibility of the testifying witness nor
based on a misapprehension of the evidence, the rule remains that appellate
review should be limited to those instances where a manifest error has been
made.  Hence, in Schreiber Brothers Ltd. v. Currie Products Ltd., [1980]
2 S.C.R. 78, this Court refused to overturn a trial judge’s finding that
certain goods were defective, stating at pp. 84-85 that it is wrong for an
appellate court to set aside a trial judgment where the only point at issue is
the interpretation of the evidence as a whole (citing Métivier v. Cadorette,
[1977] 1 S.C.R. 371).   This view has
been reiterated by this Court on numerous occasions: see Palsky v. Humphrey,
[1964] S.C.R. 580, at p. 583; Schwartz, supra, at para. 32; Hodgkinson
v. Simms, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377, at p. 426, per La Forest J.; Toneguzzo-Norvell,
supra.  The United States Supreme Court has taken a similar position:
see Anderson, supra, at  p. 577.  21                              
In discussing the standard of review of the trial judge’s inferences of
fact, our colleague states, at para. 103, that:  In reviewing the making of an inference, the appeal court will
verify whether it can reasonably be supported by the findings of fact that the
trial judge reached and whether the judge proceeded on proper legal
principles. . . . While the standard of review is identical for both findings
of fact and inferences of fact, it is nonetheless important to draw an
analytical distinction between the two.  If the reviewing court were to
review only for errors of fact, then the decision of the trial judge would
necessarily be upheld in every case where evidence existed to support his or
her factual findings.  In my view, this Court is entitled to conclude that
inferences made by the trial judge were clearly wrong, just as it is entitled
to reach this conclusion in respect to findings of fact. [Emphasis added.]  With respect,
we find two problems with this passage.  First, in our view, the standard of
review is not to verify that the inference can be reasonably supported
by the findings of fact of the trial judge, but whether the trial judge made a palpable
and overriding error in coming to a factual conclusion based on accepted
facts, which implies a stricter standard.  22                              
Second, with respect, we find that by drawing an analytical distinction
between factual findings and factual inferences, the above passage may lead appellate
courts to involve themselves in an unjustified reweighing of the evidence. 
Although we agree that it is open to an appellate court to find that an
inference of fact made by the trial judge is clearly wrong, we would add the
caution that where evidence exists to support this inference, an appellate
court will be hard pressed to find a palpable and overriding error.   As stated
above, trial courts are in an advantageous position when it comes to assessing
and weighing vast quantities of evidence.  In making a factual inference, the
trial judge must sift through the relevant facts, decide on their weight, and
draw a factual conclusion.  Thus, where evidence exists which supports this
conclusion, interference with this conclusion entails interference with the
weight assigned by the trial judge to the pieces of evidence.  23                              
We reiterate that it is not the role of appellate courts to second-guess
the weight to be assigned to the various items of evidence.  If there is no
palpable and overriding error with respect to the underlying facts that the
trial judge relies on to draw the inference, then it is only where the inference-drawing
process itself is palpably in error that an appellate court can interfere
with the factual conclusion.  The appellate court is not free to interfere with
a factual conclusion that it disagrees with where such disagreement stems from
a difference of opinion over the weight to be assigned to the underlying
facts.  As we discuss below, it is our respectful view that our colleague’s finding
that the trial judge erred by imputing knowledge of the hazard to the
municipality in this case is an example of this type of impermissible
interference with the factual inference drawn by the trial judge.  24                              
In addition, in distinguishing inferences of fact from findings of fact,
our colleague states, at para. 102, that deference to findings of fact is
“principally grounded in the recognition that only the trial judge enjoys the
opportunity to observe witnesses and to hear testimony first-hand”, a rationale
which does not bear on factual inferences.  With respect, we disagree with this
view.  As we state above, there are numerous reasons for showing deference to
the factual findings of a trial judge, many of which are equally applicable to
all factual conclusions of the trial judge.  This was pointed out  in Schwartz,
supra.  After listing numerous policy concerns justifying a deferential
approach to findings of fact, at para. 32 La Forest J. goes on to state:  This explains why the rule [that appellate courts must treat a trial
judge’s findings of fact with great deference] applies not only when the
credibility of witnesses is at issue, although in such a case it may be more
strictly applied, but also to all conclusions of fact made by the trial
judge. [Emphasis added.]  Recent support
for deferring to all factual conclusions of the trial judge is found in Toneguzzo-Norvell,
supra.  McLachlin J. (as she then was) for a unanimous Court stated, at pp.
121-22:  A Court of Appeal is clearly not entitled to interfere merely because
it takes a different view of the evidence.  The finding of facts and the
drawing of evidentiary conclusions from facts is the province of the trial
judge, not the Court of Appeal.  .
. .  I agree that the principle of non-intervention of a
Court of Appeal in a trial judge’s findings of facts does not apply with the
same force to inferences drawn from conflicting testimony of expert witnesses
where the credibility of these witnesses is not in issue.  This does not
however change the fact that the weight to be assigned to the various pieces of
evidence is under our trial system essentially the province of the trier of
fact, in this case the trial judge. [Emphasis added.]  We take the
above comments of McLachlin J. to mean that, although the same high standard of
deference applies to the entire range of factual determinations made by the
trial judge, where a factual finding is grounded in an assessment of
credibility of a witness, the overwhelming advantage of the trial judge in this
area must be acknowledged.  This does not, however, imply that there is a lower
standard of review where witness credibility is not in issue, or that there are
not numerous policy reasons supporting deference to all factual conclusions of
the trial judge.  In our view, this is made clear by the underlined portion of
the above passage.  The essential point is that making a factual conclusion, of
any kind, is inextricably linked with assigning weight to evidence, and thus
attracts a deferential standard of review.  25                              
Although the trial judge will always be in a distinctly privileged
position when it comes to assessing the credibility of witnesses, this is not
the only area where the trial judge has an advantage over appellate
judges.  Advantages enjoyed by the trial judge with respect to the drawing of
factual inferences include the trial judge’s relative expertise with respect to
the weighing and assessing of evidence, and the trial judge’s inimitable familiarity
with the often vast quantities of evidence.  This extensive exposure to the
entire factual nexus of a case will be of invaluable assistance when it comes
to drawing factual conclusions.  In addition, concerns with respect to cost,
number and length of appeals apply equally to inferences of fact and findings
of fact, and support a deferential approach towards both.  As such, we
respectfully disagree with our colleague’s view that the principal
rationale for showing deference to findings of fact is the opportunity to
observe witnesses first-hand.   It is our view that the trial judge enjoys
numerous advantages over appellate judges which bear on all conclusions
of fact, and, even in the absence of these advantages, there are other
compelling policy reasons supporting a deferential approach to inferences of
fact.  We conclude, therefore, by emphasizing that  there is one, and only one,
standard of review applicable to all factual conclusions made by the trial
judge -- that of palpable and overriding error.  D.  Standard
of Review for Questions of Mixed Fact and Law  26                              
At the outset, it is important to distinguish questions of mixed fact
and law from factual findings (whether direct findings or inferences). 
Questions of mixed fact and law involve applying a legal standard to a set of
facts: Canada (Director of Investigation and Research) v. Southam Inc.,
[1997] 1 S.C.R. 748, at para. 35.  On the other hand, factual findings or
inferences require making a conclusion of fact based on a set of facts.  Both
mixed fact and law and fact findings often involve drawing inferences; the
difference lies in whether the inference drawn is legal or factual.  Because of
this similarity, the two types of questions are sometimes confounded.  This
confusion was pointed out by A. L. Goodhart in “Appeals on Questions of Fact”
(1955), 71 L.Q.R. 402, at p. 405:  The distinction between [the perception of facts and the evaluation of
facts] tends to be obfuscated because we use such a phrase as “the judge found
as a fact that the defendant had been negligent,” when what we mean to say is
that “the judge found as a fact that the defendant had done acts A and B, and
as a matter of opinion he reached the conclusion that it was not reasonable for
the defendant to have acted in that way.”   In the case at
bar, there are examples of both types of questions.  The issue of whether the
municipality ought to have known of the hazard in the road involves weighing
the underlying facts and making factual findings as to the knowledge of the
municipality.  It also involves applying a legal standard, which in this case
is provided by s. 192(3) of the Rural Municipality Act, 1989, S.S.
1989-90, c. R-26.1, to these factual findings.  Similarly, the finding of
negligence involves weighing the underlying facts, making factual conclusions
therefrom, and drawing an inference as to whether or not the municipality
failed to exercise the legal standard of reasonable care and therefore was
negligent.  27                              
Once it has been determined that a matter being reviewed involves the
application of a legal standard to a set of facts, and is thus a question of
mixed fact and law, then the appropriate standard of review must be determined
and applied.  Given the different standards of review applicable to questions
of law and questions of fact, it is often difficult to determine what the
applicable standard of review is.  In Southam, supra, at para.
39, this Court illustrated how an error on a question of mixed fact and law can
amount to a pure error of law subject to the correctness standard:  . . . if a decision-maker says that the correct test requires him or
her to consider A, B, C, and D, but in fact the decision-maker considers only
A, B, and C, then the outcome is as if he or she had applied a law that
required consideration of only A, B, and C.  If the correct test requires him
or her to consider D as well, then the decision-maker has in effect applied the
wrong law, and so has made an error of law.   Therefore,
what appears to be a question of mixed fact and law, upon further reflection,
can actually be an error of pure law.  28                              
However, where the error does not amount to an error of law, a higher
standard is mandated.  Where the trier of fact has considered all the evidence that
the law requires him or her to consider and still comes to the wrong
conclusion, then this amounts to an error of mixed law and fact and is subject
to a more stringent standard of review: Southam, supra, at paras.
41 and 45.  While easy to state, this distinction can be difficult in practice
because matters of mixed law and fact fall along a spectrum of particularity. 
This difficulty was pointed out in Southam, at para. 37:  . . . the matrices of facts at issue in some cases are so particular,
indeed so unique, that decisions about whether they satisfy legal tests do not
have any great precedential value.  If a court were to decide that driving at a
certain speed on a certain road under certain conditions was negligent, its
decision would not have any great value as a precedent.  In short, as the level
of generality of the challenged proposition approaches utter particularity, the
matter approaches pure application, and hence draws nigh to being an
unqualified question of mixed law and fact.  See R. P. Kerans, Standards of
Review Employed by Appellate Courts (1994), at pp. 103-108.  Of course, it
is not easy to say precisely where the line should be drawn; though in most
cases it should be sufficiently clear whether the dispute is over a general
proposition that might qualify as a principle of law or over a very particular
set of circumstances that is not apt to be of much interest to judges and
lawyers in the future.   29                              
When the question of mixed fact and law at issue is a finding of
negligence, this Court has held that a finding of negligence by the trial judge
should be deferred to by appellate courts.  In Jaegli Enterprises Ltd. v.
Taylor, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 2, at p. 4, Dickson J. (as he then was) set aside
the holding of the British Columbia Court of Appeal that the trial judge had
erred in his finding of negligence on the basis that “it is wrong for an
appellate court to set aside a trial judgment where there is not palpable and
overriding error, and the only point at issue is the interpretation of the
evidence as a whole” (see also Schreiber Brothers Ltd. v. Currie Products
Ltd., [1980] 2 S.C.R. 78, at p. 84).  30                              
This more stringent standard of review for findings of negligence is
appropriate, given that findings of negligence at the trial level can also be
made by juries.  If the standard were instead correctness, this would result in
the appellate court assessing even jury findings of negligence on a correctness
standard.  At present, absent misdirection on law by the trial judge, such
review is not available. The general rule is that courts accord great deference
to a jury’s findings in civil negligence proceedings:  The principle has been laid down in many judgments
of this Court to this effect, that the verdict of a jury will not be set aside
as against the weight of evidence unless it is so plainly unreasonable and
unjust as to satisfy the Court that no jury reviewing the evidence as a whole
and acting judicially could have reached it.  (McCannell v. McLean, [1937] S.C.R. 341, at p. 343)  See also Dube
v. Labar, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 649, at p. 662, and C.N.R. v. Muller,
[1934] 1 D.L.R. 768 (S.C.C.). To adopt a correctness standard would change the
law and undermine the traditional function of the jury.  Therefore, requiring a
standard of “palpable and overriding error” for findings of negligence made by
either a trial judge or a jury reinforces the proper relationship between the
appellate and trial court levels and accords with the established standard of
review applicable to a finding of negligence by a jury.  31                              
Where, however, the erroneous finding of negligence of the trial judge
rests on an incorrect statement of the legal standard, this can amount to an
error of law.  This distinction was pointed out by Cory J. in Galaske v.
O’Donnell, [1994] 1 S.C.R 670, at pp. 690-91:  The definition of the standard of care is a mixed
question of law and fact. It will usually be for the trial judge to determine,
in light of the circumstances of the case, what would constitute reasonable
conduct on the part of the legendary reasonable man placed in the same
circumstances. In some situations a simple reminder may suffice while in
others, for example when a very young child is the passenger, the driver may
have to put the seat belt on the child himself. In this case, however, the
driver took no steps whatsoever to ensure that the child passenger wore a seat
belt. It follows that the trial judge's decision on the issue amounted to a
finding that there was no duty at all resting upon the driver. This was an
error of law.   Galaske,
supra, is an illustration of the point made in Southam, supra,
of the potential to extricate a purely legal question from what appears to be a
question of mixed fact and law.  However, in the absence of a legal error or a
palpable and overriding error, a finding of negligence by a trial judge should
not be interfered with.  32                              
We are supported in our conclusion by the analogy which can be drawn
between inferences of fact and questions of mixed fact and law.  As stated above,
both involve drawing inferences from underlying facts.  The difference lies in
whether the inference drawn relates to a legal standard or not.  Because both
processes are intertwined with the weight assigned to the evidence, the
numerous policy reasons which support a deferential stance to the trial judge’s
inferences of fact, also, to a certain extent, support showing deference to the
trial judge’s inferences of mixed fact and law.  33                              
Where, however, an erroneous finding of the trial judge can be traced to
an error in his or her characterization of the legal standard, then this
encroaches on the law-making role of an appellate court, and less deference is
required, consistent with a “correctness” standard of review.  This nuance was
recognized by this Court in St-Jean v. Mercier, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 491,
2002 SCC 15, at paras. 48-49:  A question “about whether the facts satisfy the
legal tests” is one of mixed law and fact.  Stated differently, “whether the
defendant satisfied the appropriate standard of care is a question of mixed law
and fact” (Southam,  at para. 35).  Generally, such a question, once the facts have
been established without overriding and palpable error, is to be reviewed on a
standard of correctness since the standard of care is normative and is a
question of law within the normal purview of both the trial and appellate
courts.  [Emphasis added.] 34                              
A good example of this subtle principle can be found in Rhône (The)
v.  Peter A.B. Widener (The), [1993] 1 S.C.R. 497, at pp. 515-16.  In that
case the issue was the identification of certain individuals within a corporate
structure as directing minds.  This is a mixed question of law and fact. 
However, the erroneous finding of the courts below was easily traceable to an
error of law which could be extricated from the mixed question of law and
fact.  The extricable question of law was the issue of the functions which are
required in order to be properly identified as a “directing mind” within a corporate
structure (pp. 515-16).  In the opinion of Iacobucci J. for the majority of the
Court (at p. 526):  With respect, I think that the courts below
overemphasized the significance of sub-delegation in this case.  The key factor
which distinguishes directing minds from normal employees is the capacity to
exercise decision-making authority on matters of corporate policy, rather than
merely to give effect to such policy on an operational basis, whether at head
office or across the sea.   35                              
Stated differently, the lower courts committed an error in law by
finding that sub-delegation was a factor identifying a person who is part of
the “directing mind” of a company, when the correct legal factor characterizing
a “directing mind” is in fact “the capacity to exercise decision-making
authority on matters of corporate policy”.  This mischaracterization of the
proper legal test (the legal requirements to be a “directing mind”) infected or
tainted the lower courts’ factual conclusion that Captain Kelch was part of the
directing mind.  As this erroneous finding can be traced to an error in law,
less deference was required and the applicable standard was one of
correctness.  36                              
To summarize, a finding of negligence by a trial judge involves applying
a legal standard to a set of facts, and thus is a question of mixed fact and
law.  Matters of mixed fact and law lie along a spectrum.  Where, for instance,
an error with respect to a finding of negligence can be attributed to the
application of an incorrect standard, a failure to consider a required element
of a legal test, or similar error in principle, such an error can be
characterized as an error of law, subject to a standard of correctness. 
Appellate courts must be cautious, however, in finding that a trial judge erred
in law in his or her determination of negligence, as it is often difficult to
extricate the legal questions from the factual.  It is for this reason that
these matters are referred to as questions of “mixed law and fact”.  Where the
legal principle is not readily extricable, then the matter is one of “mixed law
and fact” and is subject to a more stringent standard.  The general rule, as
stated in Jaegli Enterprises, supra, is that, where the issue on
appeal involves the trial judge’s interpretation of the evidence as a whole, it
should not be overturned absent palpable and overriding error.  37                              
In this regard, we respectfully disagree with our colleague when he
states at para. 106 that “[o]nce the facts have been established, the determination
of whether or not the standard of care was met by the defendant will in most
cases be reviewable on a standard of correctness since the trial judge must
appreciate the facts within the context of the appropriate standard of care. 
In many cases, viewing the facts through the legal lens of the standard of care
gives rise to a policy-making or law-setting function that is  the purview of
both the trial and appellate courts”.  In our view, it is settled law that the
determination of whether or not the standard of care was met by the defendant
involves the application of a legal standard to a set of facts, a question of
mixed fact and law.  This question is subject to a standard of palpable and
overriding error unless it is clear that the trial judge made some extricable
error in principle with respect to the characterization of the standard or its
application, in which case the error may amount to an error of law.  III.   Application of the Foregoing Principles
to this Case: Standard of Care of the Municipality  A.    The Appropriate Standard of Review  38                              
We agree with our colleague that the correct statement of the
municipality’s standard of care is that found in Partridge v. Rural
Municipality of Langenburg, [1929] 3 W.W.R. 555 (Sask. C.A.), per Martin
J.A., at pp. 558-59:  The extent of the statutory obligation placed upon
municipal corporations to keep in repair the highways under their jurisdiction,
has been variously stated in numerous reported cases.  There is, however, a
general rule which may be gathered from the decisions, and that is, that the
road must be kept in such a reasonable state of repair that those requiring to
use it may, exercising ordinary care, travel upon it with safety.  What is a
reasonable state of repair is a question of fact, depending upon all the
surrounding circumstances; “repair” is a relative term, and hence the facts in
one case afford no fixed rule by which to determine another case where the facts
are different . . . .  However, we
differ from the views of our colleague in that we find that the trial judge
applied the correct test in determining that the municipality did not meet its
standard of care, and thus did not commit an error of law of the type mentioned
in Southam, supra.  The trial judge applied all the elements of
the Partridge standard to the facts, and her conclusion that the
respondent municipality failed to meet this standard should not be overturned
absent palpable and overriding error.  B.  The
Trial Judge Did Not Commit an Error of Law  39                              
We note that our colleague bases his conclusion that the municipality
met its standard of care on his finding that the trial judge neglected to
consider the conduct of the ordinary motorist, and thus failed to apply the
correct standard of care, an error of law, which justifies his reconsideration
of the evidence (para. 114).  As a starting point to the discussion of the
ordinary or reasonable motorist, we emphasize that the failure to discuss a
relevant factor in depth, or even at all, is not itself a sufficient basis for
an appellate court to reconsider the evidence.  This was made clear by the
recent decision of Van de Perre, supra, where Bastarache J. says,
at para. 15:  . . . omissions in the reasons will not necessarily mean that the
appellate court has jurisdiction to review the evidence heard at trial.  As
stated in Van Mol (Guardian ad Litem of) v. Ashmore (1999), 168 D.L.R.
(4th) 637 (B.C.C.A.), leave to appeal refused [2000] 1 S.C.R. vi, an omission
is only a material error if it gives rise to the reasoned belief that the trial
judge must have forgotten, ignored or misconceived the evidence in a way that
affected his conclusion.  Without this reasoned belief, the appellate court
cannot reconsider the evidence.  In our view,
as we will now discuss, there can be no reasoned belief in this case that the
trial judge forgot, ignored, or misconceived the question of the ordinary
driver.  It would thus be an error to engage in a re-assessment of the evidence
on this issue.  40                              
The fact that the conduct of the ordinary motorist was in the mind of
the trial judge from the outset is clear from the fact that she began her
standard of care discussion by stating the correct test, quoting the above
passage from Partridge, supra.  Absent some clear sign that she
subsequently varied her approach, this initial acknowledgment of the correct
legal standard is a strong indication that this was the standard she applied. 
Not only is there no indication that she departed from the stated test, but
there are further signs which support the conclusion that the trial judge
applied the Partridge standard.  The first such indication is that the
trial judge did discuss, both explicitly and implicitly, the conduct of an
ordinary or reasonable motorist approaching the curve.  The second indication
is that she referred to the evidence of the experts, Mr. Anderson and Mr.
Werner, both of whom discussed the conduct of an ordinary motorist in this
situation.  Finally, the fact that the trial judge apportioned negligence to
Mr. Nikolaisen indicates that she assessed his conduct against the standard of
the ordinary driver, and thus considered the conduct of the latter.  41                              
The discussion of the ordinary motorist is found in the passage from the
trial judgment immediately following the statement of the requisite standard of
care:  Snake Hill Road is a low traffic road.  It is
however maintained by the R.M. so that it is passable year round.  There are
permanent residences on the road.  It is used by farmers for access to their
fields and cattle.  Young people frequent Snake Hill Road for parties and as
such the road is used by those who may not have the same degree of
familiarity with it as do residents.  There is a portion of Snake Hill Road that is a
hazard to the public.  In this regard I accept the evidence of Mr. Anderson and
Mr. Werner.  Further, it is a hazard that is not readily apparent to users of
the road.  It is a hidden hazard.  The location of the Nikolaisen rollover is
the most dangerous segment of Snake Hill Road.  Approaching the location of the
Nikolaisen rollover, limited sight distance, created by uncleared bush,
precludes a motorist from being forewarned of an impending sharp right turn
immediately followed by a left turn.  While there were differing opinions on
the maximum speed at which this curve can be negotiated, I am satisfied
that when limited sight distance is combined with the tight radius of the curve
and lack of superelevation, this curve cannot be safely negotiated at
speeds greater than 60 kilometres per hour when conditions are favourable, or
50 kilometres per hour when wet.  . . . where the existence of that bush obstructs the ability of a
motorist to be forewarned of a hazard such as that on Snake Hill Road, it is
reasonable to expect the R.M. to erect and maintain a warning or regulatory
sign so that a motorist, using ordinary care, may be forewarned, adjust speed
and take corrective action in advance of entering a dangerous situation. 
[Underlining added; italics in original.]  ([1998] 5 W.W.R. 523, at paras. 84-86)  42                              
In our view, this passage indicates that the trial judge did consider
how a motorist exercising ordinary care would approach the curve in question. 
The implication of labelling the curve a “hidden hazard” which is “not readily
apparent to users of the road”, is that the danger is of the type that cannot
be anticipated.  This in turn implies that, even if the motorist exercises
ordinary care, he or she will not be able to react to the curve.  As well, the
trial judge referred explicitly to the conduct of a motorist exercising
ordinary care: “it is reasonable to expect the R.M. to erect and maintain a
warning or regulatory sign so that a motorist, using ordinary care, may
be forewarned, adjust speed and take corrective action in advance of entering a
dangerous situation” (para. 86 (emphasis added)).  43                              
With respect to the speed of a motorist approaching the curve,
there is also an indication that the trial judge considered the conduct of an
ordinary motorist.  First, she stated that she accepted the evidence of Mr.
Anderson and Mr. Werner with respect to the finding that the curve constituted
a hazard to the public.  The evidence given by these experts suggests that
between 60 and 80 km/h is a reasonable speed to drive parts of this road, and
at that speed, the curve presents a hazard.  Their evidence also indicates
their general opinion that the curve was a hazardous one.  Mr. Anderson refers
to the curve being difficult to negotiate at “normal speeds”.  Also, Mr.
Anderson states that “if you’re not aware that this curve is there, the sharp
course of the curve, and you enter too far into it before you realize that the
curve is there, then you have to do a tighter radius than 118 metres in order
to get back on track to be able to negotiate the second curve”.  He also states
that “you could be lulled into thinking you’ve got an 80 kilometres an hour
road until you are too far into the tight curve to be able to respond”.  44                              
The Court of Appeal found that, given the nature and condition of Snake
Hill Road, the contention that this rural road would be taken at 80 km/h by the
ordinary motorist was untenable. However, it is clear from the trial judge’s
reasons that she did not take 80 km/h as the speed at which the ordinary
motorist would approach the curve.  Instead she found, based on expert
evidence, that “this curve cannot be safely negotiated at speeds greater
than 60 kilometres per hour when conditions are favourable, or 50 kilometres
per hour when wet” (para. 85 (emphasis in original)).  From this finding,
coupled with the finding that the curve was hidden and unexpected, the logical conclusion
is that the trial judge found that a motorist exercising ordinary care could
easily be deceived into approaching the curve at speeds in excess of the safe
speed for the curve, and subsequently be taken by surprise.  Therefore, the
trial judge found that the curve was hazardous to the ordinary motorist
and it follows that she applied the correct standard of care.  45                              
In our respectful view, our colleague errs in agreeing with the Court of
Appeal’s finding that the trial judge should have addressed the conduct of the
ordinary motorist more fully (para. 124).  At para. 119, he writes:  A proper application of the test demands that the trial judge ask the
question: “How would a reasonable driver have driven on this road?”  Whether or
not a hazard is “hidden” or a curve is “inherently” dangerous does not dispose
of the question.  And later, he
states, “In my view, the question of how the reasonable driver would have
negotiated Snake Hill Road necessitated a somewhat more in-depth analysis of
the character of the road” (para. 125). With respect, requiring the trial judge
to have made this specific inquiry in her reasons is inconsistent with Van
de Perre, supra, which makes it clear that an omission or a failure
to discuss a factor in depth is not, in and of itself, a basis for interfering
with the findings of the trial judge and reweighing the evidence.  As we note
above, it is clear that although the trial judge may not have conducted an
extensive review of this element of the Partridge test, she did indeed
consider this factor by stating the correct test, then applying this test to
the facts.  46                              
We note that in relying on the evidence of Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner,
the trial judge chose not to base her decision on the conflicting evidence of
other witnesses.  However, her reliance on the evidence of Mr. Anderson and Mr.
Werner is insufficient proof that she “forgot, ignored, or misconceived” the
evidence.  The full record was before the trial judge and we can presume that
she reviewed all of it, absent further proof that the trial judge forgot,
ignored or misapprehended the evidence, leading to an error in law. It is open
to a trial judge to prefer the evidence of some witnesses over others: Toneguzzo-Norvell,
supra, at p. 123.  Mere reliance by the trial judge on the evidence of some
witnesses over others cannot on its own form the basis of a “reasoned belief
that the trial judge must have forgotten, ignored or misconceived the evidence
in a way that affected his conclusion” (Van de Perre, supra, at
para. 15).  This is in keeping with the narrow scope of review by an appellate
court applicable in this case.  47                              
A further indication that the trial judge considered the conduct of an
ordinary motorist on Snake Hill Road is her finding that both Mr. Nikolaisen
and the municipality breached their duty of care to Mr. Housen, and that the
defendant Nikolaisen was 50 percent contributorily negligent.  Since a finding
of negligence implies a failure to meet the ordinary standard of care, and since
Mr. Nikolaisen’s negligence related to his driving on the curve, to find that
Mr. Nikolaisen’s conduct on the curve failed to meet the standard of the
ordinary driver implies a consideration of that ordinary driver on the curve. 
The fact that the trial judge distinguished the conduct of Mr. Nikolaisen in
driving negligently on the road from the conduct of the municipality in
negligently failing to erect a warning sign is evidence that the trial judge
kept the municipality’s legal standard clearly in mind in its application to
the facts, and that she applied this standard to the ordinary driver,
not the negligent driver.  48                              
To summarize, in the course of her reasons, the trial judge first stated
the requisite standard of care from Partridge, supra, relating to
the conduct of the ordinary driver.  She then applied that standard to the
facts referring again to the conduct of the ordinary driver.  Finally, in light
of her finding that the municipality breached this standard, she apportioned
negligence between the driver and the municipality in a way which again
entailed a consideration of the ordinary driver.  As such, we are
overwhelmingly drawn to the conclusion that the conduct of the ordinary driver
was both considered and applied by the trial judge.  49                              
Thus, we conclude that the trial judge did not commit an error of law
with respect to the municipality’s standard of care.  On this matter, we
disagree with the basis for the re-assessment of the evidence undertaken by our
colleague (paras. 122-42) and regard this re-assessment to be an unjustified
intrusion into the finding of the trial judge that the municipality breached
its standard of care.  This finding is a question of mixed law and fact which
should not be overturned absent a palpable and overriding error.  As discussed
below, it is our view that no such error exists, as the trial judge conducted a
reasonable assessment based on her view of the evidence.  C.  The
Trial Judge Did Not Commit A Palpable or Overriding Error  50                              
Despite this high standard of review, the Court of Appeal found that a
palpable and overriding error was made by the trial judge ([2000] 4 W.W.R. 173,
2000 SKCA 12, at para. 84). With respect, this finding was based on the
erroneous presumption that the trial judge accepted 80 km/h as the speed at
which an ordinary motorist would approach the curve, a presumption which our
colleague also adopts in his reasons (para. 133).  51                              
As discussed above, the trial judge’s finding was that an ordinary
motorist could approach the curve in excess of 60 km/h in dry conditions, and
50 km/h in wet conditions, and that at such speeds the curve was hazardous. 
The trial judge’s finding was not based on a particular speed at which the
curve would be approached by the ordinary motorist.  Instead, she found that,
because the curve was hidden and sharper than would be anticipated, a motorist
exercising ordinary care could approach it at greater than the speed at which
it would be safe to negotiate the curve.  52                              
As we explain in greater detail below, in our opinion, not only is this
assessment far from reaching the level of a palpable and overriding error, in
our view, it is a sensible and logical way to deal with large quantities of
conflicting evidence.  It would be unrealistic to focus on some exact speed at
which the curve would likely be approached by the ordinary motorist.  The
findings of the trial judge in this regard were the result of a reasonable and
practical assessment of the evidence as a whole.  53                              
In finding a palpable and overriding error, Cameron J.A. relied on the
fact that the trial judge adopted the expert evidence of Mr. Anderson and Mr.
Werner which was premised on a de facto speed limit of 80 km/h taken
from The Highway Traffic Act, S.S. 1986, c. H-3.1.  However, whether or
not the experts based their testimony on this limit, the trial judge did not
adopt that limit as the speed of the ordinary motorist approaching the curve. 
Again, the trial judge found that the curve could not be taken safely at
greater than 60 km/h dry and 50 km/h wet, and there is evidence in the record
to support this finding.  For example, Mr. Anderson states:  If you don’t anticipate the curve and you get too far into it before
you start to do your correction then you can get into trouble even at, probably
at 60.  Fifty you’d have to be a long ways into it, but certainly at 60 you
could.  It is notable
too that both Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner would have recommended installing a
sign, warning motorists of the curve, with a posted limit of 50 km/h.  54                              
Although clearly the curve could not be negotiated safely at 80 km/h, it
could also not be negotiated safely at much slower speeds.  It should also be
noted that the trial judge did not adopt the expert testimony of Mr. Anderson
and Mr. Werner in its entirety.  She stated: “There is a portion of
Snake Hill Road that is a hazard to the public.  In this regard I accept
the evidence of Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner” (para. 85 (emphasis added)).  It
cannot be assumed from this that she accepted a de facto speed limit of
80 km/h especially when one bears in mind (1) the trial judge’s statement of
the safe speeds of 50 and 60 km/h, and (2) the fact that both these experts
found the road to be unsafe at much lower speeds than 80 km/h.  55                              
Given that the trial judge did not base her standard of care analysis on
a de facto speed limit of 80 km/h, it then follows that the Court of
Appeal’s finding of a palpable and overriding error cannot stand.  56                              
Furthermore, the narrowly defined scope of appellate review dictates
that a trial judge should not be found to have misapprehended or ignored
evidence, or come to the wrong conclusions merely because the appellate court
diverges in the inferences it draws from the evidence and chooses to emphasize
some portions of the evidence over others.  As we are of the view that the
trial judge committed no error of law in finding that the municipality breached
its standard of care, we are also respectfully of the view that our colleague’s
re-assessment of the evidence on this issue (paras. 129-42) is an unjustified
interference with the findings of the trial judge, based on a difference of
opinion concerning the inferences to be drawn from the evidence and the proper
weight to be placed on different portions of the evidence.  For instance, in
the opinion of our colleague, based on some portions of the expert evidence, a
reasonable driver exercising ordinary care would approach a rural road at 50
km/h or less, because a reasonable driver would have difficulty seeing the
sharp radius of the curve and oncoming traffic (para. 129).  However, the
trial judge, basing her assessment on other portions of the expert
evidence, found that the nature of the road was such that a motorist could be
deceived into believing that the road did not contain a sharp curve and thus
would approach the road normally, unaware of the hidden danger.  57                              
We are faced in this case with conflicting expert evidence on the issue
of the correct speed at which an ordinary motorist would approach the curve on
Snake Hill Road.  The differing inferences from the evidence drawn by the trial
judge and the Court of Appeal amount to a divergence on what weight should be
placed on various pieces of conflicting evidence.  As noted by our colleague,
Mr. Sparks was of the opinion that “[if] you can’t see around the corner, then,
you know, drivers would have a fairly strong signal . . . that due care and
caution would be required”.  Similar evidence of this nature was given by Mr.
Nikolaisen, and indeed even by Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner.  This is contrasted
with evidence such as that given by Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner that a
reasonable driver would be “lulled” into thinking that there is an 80 km/h road
ahead of him or her.  58                              
As noted by McLachlin J. in Toneguzzo-Norvell, supra, at
p. 122 and mentioned above, “the weight to be assigned to the various pieces of
evidence is under our trial system essentially the province of the trier of
fact”.  In that case, a unanimous Court found that the Court of Appeal erred in
interfering with the trial judge’s factual findings, on the basis that it was
open to the trial judge to place less weight on certain evidence and accept
other, conflicting evidence which the trial judge found to be more convincing (Toneguzzo-Norvell,
at pp. 122-23).  Similarly, in this case, the trial judge’s factual findings
concerning the proper speed to be used on approaching the curve should not be
interfered with.  It was open to her to choose to place more weight on certain
portions of the evidence of Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner, where the evidence was
conflicting.  Her assessment of the proper speed was a reasonable inference
based on the evidence and does not reach the level of a palpable and overriding
error. As such, the trial judge’s findings with respect to the standard of care
should not be overturned.  IV.  Knowledge
of the Municipality  59                              
We agree with our colleague that s. 192(3) of The Rural Municipality
Act, 1989, requires the plaintiff to show that the municipality knew
or should have known of the disrepair of Snake Hill Road before the
municipality can be found to have breached its duty of care under s. 192.  We
also agree that the evidence of the prior accidents, in and of itself, is
insufficient to impute such knowledge to the municipality.  However, we find
that the trial judge did not err in her finding that the municipality knew or
ought to have known of the disrepair.  60                              
As discussed, the question of whether the municipality knew or should
have known of the disrepair of Snake Hill Road is a question of mixed fact and
law.  The issue is legal in the sense that the municipality is held to a legal
standard of knowledge of the nature of the road, and factual in the sense of
whether it had the requisite knowledge on the facts of this case.  As we state
above, absent an isolated error in law or principle, such a finding is subject
to the “palpable and overriding” standard of review.  In this case, our
colleague concludes that the trial judge erred in law by failing to approach
the question of knowledge from the perspective of a prudent municipal
councillor, and holds that a prudent municipal councillor could not be expected
to become aware of the risk posed to the ordinary driver by the hazard in
question.  He also finds that the trial judge erred in law by failing to
recognize that the burden of proving knowledge rested with the plaintiff.  With
respect, we disagree with these conclusions.  61                              
The hazard in question is an unsigned and unexpected sharp curve.  In
our view, when a hazard is, like this one, a permanent feature of the road
which has been found to present a risk to the ordinary driver, it is open to
the trial judge to draw an inference, on this basis alone, that a prudent
municipal councillor ought to be aware of the hazard.  In support of his
conclusion on the issue of knowledge, our colleague states that the
municipality’s knowledge is inextricably linked to the standard of care, and
ties his finding on the question of knowledge to his finding that the curve did
not present a hazard to the ordinary motorist (para. 149).  We agree that the
question of knowledge is closely linked to the standard of care, and since we
find that the trial judge was correct in holding that the curve presented a
hazard to the ordinary motorist, from there it was open to the trial judge to
find that the municipality ought to have been aware of this hazard.  We further
note that as a question of mixed fact and law this finding is subject to the
“palpable and overriding” standard of review.  On this point, however, we
restrict ourselves to situations such as the one at bar where the hazard in
question is a permanent feature of the road, as opposed to a temporary hazard
which reasonably may not come to the attention of the municipality in time to
prevent an accident from occurring.  62                              
In addition, our colleague relies on the evidence of the lay witnesses,
Craig and Toby Thiel, who lived on Snake Hill Road, and who testified that they
had not experienced any difficulties with it (para. 149).  With respect, we
find three problems with this reliance.  First, since the curve was found to be
a hazard based on its hidden and unexpected nature, relying on the evidence of
those who drive the road on a daily basis does not, in our view, assist in
determining whether the curve presented a hazard to the ordinary motorist, or
whether the municipality ought to have been aware of the hazard.  In addition,
in finding that the municipality ought to have known of the disrepair, the
trial judge clearly chose not to rely on the above evidence.  As we state
above, it is open for a trial judge to prefer some parts of the evidence over
others, and to re-assess the trial judge’s weighing of the evidence, is, with
respect, not within the province of an appellate court.  63                              
As well, since the question of knowledge is to be approached from
the perspective of a prudent municipal councillor, we find the evidence of lay
witnesses to be of little assistance.  In Ryan, supra, at para.
28, Major J. stated that the applicable
standard of care is that which “would
be expected of an ordinary, reasonable and prudent person in the same
circumstances” (emphasis added). 
Municipal councillors are elected for the purpose of
managing the affairs of the municipality.  This requires some degree of study
and of information gathering, above that of the average citizen of the
municipality.  Indeed, it may in fact require consultation with experts to
properly meet the obligation to be informed.  Although municipal councillors
are not experts, to equate the “prudent municipal councillor” with the opinion
of lay witnesses who live on the road is incorrect in our opinion.  64                              
It is in this context that we view the following comments of the trial
judge, at para. 90:  If the R.M. did not have actual knowledge of the
danger inherent in this portion of Snake Hill Road, it should have known. 
While four accidents in 12 years may not in itself be significant, it takes on
more significance given the close proximity of three of these accidents, the
relatively low volume of traffic, the fact that there are permanent residences
on the road and the fact that the road is frequented by young and perhaps less
experienced drivers.  I am not satisfied that the R.M. has established that in
these circumstances it took reasonable steps to prevent this state of disrepair
on Snake Hill Road from continuing.  From this
statement, we take the trial judge to have meant that, given the occurrence of
prior accidents on this low-traffic road, the existence of permanent residents,
and the type of drivers on the road, the municipality did not take the reasonable
steps it should have taken in order to ensure that Snake Hill Road did not
contain a hazard such as the one in question.  Based on these factors, the
trial judge drew the inference that the municipality should have been put on
notice and investigated Snake Hill Road, in which case it would have become
aware of the hazard in question.  This factual inference, grounded as it was on
the trial judge’s assessment of the evidence, was in our view, far from
reaching the requisite standard of palpable and overriding error, proper.  65                              
Although we agree with our colleague that the circumstances of the prior
accidents in this case do not provide a direct basis for the municipality to
have had knowledge of the particular hazard in question, in the view of
the trial judge, they should have caused the municipality to investigate
Snake Hill Road, which in turn would have resulted in actual knowledge.  In
this case, far from causing the municipality to investigate, the evidence of
Mr. Danger, who had been the municipal administrator for 20 years, was that,
until the time of the trial, he was not even aware of the three accidents which
had occurred between 1978 and 1987 on Snake Hill Road.  As such, we do not find
that the trial judge based her conclusion on any perspective other than that of
a prudent municipal councillor, and therefore that she did not commit an error
of law in this respect.  Moreover, we do not find that she imputed knowledge to
the municipality on the basis of the occurrence of prior accidents on Snake
Hill Road.  The existence of the prior accidents was simply a factor which
caused the trial judge to find that the municipality should have been put on
notice with respect to the condition of Snake Hill Road (para. 90).  66                              
We emphasize that, in our view, the trial judge did not shift the burden
of proof to the municipality on this issue.  Once the trial judge found that
there was a permanent feature of Snake Hill Road which presented a hazard to
the ordinary motorist, it was open to her to draw an inference that the
municipality ought to have been aware of the danger.  Once such an inference is
drawn, then, unless the municipality can rebut the inference by showing that it
took reasonable steps to prevent such a hazard from continuing, the inference
will be left undisturbed.  In our view, this is what the trial judge did in the
above passage when she states:  “I am not satisfied that the R.M. has
established that in these circumstances it took reasonable steps to
prevent this state of disrepair on Snake Hill Road from continuing” (para. 90
(emphasis added)).  The fact that she drew such an inference is clear from the
fact that this statement appears directly after her finding that the
municipality ought to have known of the hazard based on the listed factors. 
Thus, it is our view that the trial judge did not improperly shift the burden
of proof onto the municipality in this case.  67                              
As well, although the circumstances of the prior accidents in this case
do not provide strong evidence that the municipality ought to have known of the
hazard, proof of prior accidents is not a necessary condition to a finding of
breach of the duty of care under s. 192 of The Rural Municipality Act, 1989. 
If this were so, the first victim of an accident on a negligently maintained
road would not be able to recover, whereas subsequent victims in identical
circumstances would.  Although under s. 192(3) the municipality cannot be held
responsible for disrepair of which it could not have known, it is not sufficient
for the municipality to wait for an accident to occur before remedying the
disrepair, and, in the absence of proof by the plaintiff of prior accidents,
claim that it could not have known of the hazard.  If this were the case, not
only would the first victim of an accident suffer a disproportionate
evidentiary burden, but municipalities would also be encouraged not to collect
information pertaining to accidents on its roads, as this would make it more
difficult for the plaintiff in a motor vehicle accident to prove that the
municipality knew or ought to have known of the disrepair.  68                              
Although in this case the trial judge emphasized the prior accidents
that the plaintiff did manage to prove, in our view, it is not necessary to
rely on these accidents in order to satisfy s. 192(3). For the plaintiff to
provide substantial and concrete proof of the municipality’s knowledge of the
state of disrepair of its roads, is to set an impossibly high burden on the
plaintiff.  Such information was within the particular sphere of knowledge of
the municipality, and in our view, it was reasonable for the trial judge to
draw an inference of knowledge from her finding that there was an ongoing state
of disrepair.  69                              
To summarize our position on this issue, we do not find that the trial
judge erred in law either by failing to approach the question from the perspective
of a prudent municipal councillor, or by improperly shifting the burden of
proof onto the defendant.  As such, it would require a palpable and overriding
error in order to overturn her finding that the municipality knew or ought to
have known of the hazard, and, in our view, no such error was made.  V.  Causation  70                              
We agree with our colleague’s statement at para. 159 that the trial
judge’s conclusions on the cause of the accident was a finding of fact: Cork
v. Kirby MacLean, Ltd., [1952] 2 All E.R. 402 (C.A.), at p. 407, quoted
with approval in Matthews v. MacLaren (1969), 4 D.L.R. (3d) 557 (Ont.
H.C.), at p. 566.  Thus, this finding should not be interfered with absent
palpable and overriding error.  71                              
The trial judge based her findings on causation on three points (at
para. 101):  (1) the accident occurred at a dangerous part of the road where a sign
warning motorists of the hidden hazard should have been erected;  (2) even if there had been a sign, Mr. Nikolaisen’s degree of impairment
did increase his risk of not reacting, or reacting inappropriately, to a sign;  (3) even so, Mr. Nikolaisen was not driving recklessly such that one
would have expected him to have missed or ignored a warning sign.  Moments
before, on departing the Thiel residence, he had successfully negotiated a
sharp curve which he could see and which was apparent to him.  The trial
judge concluded that, on a balance of probabilities, Mr. Nikolaisen would have
reacted and possibly avoided an accident, if he had been given advance warning
of the curve.  However she also found that the accident was partially caused by
the conduct of Mr. Nikolaisen, and apportioned fault accordingly, with 50
percent to Mr. Nikolaisen and 35 percent to the Rural Municipality (para. 102).  72                              
As noted above, this Court has previously held that “an omission is only
a material error if it gives rise to the reasoned belief that the trial judge
must have forgotten, ignored or misconceived the evidence in a way that
affected his conclusion” (Van de Perre, supra, at para.15).  In
the present case, it is not clear from the trial judge’s reasons which portions
of the evidence of Mr. Laughlin, Craig and Toby Thiel and Paul Housen she
relied upon, or to what extent.  However, as we have already stated, the full
evidentiary record was before the trial judge and, absent further proof that
the omission in her reasons was due to her misapprehension or neglect, of the
evidence, we can presume that she reviewed the evidence in its entirety and
based her factual findings on this review.  This presumption, absent sufficient
evidence of misapprehension or neglect, is consistent with the high level of error
required by the test of  “palpable and overriding” error.  We reiterate that it
is open to the trial judge to prefer the testimony of certain witnesses over
others and to place more weight on some parts of the evidence than others,
particularly where there is conflicting evidence: Toneguzzo-Norvell,
supra, at pp. 122-23.  The mere fact that the trial judge did not
discuss a certain point or certain evidence in depth is not sufficient grounds
for appellate interference: Van de Perre, supra, at para. 15.  73                              
For these reasons, we do not feel it appropriate to review the evidence
of Mr. Laughlin and the lay witnesses de novo.  As we concluded earlier,
the trial judge’s finding of fact that a hidden hazard existed at the curve
should not be interfered with.  The finding of a hidden hazard that requires a
sign formed part of the basis of her findings concerning causation.  As her
conclusions on the existence of a hidden hazard had a basis in the evidence,
her conclusions on causation grounded in part on the hidden hazard finding also
had a basis in the evidence.  74                              
As for the silence of the trial judge on the evidence of Mr. Laughlin,
we observe only that the evidence of Mr. Laughlin appears to be general in
nature and thus of limited utility.  Mr. Laughlin admitted that he could only
provide general comments on the effects of alcohol on motorists, but could not
provide specific expertise on the actual effect of alcohol on an individual
driver.  This is significant, as the level of tolerance of an individual driver
plays a key role in determining the actual effect of alcohol on the motorist;
an experienced drinker, although dangerous, will probably perform better on the
road than an inexperienced drinker.  It is noteworthy that the trial judge
believed the evidence of Mr. Anderson that Mr. Nikolaisen’s vehicle was
travelling at the relatively slow speed of between 53 to 65 km/h at the time of
impact with the embankment.  It was also permissible for the trial judge to
rely on the evidence of lay witnesses that Mr. Nikolaisen had successfully
negotiated an apparently sharp curve moments before the accident, rather than
relying on the evidence of Mr. Laughlin, which was of a hypothetical and
unspecific nature. Indeed, the hypothetical nature of Mr. Laughlin’s evidence
reflects the entire inquiry into whether Mr. Nikolaisen would have seen a sign
and reacted, or the precise speed that would be taken by a reasonable driver
upon approaching the curve.  The abstract nature of such inquiries supports
deference to the factual findings of the trial judge, and is consistent with
the stringent standard imposed by the phrase “palpable and overriding error”.  75                              
Therefore we conclude that the trial judge’s factual findings on
causation were reasonable and thus do not reach the level of a palpable and
overriding error, and therefore should not have been interfered with by the
Court of Appeal.  VI.  Common
Law Duty of Care  76                              
As we conclude that the municipality is liable under The Rural
Municipality Act, 1989, we find it unnecessary to consider the existence of
a common law duty in this case.  VII.  Disposition  77                              
As we stated at the outset, there are important reasons and principles
for appellate courts not to interfere improperly with trial decisions. 
Applying these reasons and principles to this case, we would allow the appeal,
set aside the judgment of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, and restore the
judgment of the trial judge, with costs throughout.  The reasons of Gonthier, Bastarache, Binnie and LeBel JJ. were
delivered by  Bastarache J.
(dissenting)  --  I.  Introduction  78                              
This appeal arises out of a single-vehicle accident which occurred on
July 18, 1992, on Snake Hill Road, a rural road located in the Municipality of
Shellbrook, Saskatchewan.  The appellant, Paul Housen, a passenger in the
vehicle, was rendered a quadriplegic by the accident.  At trial, the judge
found that the driver of the vehicle, Douglas Nikolaisen, was negligent in
travelling Snake Hill Road at an excessive rate of speed and in operating his
vehicle while impaired.  The trial judge also found the respondent, the Municipality
of Shellbrook, to be at fault for breaching its duty to keep the road in a
reasonable state of repair as required by s. 192 of The Rural
Municipality Act, 1989, S.S. 1989-90, c. R-26.1.  The Court
of Appeal overturned the trial judge’s finding that the respondent municipality
was negligent.  At issue in this appeal is whether the Court of Appeal had
sufficient grounds to intervene in the decision of the lower court.  The
respondent has also asked this Court to overturn the trial judge’s finding that
the respondent knew or ought to have known of the alleged disrepair of Snake
Hill Road and that the accident was caused in part by the negligence of the
respondent.  An incidental question is whether a common law duty of care exists
alongside the statutory duty imposed on the respondent by s. 192.  79                              
I conclude that the Court of Appeal was correct to overturn the trial
judge’s finding that the respondent was negligent.  Though I would not
interfere with the trial judge’s factual findings on this issue, I find that
she erred in law by failing to apply the correct standard of care.  I would
also overturn the trial judge’s conclusions with regard to knowledge and
causation.  In coming to the conclusion that the respondent knew or should have
known of the alleged disrepair of Snake Hill Road, the trial judge erred in law
by failing to consider the knowledge requirement from the perspective of a
prudent municipal councillor and by failing to be attentive to the fact that
the onus of proof was on the appellant.  In addition, the trial judge drew an
unreasonable inference by imputing knowledge to the respondent on the basis of
accidents that occurred on other segments of the road while motorists were
travelling in the opposite direction.  The trial judge also erred with respect
to causation.  She misapprehended the evidence before her, drew erroneous
conclusions from that evidence and ignored relevant evidence.  Finally, I would
not interfere with the decision of the courts below to reject the appellant’s
argument that a common law duty existed.  It is unnecessary to impose a common
law duty of care where a statutory duty exists.  Moreover, the application of
common law negligence principles would not affect the outcome in these
proceedings.  II.  Factual
Background  80                              
The sequence of` events which culminated in this tragic accident began 
to unfold some 19 hours before its occurrence on the afternoon of July 18,
1992.  On July 17, Mr. Nikolaisen attended a barbeque at the residence of Craig
and Toby Thiel, located on Snake Hill Road.   He arrived in the late afternoon
and had his first drink of the day at approximately 6:00 p.m.  He consumed four
or five drinks before leaving the Thiel residence at approximately 10:00 or
10:30 p.m.  After returning home for a few hours, Mr. Nikolaisen proceeded to
the Sturgeon Lake Jamboree, where he met up with the appellant.  At the
jamboree, Mr. Nikolaisen consumed eight or nine double rye drinks and several
beers.  The appellant was also drinking during this event.  The appellant and
Mr.  Nikolaisen partied on the grounds of the jamboree for several hours.  At
approximately 4:30 a.m., the appellant left the jamboree with Mr. Nikolaisen. 
After travelling around the back roads for a period of time, they returned to
the Thiel residence.  It was approximately 8:00 a.m.  The appellant and Mr.
Nikolaisen had several more drinks over the course of the morning.  Mr.
Nikolaisen stopped drinking two or three hours before leaving the Thiel
residence with the appellant at approximately 2:00 p.m.  81                              
A light rain was falling when the appellant and Mr. Nikolaisen left the
Thiel residence, travelling eastbound with Mr. Nikolaisen behind the wheel of a
Ford pickup truck.  The truck swerved or “fish-tailed” as it turned the corner
from the Thiel driveway onto Snake Hill Road.  As Mr. Nikolaisen continued on
his way over the course of a gentle bend some 300 metres in length, gaining
speed to an estimated 65 km/h, the truck again fish-tailed several times.  The
truck went into a skid as Mr. Nikolaisen approached and entered a sharper right
turn.  Mr. Nikolaisen steered into the skid but was unable to negotiate the
curve.  The left rear wheel of the truck contacted an embankment on the left
side of the road.  The vehicle travelled on the road for approximately 30
metres when the left front wheel contacted and climbed an 18-inch embankment on
the left side of the road.  This second contact with the embankment caused the
truck to enter a 360-degree roll with the passenger side of the roof contacting
the ground first.  82                              
When the vehicle came to rest, the appellant was unable to feel any
sensation.  Mr. Nikolaisen climbed out the back window of the vehicle and ran
to the Thiel residence for assistance.  Police later accompanied Mr. Nikolaisen
to the Shellbrook Hospital where a blood sample was taken.  Expert testimony
estimated Mr. Nikolaisen’s blood alcohol level to be between 180 and 210
milligrams in 100 millilitres of blood at the time of the accident, well over the
legal limits prescribed in The Highway Traffic Act, S.S.
1986, c. H-3.1, and the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 .  83                              
Mr. Nikolaisen had travelled on Snake Hill Road three times in the 24
hours preceding the accident, but had not driven it on any earlier occasions. 
The road was about a mile and three quarters in length and was flanked by
highways to the north and to the east.  Starting at the north end, it ran south
for a short distance, dipped between open fields, then curved to the southeast
and descended in a southerly loop down and around Snake Hill, past trees, bush
and pasture, to the bottom of the valley.  There it curved sharply to the
southeast as it passed the Thiels’ driveway.  Once it passed the driveway, it
curved gently to the south east for about 300 metres, then curved more
distinctly to the south.  It was on this stretch that the accident occurred. 
From that point on, the road crossed a creek, took another curve, then ascended
a steep hill to the east, straightened out, and continued east for just over
half a mile, past tree-lined fields and another farm site, to an approach to
the highway.  84                              
Snake Hill Road was established in 1923 and was maintained by the
respondent municipality for the primary purpose of providing local farmers
access to their fields and pastures.  It also served as an access road for the
two permanent residences and one veterinary clinic located on it.  The
road at its northernmost end, coming off the highway, is characterized as a
“Type C” local access road under the provincial government’s scheme of road
classification.  This means that it is graded, gravelled and elevated above the
surrounding land.  The portion of the road east of the Thiel residence, on
which the accident occurred, is characterized as “Type B” bladed trail,
essentially a prairie trail that has been bladed to remove the ruts and to
allow it to be driven on.  Bladed trails follow the path of least resistance
through the surrounding land and are not elevated or gravelled.  The province of
Saskatchewan has some 45,000 kilometres of bladed trails.  85                              
According to the provincial scheme of road classification, both bladed
trails and local access roads are “non-designated”, meaning that they are not
subject to the Saskatchewan Rural Development Sign Policy and Standards.  On
such roads, the council of the rural municipality makes a decision to post
signs if it becomes aware of a hazard or if there are several accidents at one
specific spot.  Three accidents had occurred on Snake Hill Road between 1978
and 1987.  All three accidents occurred to the east of the site of the
Nikolaisen rollover, with drivers travelling westbound.  A fourth accident
occurred on Snake Hill Road in 1990 but there was no evidence as to where it
occurred.  There was no evidence that topography was a factor in any of these
accidents.  The respondent municipality had not posted signs on any portion of
Snake Hill Road.  III.  Relevant
Statutory Provisions  86                              
The Rural Municipality Act, 1989, S.S. 1989-90, c. R-26.1  192(1) Every Council shall keep in a reasonable state of repair
all municipal roads, dams and reservoirs and the approaches to them that have
been constructed or provided by the municipality or by any person with the
permission of the council or that have been constructed or provided by the
province, having regard to the character of the municipal road, dam or
reservoir and the locality in which it is situated or through which it passes.                                                                                
. . .  (2)  Where the council fails to carry out its duty imposed by
subsections (1) and (1.1), the municipality is, subject to The Contributory
Negligence Act, civilly liable for all damages sustained by any person by
reason of the failure.  (3)  Default under subsections (1) and (1.1) shall not be imputed to a
municipality in any action without proof by the plaintiff that the municipality
knew or should have known of the disrepair of the municipal road or other thing
mentioned in subsections (1) and (1.1).   The Highway
Traffic Act, S.S. 1986, c. H-3.1  33(1)  Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no person
shall drive a vehicle on a highway:                           (a) at a speed greater
than 80 kilometres per hour; or  (b) at a speed greater than the maximum speed indicated by any signs
that are erected on the highway . . . .  (2)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater
than is reasonable and safe in the circumstances.                     44(1)  No person shall
drive a vehicle on a highway without due care and attention.  IV.  Judicial History  A.  Saskatchewan Court of Queen’s Bench, [1998] 5 W.W.R. 523  87                              
Wright J. found the respondent negligent in failing to erect a sign to
warn motorists of the sharp right curve on Snake Hill Road, which she
characterized as a “hidden hazard”.  She also found Mr. Nikolaisen negligent in
travelling Snake Hill Road at an excessive speed and in operating his vehicle
while impaired.  The appellant was held to be contributorily negligent in
accepting a ride with Mr. Nikolaisen.  Fifteen percent of the fault was
apportioned to the appellant, and the remainder was apportioned jointly and
severally 50 percent to Mr. Nikolaisen and 35 percent to the respondent.  88                              
Wright J. found that s. 192 of The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 imposed
a statutory duty of care on the respondent toward persons travelling on Snake
Hill Road.  She then considered whether the respondent met the standard of care
as delineated in s. 192 and the jurisprudence interpreting that section.  She
referred specifically to Partridge v. Rural Municipality of Langenberg,
[1929] 3 W.W.R. 555 (Sask. C.A.), in which it was stated at p. 558 that
“the road must be kept in such a reasonable state of repair that those
requiring to use it may, exercising ordinary care, travel upon it with
safety”.  She also cited Shupe v. Rural Municipality of Pleasantdale,
[1932] 1 W.W.R. 627 (Sask. C.A.), at p. 630: “[R]egard must be had to the
locality . . . the situation of the road therein, whether
required to be used by many or by few; . . . to the number of roads to be kept
in repair; to the means at the disposal of the council for that purpose, and
the requirements of the public who use the road.” Relying on Galbiati v.
City of Regina, [1972] 2 W.W.R. 40 (Sask. Q.B.), Wright J. observed
that although the Act does not mention an obligation to erect warning
signs, the general duty of repair nevertheless includes the duty to warn
motorists of a hidden hazard.  89                              
Having laid out the relevant case law, Wright J. went on to discuss the
character of the road.  Relying primarily on the evidence of two experts at
trial, Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner, she found that the sharp right turning
curve was a hazard that was not readily apparent to the users of the road. 
From their testimony she concluded (at para. 85):   It is a hidden hazard.  The location of the Nikolaisen rollover is the
most dangerous segment of Snake Hill Road.  Approaching the location of the
Nikolaisen rollover, limited sight distance, created by uncleared bush,
precludes a motorist from being forewarned of an impending sharp right turn
immediately followed by a left turn.  While there were differing opinions on
the maximum speed at which this curve can be negotiated, I am satisfied
that when limited sight distance is combined with the tight radius of the curve
and lack of superelevation, this curve cannot be safely negotiated at
speeds greater than 60 kilometres per hour when conditions are favourable, or
50 kilometres per hour when wet.  [Emphasis in original.]   Wright J. then
noted that, while it would not be reasonable to expect the respondent to
construct the road to a higher standard or to clear all of the bush away, it
was reasonable to expect the respondent to erect and maintain a warning or
regulatory sign “so that a motorist, using ordinary care, may be forewarned,
adjust speed and take corrective action in advance of entering a dangerous
situation” (para. 86).  90                              
Wright J. then considered s. 192(3) of the Act, which provides that
there is no breach of the statutory standard of care unless the municipality
knew or should have known of the danger.  Wright J. observed that between 1978
and 1990, there were four accidents on Snake Hill Road, three of which occurred
“in the same vicinity” as the Nikolaisen rollover, and two of which were
reported to the authorities.  On the basis of this information, she held that
“[i]f the R.M. [Rural Municipality] did not have actual knowledge of the danger
inherent in this portion of Snake Hill Road, it should have known” (para. 90).
Wright J. also found significant the relatively low volume of traffic on the
road, the fact that there were permanent residences on the road, and the fact
that the road was frequented by young and perhaps less experienced drivers.  91                              
In respect to causation, Wright J. found that it was probable that a
warning sign would have enabled Mr. Nikolaisen to take corrective action to
maintain control of his vehicle despite the fact of his impairment.  She
concluded (at para. 101):  Mr. Nikolaisen’s degree of impairment only served to increase the risk
of him not reacting, or reacting inappropriately to a sign.  Mr. Nikolaisen was
not driving recklessly such that he would have intentionally disregarded a
warning or regulatory sign.  He had moments earlier, when departing the Thiel
residence, successfully negotiated a sharp curve which he could see and which
was apparent to him.   92                              
Wright J. also addressed the appellant’s argument that the municipality
was in breach of a common law duty of care which was not qualified or limited
by any of the restrictions set out under s. 192.  She held that Just v.
British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228, and the line of authority
both preceding and following that decision did not apply to the case before her
given the existence of the statutory duty of care.  She also found that any
qualifying words in s. 192 of the Act pertained to the standard of care and did
not impose limitations on the statutory duty of care.  B.  Saskatchewan
Court of Appeal, [2000] 4 W.W.R. 173, 2000 SKCA 12  93                              
On appeal, Cameron J.A., writing for a unanimous court, dealt primarily
with the trial judge’s finding that the respondent’s failure to place a warning
sign or regulatory sign at the site of the accident constituted a breach of its
statutory duty of road repair.  He did not find it necessary to rule on the
issue of causation given his conclusion that the trial judge erred in finding
the respondent negligent.  94                              
Cameron J.A. characterized the trial judge’s conclusion that the respondent
had breached the statutory duty of care as a matter of mixed fact and law.  He
noted that an appellate court is not to interfere with a trial judge’s findings
of fact unless the judge made a “palpable and overriding error” which affected
his or her assessment of the facts.  With respect to errors of law, however,
Cameron J.A. remarked that the ability of an appellate court to overturn the
finding of the trial judge is “largely unbounded”.  Regarding errors of mixed
fact and law, Cameron J.A. noted that these are typically subject to the same
standard of review as findings of fact.  One exception to this, according to
Cameron J.A., occurs where the trial judge identifies the correct legal test,
yet fails to apply one branch of that test to the facts at hand.  As support
for this proposition, Cameron J.A. cited (at para. 41) Iacobucci J. in Canada
(Director of Investigation and Research) v. Southam Inc., [1997] 1
S.C.R. 748, at para. 39:  [I]f a decision-maker says that the correct test requires him or her to
consider A, B, C, and D, but in fact the decision-maker considers only A, B,
and C, then the outcome is as if he or she had applied a law that required
consideration of only A, B, and C.  If the correct test requires him or her to
consider D as well, then the decision-maker has in effect applied the wrong
law, and so has made an error of law.  95                              
Turning to the applicable law in this case, Cameron J.A. acknowledged
that the standard of care set out in the Act and the jurisprudence interpreting
it requires municipalities to post warning signs to warn of hazards that
prudent drivers, using ordinary care, would be unlikely to appreciate.  Based
on the jurisprudence, Cameron J.A. set out (at para. 50) an analytical
framework to be used in order to assess if a municipality has breached its duty
in this regard.  This framework requires the judge:  1.    To determine the character and state of the
road at the time of the accident.  This, of course, is a matter of fact that
entails an assessment of the material features of the road where the accident
occurred, as well as those factors going to the maintenance standard, namely
the location, class of road, patterns of use, and so on.  2.    To assess the issue of whether persons
requiring to use the road, exercising ordinary car[e], could ordinarily travel
upon it safely.  This is essentially a reasonable person test, one concerned
with how a reasonable driver on that particular road would have conducted himself
or herself.  It is necessary in taking this step to take account of the various
elements noted in the authorities referred to earlier, namely the locality of
the road, the character and class of the road, the standard to which the
municipality could reasonably have been expected to maintain the road, and so
forth.  These criteria fall to be balanced in the context of the question: how
would a reasonable driver have driven upon this particular road? Since this
entails the application of a legal standard to a given set of facts, it
constitutes a question of mixed fact and law.  3.    To determine either tha[t] the road was in a
reasonable state of repair or that it was not, depending upon the assessment
made while using the second step.  If it is determined that the road was not in
a reasonable state of repair, then it becomes necessary to go on to determine
whether the municipality knew or should  have known of the state of disrepair
before imputing liability. 96                              
According to Cameron J.A., the trial judge did not err in law by failing
to set out the proper legal test.  She did, however, make an error in law of
the type identified by Iacobucci J. in Southam, supra.  In his
view, when applying the law to the facts of the case, the trial judge failed to
assess the manner in which a reasonable driver, exercising ordinary care, would
ordinarily have driven on the road, and the risk, if any, that the unmarked
curve might have posed for the ordinary driver.   As noted by Cameron J.A., the
trial judge “twice alluded to the matter, but failed to come to grips with it”
(para. 57).  97                              
Cameron J.A. also found that the trial judge had made a “palpable and
overriding” error of fact in determining that the respondent had breached the
standard of care.  According to Cameron J.A., the trial judge’s factual error
stemmed from her reliance on the expert testimony of Mr. Werner and Mr.
Anderson.  Cameron J.A. found that the evidence of both experts was based on
the fundamental premise that the ordinary driver could be expected to travel
the road at a speed of 80 km/h.  In his view, this premise was misconceived and
unsupported by the evidence.  98                              
Cameron J.A. concluded that although the trial judge was free to accept
the evidence of some witnesses over others, she was not free to accept expert
testimony that was based on an erroneous factual premise.  According to Cameron
J.A., had the trial judge found that a prudent driver, exercising ordinary care
for his or her safety, would not ordinarily have driven this section of Snake
Hill Road at a speed greater than 60 km/h, then she would have had to conclude
that no hidden hazard existed since the curve could be negotiated safely at
this speed.  99                              
Cameron J.A. agreed with the trial judge that a common law duty of care
was not applicable in this case.  His remarks in this respect are found at
para. 44 of his reasons:  Concerning the duty of care, it might be noted that
unlike statutory provisions empowering municipalities to maintain roads, but
imposing no duty upon them to do so, the duty in this instance owes its
existence to a statute, rather than the neighbourhood principle of the common
law: Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228 (S.C.C.). 
The duty is readily seen to extend to all who travel upon the roads.  V.  Issues  100        
A.            Did the Court of Appeal properly interfere with the trial
judge’s finding that the respondent was in breach of its statutory duty of
care?  B.       Did the trial judge err in finding the
respondent knew or should have known of the alleged danger?  C.       Did the trial judge err in finding that
the accident was caused in part by the respondent’s negligence?  D.             
Does a common law duty of care coexist alongside the statutory duty of
care?  VI.      Analysis  A.       Did the Court of Appeal Properly
Interfere with the Decision at Trial?  (1)    The Standard of Review  101                       
Although the distinctions are not always clear, the issues that confront
a trial court fall generally into three categories: questions of law, questions
of fact, and questions of mixed law and fact.  Put briefly, questions of law
are questions about what the correct legal test is; questions of fact are
questions about what actually took place between the parties; and questions of
mixed law and fact are questions about whether the facts satisfy the legal
tests (Southam, supra, at para. 35).  102                       
Of the three categories above, the highest degree of deference is
accorded to the trial judge’s findings of fact.  The Court will not overturn a
factual finding unless it is palpably and overridingly, or clearly wrong (Southam,
supra, at para. 60; Stein v. The Ship“Kathy K”, [1976] 2
S.C.R. 802, at p. 808; Toneguzzo-Norvell (Guardian ad litem of) v. Burnaby
Hospital, [1994] 1 S.C.R. 114, at p. 121).   This deference is principally
grounded in the recognition that only the trial judge enjoys the opportunity to
observe witnesses and to hear testimony first-hand, and is therefore better
able to choose between competing versions of events (Schwartz v. Canada,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 254, at para. 32).  It is however important to recognize that
the making of a factual finding often involves more than merely determining the
who, what, where and when of the case.  The trial judge is very often called
upon to draw inferences from the facts that are put before the court.  For
example, in this case, the trial judge inferred from the fact of accidents
having occurred on Snake Hill Road that the respondent knew or should have
known of the hidden danger.  103                       
This Court has determined that a trial judge’s inferences of fact should
be accorded a similar degree of deference as findings of fact (Geffen v.
Goodman Estate,  [1991] 2 S.C.R. 353).  In reviewing the making of
an inference, the appeal court will verify whether it can reasonably be
supported by the findings of fact that the trial judge reached and whether the
judge proceeded on proper legal principles.  I respectfully disagree with the
majority’s view that inferences can be rejected only where the
inference-drawing process itself is deficient: see Toronto (City) Board of
Education v. O.S.S.T.F., District 15, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 487, at
para. 45:  When a court is reviewing a tribunal’s findings of
fact or the inferences made on the basis of the evidence, it can only intervene
“where the evidence, viewed reasonably, is incapable of supporting a tribunal’s
findings of fact”: Lester (W. W.) (1978) Ltd. v. United Association of
Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry, Local 740,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 644, at p. 669 per McLachlin J.  An inference can be clearly wrong where the factual basis upon which
it relies is deficient or where the legal standard to which the facts are
applied is misconstrued.  My colleagues recognize themselves that a judge is
often called upon to make inferences of mixed law and fact (para. 26).  While
the standard of review is identical for both findings of fact and inferences of
fact, it is nonetheless important to draw an analytical distinction between the
two.  If the reviewing court were to review only for errors of fact, then the
decision of the trial judge would necessarily be upheld in every case where
evidence existed to support his or her factual findings.   In my view, this
Court is entitled to conclude that inferences made by the trial judge were
clearly wrong, just as it is entitled to reach this conclusion in respect to
findings of fact.  104                       
My colleagues take issue with the above statement that an
appellate court will verify whether the making of an inference can reasonably
be supported by the trial judge’s findings of fact, a standard which they
believe to be less strict than the “palpable and overriding” standard.  I do
not agree that a less strict standard is implied.  In my view there is no
difference between concluding that it was “unreasonable” or “palpably wrong”
for a trial judge to draw an inference from the facts as found by him or her
and concluding that the inference was not reasonably supported by those facts. 
The distinction is merely semantic.  105                       
By contrast, an appellate court reviews a trial judge’s findings on
questions of law not merely to determine if they are reasonable, but rather to
determine if they are correct; Moge v. Moge, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 813,
at p. 833; R. v. Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, [1992] 2 S.C.R.
606, at p. 647; R. P. Kerans, Standards of Review Employed by Appellate
Courts (1994), at p. 90.  The role of correcting errors of law is a primary
function of the appellate court; therefore, that court can and should review
the legal determinations of the lower courts for correctness.  106                       
In the law of negligence, the question of whether the conduct of the
defendant has met the appropriate standard of care is necessarily a question of
mixed fact and law.  Once the facts have been established, the determination of
whether or not the standard of care was met by the defendant will in most cases
be reviewable on a standard of correctness since the trial judge must
appreciate the facts within the context of the appropriate standard of care.  
In many cases, viewing the facts through the legal lens of the standard of care
gives rise to a policy-making or law-setting function that is the purview of
both the trial and appellate courts.  As stated by Kerans, supra, at
p. 103, “[t]he evaluation of facts as meeting or not meeting a legal test is a
process that involves law-making.  Moreover, it is probably correct to say that
every new attempt to apply a legal rule to a set of facts involves some
measure of interpretation of that rule, and thus more law-making” (emphasis in
original).  107                      
In a negligence case, the trial judge is called on to decide
whether the conduct of the defendant was reasonable under all the
circumstances.  While this determination involves questions of fact, it also
requires the trial judge to assess what is reasonable.  As stated above, in
many cases, this will involve a policy-making or “law-setting” role which an
appellate court is better situated to undertake (Kerans, supra, at pp.
5-10).   For example, in this case, the degree of knowledge that the trial judge
should have imputed to the reasonably prudent municipal councillor raised the
policy consideration of the type of accident-reporting system that a small
rural municipality with limited resources should be expected to maintain.  This
law-setting role was recognized by the United States Supreme Court in Bose
Corp. v. Consumers Union of U.S., Inc., 466 U.S. 485 (1984), at note 17, within the context of an action for
defamation:  A finding of fact
in some cases is inseparable from the principles through which it was deduced. 
At some point, the reasoning by which a fact is “found” crosses the line between
application of those ordinary principles of logic and common experience which
are ordinarily entrusted to the finder of fact into the realm of a legal rule
upon which the reviewing court must exercise its own independent judgment. 
Where the line is drawn varies according to the nature of the substantive law
at issue.  Regarding certain largely factual questions in some areas of the
law, the stakes -- in terms of impact on future cases and future conduct -- are
too great to entrust them finally to the judgment of the trier of fact.   108                       
My colleagues assert that the question of whether or not the standard of
care was met by the defendant in a negligence case is subject to a standard of
palpable and overriding error unless it is clear that the trial judge made some
extricable error in principle with respect to the characterization of the
standard or its application, in which case the error may amount to an error of
law (para. 36).  I disagree.  In many cases, it will not be possible to
“extricate” a purely legal question from the standard of care analysis
applicable to negligence, which is a question of mixed fact and law.   In
addition, while some questions of mixed fact and law may not have “any great
precedential value” (Southam, supra, at para. 37), such
questions often necessitate a normative analysis that should be reviewable by
an appellate court.  109                       
Consider again the issue of whether the municipality knew or should have
known of the alleged danger.  As a matter of law, the trial judge must approach
the question of whether knowledge should be imputed to the municipality having
regard to the duties of the ordinary, reasonable and prudent municipal
councillor.  If the trial judge applies a different legal standard, such as the
reasonable person standard, it is an error of law.  Yet even if the trial judge
correctly identifies the applicable legal standard, he or she may still err in
the process of assessing the facts through the lens of that legal standard. 
For example, there may exist evidence that an accident had previously occurred
on the portion of the road on which the relevant accident occurred.  In the
course of considering whether or not that fact satisfies the legal test for
knowledge the trial judge must make a number of normative assumptions.  The
trial judge must consider whether the fact that one accident had previously
occurred in the same location would alert the ordinary, reasonable and prudent
municipal councillor to the existence of a hazard.  The trial judge must also
consider whether the ordinary, reasonable and prudent councillor would have
been alerted to the previous accident by an accident-reporting system.  In my
view, the question of whether the fact of a previous accident having occurred
fulfills the applicable knowledge requirement is a question of mixed fact and
law and it is artificial to characterize it as anything else.  As is apparent
from the example given, the question may also raise normative issues which
should be reviewable by an appellate court on the correctness standard.  110                       
I agree with my colleagues that it is not possible to state as a
general proposition that all matters of mixed fact and law are reviewable
according to the standard of correctness: citing Southam, supra,
at para. 37 (para. 28).  I disagree, however, that the dicta in Southam establishes
that a trial judge’s conclusions on questions of mixed fact and law in a
negligence action should be accorded deference in every case.  This Court in St-Jean v. Mercier, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 491, 2002
SCC 15, a medical negligence case, distinguished Southam on the issue of
the standard applicable to questions of mixed fact and law where the tribunal
has no particular expertise.  Gonthier J., writing for a unanimous Court, stated
at paras. 48-49:  A question “about whether the
facts satisfy the legal tests” is one of mixed law and fact.  Stated
differently, “whether the defendant satisfied the appropriate standard of care
is a question of mixed law and fact” (Southam, at para. 35).                           Generally,
such a question, once the facts have been established without overriding and
palpable error, is to be reviewed on a standard of correctness since the
standard of care is normative and is a question of law within the normal purview
of both the trial and appellate courts.  Such is the standard for medical
negligence.  There is no issue of expertise of a specialized tribunal in a
particular field which may go to the determination of facts and be pertinent to
defining an appropriate standard and thereby call for some measure of deference
by a court of general appeal (Southam, supra, at para. 45; and Nova
Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, supra, at p. 647).  111                       
I also disagree with my colleagues that Jaegli Enterprises Ltd. v.
Taylor, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 2, is authority for the proposition that
when the question of mixed fact and law at issue is a finding of negligence,
that finding should be deferred to by appellate courts.  In that case the trial
judge found that the conduct of the defendant ski instructor met the standard
of care expected of him.  Moreover, the trial judge found that the accident
would have occurred regardless of what the ski instructor had done (Taylor
v. The Queen in Right of British Columbia (1978), 95 D.L.R. (3d) 82). 
Seaton J.A. of the British Columbia Court of Appeal disagreed with the trial
judge that the ski instructor had met the applicable standard of care (Taylor
(Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia (1980), 112 D.L.R. (3d) 297).  
Seaton J.A. recognized nevertheless that the “final question” was whether “the
instructor’s failure to remain was a cause of the accident” (p. 307).  On the
issue of causation, a question of fact, Seaton J.A. clearly substituted his
opinion for that of the trial judge’s without regard to the appropriate
standard of review.  His concluding remarks on the issue of causation at p. 308
highlight his lack of deference to the trial judge’s conclusion on causation:  On balance, I think that the evidence supports the
plaintiffs’ claim against the instructor, that his conduct in leaving the
plaintiff below the crest was one of the causes of the accident.  112                       
This Court, which restored the finding of the trial judge, did not
clearly state whether it did so on the basis that the appellate court was wrong
to interfere with the trial judge’s finding of negligence or whether it did so
because the appellate court wrongly interfered with the trial judge’s
conclusions on causation.  The reasons suggest the latter.  The only portion of
the trial judgment that this Court referred to was the finding on causation. 
Dickson J. (as he then was) remarks in Jaegli Enterprises, supra,
at p. 4:  At the end of a nine-day trial Mr. Justice Meredith, the presiding
judge, delivered a judgment in which he very carefully considered all of the
evidence and concluded that the accident had been caused solely by Larry
LaCasse and that the plaintiffs should recover damages, in an amount to be
assessed, against LaCasse.  The claims against Paul Ankenman, Jaegli
Enterprises Limited and the other defendants were dismissed with costs.  113                       
The Court went on to cite a number of cases, some of which did not
involve negligence (see Schreiber Brothers Ltd. v. Currie Products Ltd.,
[1980] 2 S.C.R. 78), for the general proposition that “it [is] wrong for an
appellate court to set aside a trial judgment where [there is not palpable and
overriding error, and] the only point at issue [was] the interpretation of the
evidence as a whole” (p. 84).  Given that the Court focussed on the issue of
causation, a question of fact alone, I do not think that Jaegli Enterprises establishes
that a finding of negligence by the trial judge should be deferred to by
appellate courts.  In my view, the Court in Jaegli Enterprises merely
affirmed the longstanding principle that an appellate court should not
interfere with a trial judge’s finding of fact absent a palpable and overriding
error.  (2)  Error of Law in the Reasons of the Court of Queen’s Bench  114                       
The standard of care set out in s. 192 of The Rural
Municipality Act, 1989, as interpreted within the jurisprudence, required
the trial judge to examine whether the portion of Snake Hill Road on which the
accident occurred posed a hazard to the reasonable driver exercising ordinary
care.  Having identified the correct legal test, the trial judge nonetheless
failed to ask herself whether a reasonable driver exercising ordinary care
would have been able to safely drive the portion of the road on which the
accident occurred.   To neglect entirely one branch of a legal test when
applying the facts to the test is to misconstrue the law (Southam,
supra, at para. 39).  The Saskatchewan Court of Appeal was therefore right
to characterize this failure as an error of law and to consider the factual
findings made by the trial judge in light of the appropriate legal test.  115                       
The long line of jurisprudence interpreting s. 192 of The Rural
Municipality Act, 1989 and its predecessor provisions clearly establishes
that the duty of the municipality is to keep the road “in such a reasonable
state of repair that those requiring to use it may, exercising ordinary care,
travel upon it with safety” (Partridge, supra, at p. 558; Levey
v. Rural Municipality of Rodgers, No. 133, [1921] 3 W.W.R. 764 (Sask.
C.A.), at p. 766; Diebel Estate v. Pinto Creek No. 75 (Rural Municipality)
(1996), 149 Sask. R. 68 (Q.B.), at pp. 71-72).  Legislation in several other
provinces establishes a similar duty of care and courts in these provinces have
interpreted it in a similar fashion (R. v. Jennings, [1966]
S.C.R. 532, at p. 537; County of Parkland No. 31 v. Stetar, [1975] 2
S.C.R. 884, at p. 892; Fafard v. City of Quebec (1917), 39 D.L.R. 717
(S.C.C.), at p. 718).  This Court, in Jennings, supra,
interpreting a similar provision under the Ontario Highway
Improvement Act, R.S.O. 1960, c. 171,  remarked at p. 537
that: “[i]t has been repeatedly held in Ontario that where a duty to keep a
highway in repair is imposed by statute the body upon which it is imposed must
keep the highway in such a condition that travellers using it with ordinary
care may do so with safety”.  116                       
There is good reason for limiting the municipality’s duty to repair to a
standard which permits drivers exercising ordinary care to proceed with
safety.  As stated by this Court in Fafard, supra, at p. 718: “[a]
municipal corporation is not an insurer of travellers using its streets; its
duty is to use reasonable care to keep its streets in a reasonably safe
condition for ordinary travel by persons exercising ordinary care for their own
safety”. Correspondingly, appellate courts have long held that it is an error
for the trial judge to find a municipality in breach of its duty merely because
a danger exists, regardless of whether or not that danger poses a risk to the
ordinary user of the road.  The type of error to be guarded against was
described by Wetmore C.J. in Williams v. Town of North Battleford (1911),
4 Sask. L.R. 75 (en banc), at p. 81:  The question in an action of this sort, whether or not the road is kept
in such repair that those requiring to use it may, using ordinary care, pass to
and fro upon it in safety, is, it seems to me, largely one of fact . . . I
would hesitate about setting aside a finding of fact of the trial Judge if he
had found the facts necessary for the determination of the case, but he did not
so find.  He found that the crossing was a “dangerous spot without a light, and
that if the utmost care were used no accident might occur, but it was not in
such proper or safe state as to render such accident unlikely to occur.” He
did not consider the question from the standpoint of whether or not those
requiring to use the road might, using ordinary care, pass to and fro upon it
in safety.  The mere fact of the crossing being dangerous is not sufficient
. . . .  [Emphasis added.]  117                       
From the jurisprudence cited above, it is clear that the mere existence
of a hazard or danger does not in and of itself give rise to a duty on the part
of the municipality to erect a sign.  Even if a trial judge concludes on the
facts that the conditions of the road do, in fact, present a hazard, he or she
must still go on to assess whether that hazard would present a risk to the
reasonable driver exercising ordinary care.  The ordinary driver is often faced
with inherently dangerous driving conditions.  Motorists drive in icy or wet
conditions.  They drive at night on country roads that are not well lit.  They
are faced with obstacles such as snow ridges and potholes.  These obstacles are
often not in plain view, but are obscured or “hidden”.  Common sense dictates
that motorists will, however, exercise a degree of caution when faced with
dangerous driving conditions.  A municipality is expected to provide extra
cautionary measures only where the conditions of the road and the surrounding
circumstances do not signal to the driver the possibility that a hazard is
present.  For example, the ordinary driver expects a dirt road to become
slippery when wet.  By contrast, paved bridge decks on highways are often
slick, though they appear completely dry.  Consequently, signs will be posted
to alert drivers to this unapparent possibility.  118                       
The appellant in this case argued, at para. 27 of his factum, that the
trial judge did, in fact, assess whether a reasonable driver using ordinary
care would find the portion of Snake Hill Road on which the accident occurred
to pose a risk.   He points in particular to the trial judge’s comments at
paras. 85-86 that:  There is a portion of Snake Hill Road that is a hazard
to the public.  In this regard I accept the evidence of Mr. Anderson and
Mr. Werner.  Further, it is a hazard that is not readily apparent to users
of the road.  It is a hidden hazard. . . .  . . . where the existence of . . . bush obstructs the ability of a
motorist to be forewarned of a hazard such as that on Snake Hill Road, it is
reasonable to expect the R.M. to erect and maintain a warning or regulatory
sign so that a motorist, using ordinary care, may be forewarned, adjust
speed and take corrective action in advance of entering a dangerous
situation.  [Emphasis added.]  119                       
The appellant’s argument suggests that the trial judge discharged her
duty to apply the facts to the law merely by restating the facts of the case in
the language of the legal test.  This was not, however, sufficient.  Although
it is clear from the citation above that the trial judge made a factual finding
that the portion of Snake Hill Road on which the accident occurred presented
drivers with a hidden hazard, there is nothing in this portion of her reasons
to suggest that she considered whether or not that portion of the road would
pose a risk to the reasonable driver exercising ordinary care.  The finding that
a hazard, or even that a hidden hazard, exists does not automatically give rise
to the conclusion that the reasonable driver exercising ordinary care could not
travel through it safely.  A proper application of the test demands that the
trial judge ask the question: “How would a reasonable driver have driven on
this road?” Whether or not a hazard is “hidden” or a curve is “inherently”
dangerous does not dispose of the question.  My colleagues state that it was
open to the trial judge to draw an inference  of knowledge of the hazard simply
because the sharp curve was a permanent feature of the road (para. 61).  Here
again, there is nothing in the reasons of the trial judge to suggest that she
drew such an inference or to explain how such an inference accorded with the
legal requirements concerning the duty of care.  120                       
Nor did the trial judge consider the question in any other part of her
reasons.  Her failure to do so becomes all the more apparent when her analysis
(or lack thereof) is compared to that in cases in which the courts applied the
appropriate method.  The Court of Appeal referred to two such cases by way of
example.  In Nelson v. Waverley (Rural Municipality) (1988), 65 Sask. R.
260 (Q.B.), the plaintiff argued that the defendant municipality should have
posted signs warning of a ridge in the middle of the road that resulted from
the grading of the road by the municipality.  The trial judge concluded that if
the driver had exercised ordinary care, he could have travelled along the
roadway with safety.  Instead, he drove too fast and failed to keep an adequate
look-out considering the maintenance that was being performed on the road.  In Diebel
Estate, supra, the issue was whether the municipality had a duty
under s. 192 to post a sign warning motorists that a rural road ended abruptly
in a T-intersection.  The question of how a reasonable driver exercising
ordinary care would have driven on that road was asked and answered by the
trial judge in the following passage at p. 74:  His [the expert’s] conclusions as to stopping are, however,
mathematically arrived at and never having been on the road, from what was
described in the course of the trial, I would think the intersection could be a
danger at night to a complete stranger to the area, depending on one’s reaction
time and the possibility of being confused by what one saw rather than
recognizing the T intersection to be just that.  On the other hand I would
think a complete stranger in the area would be absolutely reckless to drive down
a dirt road of the nature of this particular road at night at 80 kilometres per
hour.  [Emphasis added; emphasis in original deleted.]  121                       
The conclusion that Wright J. erred in failing to apply a required
aspect of the legal test does not automatically lead to a rejection of her
factual findings.  This Court’s jurisdiction to review questions of law
entitles it, where an error of law has been found, to take the factual findings
of the trial judge as they are, and to assess these findings anew in the context
of the appropriate legal test.  122                       
In my view, neither Wright J.’s factual findings nor any other evidence
in the record that she might have considered had she asked the appropriate
question, support the conclusion that the respondent was in breach of its duty. 
The portion of Snake Hill Road on which the accident occurred did not pose a
risk to a reasonable driver exercising ordinary care because the conditions of
Snake Hill Road in general and the conditions with which motorists were
confronted at the exact location of the accident signalled to the reasonable
motorist that caution was needed.   Motorists who appropriately acknowledged
the presence of the several factors which called for caution would have been
able to navigate safely the so-called “hidden hazard” without the benefit of a
road sign.  123                       
The question of how a reasonable driver exercising ordinary care would
have driven on Snake Hill Road necessitates a consideration of the nature and
locality of the road.  A reasonable motorist will not approach a narrow gravel
road in the country in the same way that he or she will approach a paved
highway.  It is reasonable to expect a motorist to drive more slowly and to pay
greater attention to the potential presence of hazards when driving on a road
that is of a lower standard, particularly when he or she is unfamiliar with it.  124                       
While the trial judge in this case made some comments regarding the
nature of the road, I agree with the Court of Appeal’s findings that “[s]he
might have addressed the matter more fully, taking into account more broadly
the terrain through which the road passed, the class and designation of the
road in the scheme of classification, and so on . . . ” (para. 55).  Instead,
the extent of her analysis of the road was limited to the following comments,
found at para. 84 of her reasons:  Snake Hill Road is a low traffic road.  It is
however maintained by the R.M. so that it is passable year round.  There are
permanent residences on the road.  It is used by farmers for access to their
fields and cattle.  Young people frequent Snake Hill Road for parties and as
such the road is used by those who may not have the same degree of familiarity
with it as do residents.   125                       
In my view, the question of how the reasonable driver would have
negotiated Snake Hill Road necessitated a somewhat more in-depth analysis of
the character of the road.  The trial judge’s analysis focussed almost entirely
on the use of the road, without considering the sort of conditions it presented
to drivers.  It is perhaps not surprising that the trial judge did not engage
in this fuller analysis, given that she did not turn her mind to the question
of how a reasonable driver would have approached the road.  Had she considered
this question, she likely would have engaged in the type of assessment that was
made by the Court of Appeal at para. 13 of its judgment:  The road, about 20 feet in width, was classed as “a bladed trail,”
sometimes referred to as “a land access road,” a classification just above that
of “prairie trail”.   As such, it was not built up, nor gravelled, except
lightly at one end of it, but simply bladed across the terrain following the
path of least resistance.  Nor was it in any way signed.  Given the fact
that Snake Hill Road is a low standard road, in a category only one or two
levels above a prairie trail, one can assume that a reasonable driver
exercising ordinary care would approach the road with a certain degree of
caution.  126                       
Having considered the character of the road in general, and having
concluded that by its very nature it warranted a certain degree of caution, it
is nonetheless necessary to consider the material features of the road at the
point at which the accident occurred.  Even on roads which are of a lower
standard, a reasonable driver exercising due caution may be caught unaware by a
particularly dangerous segment of the road.  That was, in fact, the central
argument that the appellant put forward in this case.  According to the
appellant’s “dual nature” theory, at para. 8 of his factum, the fact that the
curvy portion of Snake Hill Road where the accident occurred was flanked by
straight segments of road created a risk that a motorist would be lulled into
thinking that the curves could be taken at speeds greater than that at which
they could actually be taken.  127                       
While it is not clear from her reasons that the trial judge accepted the
appellant’s “dual nature” theory, it appears that her conclusion that the
municipality did not meet the standard of care required by it was based largely
on her observation of the material features of the road at the location of the
Nikolaisen rollover.  Relying on the evidence of two experts, Mr. Anderson and
Mr. Werner, she found the portion of the road on which the accident occurred to
be a “hazard to the public”.  In her view, the limited sight distance created
by the presence of uncleared bush precluded a motorist from being forewarned of
the impending sharp right turn immediately followed by a left turn.  Based on
expert testimony, she concluded that the curve could not be negotiated at
speeds greater than 60 km/h under favourable conditions, or 50 km/h under
wet conditions.  128                       
Again, I would not reject the trial judge’s factual finding that the
curve presented motorists with an inherent hazard.  The evidence does not,
however, support a finding that a reasonable driver exercising ordinary care
would have been unable to negotiate the curve with safety.  As I explained
earlier, the municipality’s duty to repair is implicated only when an
objectively hazardous condition exists, and where it is
determined that a reasonable driver arriving at the hazard would be unable to
provide for his or her own security due to the features of the hazard.  129                       
I agree with the trial judge that part of the danger posed by the
presence of bushes on the side of the road was that a driver would not be able
to predict the radius of the sharp right-turning curve obscured by them.  In my
view, however, the actual danger inherent in this portion of the road was that
the bushes, together with the sharp radius of the curve, prevented an eastbound
motorist from being able to see if a vehicle was approaching from the opposite
direction.  Given this latter situation, it is highly unlikely that any
reasonable driver exercising ordinary care would approach the curve at speeds
in excess of 50 km/h, a speed which was found by the trial judge to be a safe
speed at which to negotiate the curve.  Since a reasonable driver would not
approach this curve at speeds in excess of which it could safely be taken, I
conclude that the curve did not pose a risk to the reasonable driver.  130                       
One need only refer to the series of photographs of the portion of Snake
Hill Road on which the accident occurred to appreciate the extent to which
visual clues existed which would alert a driver to approach the curve with
caution (Respondent’s Record, vol. II, at pp. 373-76).  The photographs, which
indicate what the driver would have seen on entering the curve, show the
presence of bush extending well into the road.  From the photographs, it is
clear that a motorist approaching the curve would not fail to appreciate the
risk presented by the curve, which is simply that it is impossible to see
around it and to gauge what may be coming in the opposite direction.  In
addition, the danger posed by the inability to see what is approaching in the
opposite direction is somewhat heightened by the fact that this road is used by
farm operators.  At trial, the risk was described in the following terms by Mr.
Sparks, an engineer giving expert testimony:  . . . if you can’t, if you can’t see far enough down the road to, you
know, if there’s somebody that’s coming around the corner with a tractor and a
cultivator and you can’t see around the corner, then, you know, drivers would
have a fairly strong signal, in my view, that due care and caution would be
required.  131                       
The expert testimony relied on by the trial judge does not support a
finding that the portion of Snake Hill Road on which the accident occurred
would pose a risk to a reasonable driver exercising ordinary care.  When asked
at trial whether motorists, exercising reasonable care, would enter the curve
at a slow speed because they could not see what was coming around the corner,
Mr. Werner agreed that he, himself, drove the corner “at a slower speed” and
that it would be prudent for a driver to slow down given the limited sight
distance.   Similarly, Mr. Anderson admitted to having taken the curve at 40-45
km/h the first time he drove it because he “didn’t want to get into trouble
with it”.  When asked if the reason he approached the curve at that speed was
because he could not see around it, he replied in the affirmative: “[t]hat’s
why I approached it the way I did.”  132                       
Perhaps most tellingly, Mr. Nikolaisen himself testified that he could
not see if a vehicle was coming in the opposite direction as he approached the
curve.  The following exchange which occurred during counsel’s
cross-examination of Mr. Nikolaisen at trial is instructive:  Q.    . . . You told my learned friend, Mr. Logue,
that your view of the road was quite limited, that is correct? The view ahead
on the road is quite limited, is that right?  A.     As in regards to travelling through the
curves, yes, that’s right, yeah.  Q.    Yes.  And you did not know what was coming
as you approached the curve, that is correct?  A.     That’s correct, yes.  Q.    There might be a vehicle around that curve
coming towards you or someone riding a horse on the road, that is correct?  A.     Or a tractor or a cultivator or something,
that’s right.  Q.    Or a tractor or a cultivator.  You know as a
person raised in rural Saskatchewan that all of those things are possibilities,
that is right?  A.     That’s right, yeah, that is correct.  133                       
Nor do I accept the appellant’s submission that the “dual nature” of the
road had the effect of lulling drivers into taking the curve at an
inappropriate speed.  This theory rests on the assumption that the motorists
would drive the straight portions of the road at speeds of up to 80 km/h,
leaving them unprepared to negotiate suddenly appearing curves.  Yet, while the
default speed limit on the road was 80 km/h, there was no evidence to suggest
that a reasonable driver would have driven any portion of the road at that
speed.  While Mr. Werner testified that a driver “would be permitted” to drive
at a maximum of 80 km/h, since this was the default (not the posted) speed
limit, he later acknowledged that bladed trails in the province are not
designed to meet 80 km/h design criteria.   I agree with the Court of Appeal
that the evidence is that “Snake Hill Road was self-evidently a dirt road or
bladed trail” and that it “was obviously not designed to accommodate travel at
a general speed of 80 kilometres per hour”.   As I earlier remarked, the
locality of the road and its character and class must be considered when determining
whether the reasonable driver would be able to navigate it safely.  134                       
Furthermore, the evidence at trial did not suggest that drivers were
somehow fooled by the so-called “dual nature” of the road.  The following
exchange between counsel for the respondent and Mr. Werner at trial is
illustrative of how motorists would view the road:  Q.    Now,  Mr. Werner, would you not agree that
the change in the character of this road as you proceeded from east to west was
quite obvious?  A.     It was straight, and then you came to a
hill, and you really didn’t know what might lie beyond the hill.  Q.    That’s right.  But I mean, the fact that the
road went from being straight and level to suddenly there was a hill and you
couldn’t see -- you could see from the point of the top of the hill that the
road didn’t continue in a straight line, couldn’t you?  A.     Yes, you could, from the top of the hill,
it’s a very abrupt hill, yes.  Q.    And as you proceeded down though the hill it
became quite obvious, did it not, that the character of the road changed? A.     Yes, it changed, yes.  Q.    Now you were faced with something other than
a straight road?  A.     M’hm.  Yes.  Q.    Now you were on -- and at some point along
there the surface of the road changed, did it not?  A.     Yes.  Q.    And, of course, the road was no longer, I
use the term built-up to refer to a road that has grade and it has some
drainage.  As you proceeded from west to east, you realized, you could see, it
was obvious that this was not longer a built-up road?  A.     It was a road essentially that was cut out
of the topography and had no ditches, and there was an abutment or shoulder
right to the driving surface.  It was different than the first part.  Q.    Yes.  And all those differences were
obvious, were they not?  A.     Well, I -- they were clear,
satisfactorily clear to me, yes.  [Emphasis added.]  135                       
Although they may be compelling factors in other cases, in this case the
“dual nature” of the road, the radius of the curve, the surface of the road,
and the lack of superelevation do not support the conclusion of the trial
judge.  The question of how a reasonable driver exercising ordinary care would
approach this road demands common sense.  There was no necessity to post a sign
in this case for the simple reason that any reasonable driver would have
reacted to the presence of natural cues to slow down.  The law does not require
a municipality to post signs warning motorists of hazards that pose no real
risk to a prudent driver.  To impose a duty on the municipality to erect a sign
in a case such as this is to alter the character of the duty owed by a municipality
to drivers.  Municipalities are not required to post warnings directed at drunk
drivers and thereby deal with their inability to react to the cues that alert
the ordinary driver to the presence of a hazard.  136                       
My colleagues assert that the trial judge properly considered all
aspects of the applicable legal test, including whether the curve would pose a
risk to the reasonable driver exercising ordinary care.  They say that the
trial judge did discuss, both explicitly and implicitly, the conduct of an
ordinary or reasonable motorist approaching the curve.  Secondly, they note
that she referred to the evidence of the experts, Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner,
both of whom discussed the conduct of an ordinary motorist in this situation. 
Thirdly, the fact that the trial judge apportioned negligence to Nikolaisen
indicates, in their view, that she assessed his conduct against the standard of
the ordinary driver, and thus considered the conduct of the latter (para. 40).  137                       
I respectfully disagree that it is explicit in the trial judge’s reasons
that she considered whether the portion of the road on which the accident
occurred posed a risk to the ordinary driver exercising reasonable care.  As I
explained above, the fact that the trial judge restated the legal test in the
form of a conclusion in no way suggests that she turned her mind to the issue
of whether the ordinary driver would have found the curve to be hazardous.  138                       
Nor do I agree that a discussion of the conduct of an ordinary motorist
in the situation was somehow “implicit” in the trial judge’s reasons.   In my
view, it is highly problematic to presume that a trial judge made factual
findings on a particular issue in the absence of any indication in the reasons
as to what those findings were.  While a trial judge is presumed to know the
law, he or she cannot be presumed to have reached a factual conclusion without
some indication in the reasons that he or she did in fact come to that
conclusion.  If the reviewing court is willing to presume that a trial judge
made certain findings based on evidence in the record absent any indication in
the reasons that the trial judge actually made those findings, then the
reviewing court is precluded from finding that the trial judge misapprehended
or neglected evidence.  139                       
In my view, my colleagues have throughout their reasons improperly
presumed that the trial judge reached certain factual findings based on the
evidence despite the fact that those findings were not expressed in her
reasons.  On the issue of whether the curve presented a risk to the ordinary
driver, my colleagues note that “in relying on the evidence of Mr. Anderson and
Mr. Werner, the trial judge chose not to base her decision on the conflicting
evidence of other witnesses” (para. 46).  The problem with this statement is
that although the trial judge relied on the evidence of Mr. Anderson and Mr.
Werner to conclude that the portion of Snake Hill Road on which the accident
occurred was a hazard, it is impossible from her reasons to discern what, if
any, evidence she relied on to reach the conclusion that the curve presented a
risk to the ordinary driver exercising reasonable care.  In the absence of any
indication that she considered this issue, I am not willing to presume that she
did.  140                       
My colleagues similarly presume findings of fact when discussing the knowledge
of the municipality.  On this issue, they reiterate that “it is open for a
trial judge to prefer some parts of the evidence over others, and to re-assess
the trial judge’s weighing of the evidence, is, with respect, not within the
province of an appellate court” (para. 62).   At para. 64 of their reasons, my
colleagues review the findings of the trial judge on the issue of knowledge and
conclude that the trial judge “drew the inference that the municipality should
have been put on notice and investigated Snake Hill Road, in which case it
would have become aware of the hazard in question”.  I think that it is
improper to conclude that the trial judge made a finding that the
municipality’s system of road inspection was inadequate in the absence of any indication
in her reasons that she reached this conclusion.  My colleagues further suggest
that the trial judge did not impute knowledge to the municipality on the basis
of the occurrence of prior accidents on Snake Hill Road (para. 65). They even
state that it was not necessary for the trial judge to rely on the accidents in
order to satisfy s. 192(3) (para. 67).  This, in my view, is a reinterpretation
of the trial judge’s findings that stands in direct contradiction to the
reasons that were provided by her.  The trial judge discusses other factors
pertaining to knowledge only to heighten the significance that
she attributes to the fact that accidents had previously occurred on other
portions of the road (at para. 90):  If the R.M. did not have actual knowledge of the
danger inherent in this portion of Snake Hill Road, it should have known.  While
four accidents in 12 years may not in itself be significant, it takes on more
significance given the close proximity of three of these accidents, the
relatively low volume of traffic, the fact that there are permanent residences
on the road and the fact that the road is frequented by young and perhaps less
experienced drivers. [Emphasis added.]  141                       
My colleagues refer to the decision of Van de Perre v. Edwards,
[2001] 2 S.C.R. 1014, 2001 SCC 60, in which I stated that “an omission [in
the trial judge’s reasons] is only a material error if it gives rise to the
reasoned belief that the trial judge must have forgotten, ignored or
misconceived the evidence in a way that affected his conclusion” (para. 15).  
This case is however distinguishable from Van de Perre.  In Van de
Perre, the appellate court improperly substituted its own findings
of fact for the trial judge’s clear factual conclusions on the basis that the
trial judge had not considered all of the evidence.  By contrast, in this case
my colleagues assert that this Court should not interfere with the “findings of
the trial judge” even where no findings were made and where such findings must
be presumed from the evidence.  The trial judge’s failure in this case to reach
any conclusion on whether the ordinary driver would have found the portion of
the road on which the accident occurred hazardous, in my view, gives rise to
the reasoned belief that she ignored the evidence on the issue in a way that
affected her conclusion.  142                       
Finally, I do not agree that the trial judge’s conclusion that Mr.
Nikolaisen was negligent equates to an assessment of whether a motorist
exercising ordinary care would have found the curve on which the accident
occurred to be hazardous.  It is clear from the trial judge’s reasons that she
made a factual finding that the curve could be driven safely at 60 km/h in dry
conditions and 50 km/h in wet conditions and that Mr. Nikolaisen approached the
curve at an excessive speed.  As earlier stated, what she failed to consider
was whether the ordinary driver exercising reasonable care would have
approached the curve at a speed at which it could be safely negotiated, or,
stated differently, whether the curve posed a real danger to the ordinary
driver.  B.      Did the Trial Judge Err in Finding that
the Respondent Municipality Knew or Should Have Known of the Danger Posed by
the Municipal Road?  143                       
Pursuant to s. 192(3) of The Rural Municipality Act, 1989,
fault is not to be imputed to the municipality in the absence of proof by the
plaintiff that the municipality “knew or should have known of the disrepair”.  144                       
The trial judge made no finding that the respondent municipality had
actual knowledge of the alleged state of disrepair, but rather imputed
knowledge to the respondent on the basis that it should have known of the
danger.  This is apparent in her findings on knowledge at paras. 89-91 of her
reasons:  Breach of the statutory duty of care imposed by
section 192 of the Rural Municipality Act, supra, cannot be
imputed to the R.M. unless it knew of or ought to have known of the state of
disrepair on Snake Hill Road.  Between 1978 and 1990 there were four accidents
on Snake Hill Road.  Three of these accidents occurred in the same vicinity as
the Nikolaisen rollover.  The precise location of the fourth accident is
unknown.  While at least three of these accidents occurred when motorists where
travelling in the opposite direction of the Nikolaisen vehicle, they occurred
on that portion of Snake Hill Road which is the most dangerous -- where the
road begins to curve, rather than where it is generally straight and flat.  At
least two of these accidents were reported to authorities.  If the R.M. did not have actual knowledge of the
danger inherent in this portion of Snake Hill Road, it should have known. 
While four accidents in 12 years may not in itself be significant, it takes on
more significance given the close proximity of three of these accidents, the
relatively low volume of traffic, the fact that there are permanent residences
on the road and the fact that the road is frequented by young and perhaps less
experienced drivers.  I am not satisfied that the R.M. has established that
in these circumstances it took reasonable steps to prevent this state of
disrepair on Snake Hill Road from continuing.  I find that by failing to erect and maintain a
warning and regulatory sign on this portion of Snake Hill Road the R.M. has not
met the standard of care which is reasonable in the circumstances. 
Accordingly, it is in breach of its duty of care to motorists generally, and to
Mr. Housen in particular.  [Emphasis added.]  145                       
Whether the municipality should have known of the disrepair (here, the
risk posed in the absence of a sign) involves both questions of law and
questions of fact.  As a matter of law, the trial judge must approach the
question of whether knowledge should be imputed to the municipality with regard
to the duties of the ordinary, reasonable and prudent municipal councillor (Ryan
v. Victoria (City), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 201, at para. 28).  The question
is then answered through the trial judge’s assessment of the facts of the case.  146                       
I find that the trial judge made both errors of law and palpable and
overriding errors of fact in determining that the respondent municipality
should have known of the alleged state of disrepair.  She erred in law by
approaching the question of knowledge from the perspective of an expert rather
than from the perspective of a prudent municipal councillor.  She also erred in
law by failing to appreciate that the onus of proving that the municipality
knew or should have known of the alleged disrepair remained on the plaintiff
throughout.  The trial judge clearly erred in fact by drawing the unreasonable
inference that the respondent municipality should have known that the portion
of the road on which the accident occurred was dangerous from evidence that
accidents had occurred on other parts of Snake Hill Road.  147                       
The trial judge’s failure to determine whether knowledge should be
imputed to the municipality from the perspective of what a prudent municipal
councillor should have known is implicit in her reasons.  The respondent could
not be held, for the purposes of establishing knowledge under the statutory
test, to the standard of an expert analysing the curve after the accident.  Yet
this is precisely what the trial judge did.  She relied on the expert evidence
of Mr. Anderson and Mr. Werner to reach the conclusion that the curve presented
a hidden hazard.  She also implicitly accepted that the risk posed by the curve
was not one that would be readily apparent to a lay person.  This is evident in
the portion of her judgment where she accepts as a valid excuse for not filing
a timely claim against the respondent the appellant counsel’s explanation that
he did not believe the respondent to be at fault until expert opinions were
obtained.  The trial judge stated in this regard: “[i]t was only later when
expert opinions were obtained that serious consideration was given to the
prospect that the nature of Snake Hill Road might be a factor contributing to
the accident” (para. 64).  Her failure to consider the risk to the prudent
driver is also apparent when one considers that she ignored the evidence
concerning the way in which the two experts themselves had approached the
dangerous curve (see para. 54 above).  148                       
Had the trial judge considered the question of whether the municipality
should have known of the alleged disrepair from the perspective of the prudent
municipal councillor, she would necessarily have reached a different
conclusion.  There was no evidence that the road conditions which existed posed
a risk that the respondent should have been aware of.  The respondent had no
particular reason to inspect that segment of the road for the presence of
hazards.  It had not received any complaints from motorists respecting the
absence of signs on the road, the lack of superelevation on the curves, or the
presence of trees and vegetation which grew up along the sides of the road.  149                       
In addition, the question of the respondent’s knowledge is linked
inextricably to the standard of care.  A municipality can only be expected to
have knowledge of those hazards which pose a risk to the reasonable driver
exercising ordinary care, since these are the only hazards for which there is a
duty to repair.  The trial judge should not have expected the respondent in
this case to have knowledge of the road conditions that existed at the site of the
Nikolaisen rollover since that road condition simply did not pose a risk to the
reasonable driver.  In addition to the evidence that was discussed above in the
context of the standard of care, this conclusion is supported by the testimony
of the several lay witnesses that testified at trial.  Craig Thiel, a resident
on the road, testified that he was not aware that Snake Hill Road had a
reputation of being a dangerous road, and that he himself had never experienced
difficulty with the portion of the road on which the accident occurred.   His
wife, Toby, also testified that she had experienced no problems with the road.  150                       
The trial judge also clearly erred in fact by imputing knowledge to the
municipality on the basis of the four accidents that had previously occurred on
Snake Hill Road.  While her factual findings regarding the accidents themselves
have a sound basis in the evidence, these findings simply do not support her
conclusion that a prudent municipal councillor ought to have known that a risk
existed for the normal prudent driver.  As such, the trial judge erred in
drawing an unreasonable inference from the evidence that was before her.  As
stated above, the standard of review for inferences of fact is, above all, one
of reasonableness.  This is reflected in the following  passage from Joseph
Brant Memorial Hospital v. Koziol, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 491, at pp. 503-4:  . . . “it is a well-known principle that appellate tribunals should not
disturb findings of fact made by a trial judge if there were credible evidence
before him upon which he could reasonably base his conclusion”.  
[Emphasis added.]  151                       
As I stated above, there was no evidence to suggest that the respondent
had actual knowledge that accidents had previously occurred on Snake Hill
Road.  To the contrary, Mr. Danger, the administrator of the municipality,
testified that the first he heard of the accidents was at the trial.  152                       
Implicit in the trial judge’s reasons, then, was the expectation that
the municipality should have known about the accidents through an
accident-reporting system.  The appellant put forward that argument
explicitly before this Court, placing significant emphasis on the fact that
respondent “has no regularized approach to gathering this information, whether
from councillors or otherwise”.  The argument suggests that, had the
municipality established a formal system to find out whether accidents had
occurred on a given road, it would have known that accidents had occurred on
Snake Hill Road and would have taken the appropriate corrective action to
ensure that the road was safe for travellers.  153                       
I find the above argument to be flawed in two important respects. 
First, the argument that the other accidents on Snake Hill Road were relevant
in this case is based on the assumption that there was an obligation on the
respondent municipality to have a “regularized” accident-reporting system, and
that the informal system that was in place was somehow deficient.   In my view,
the appellant did not meet its onus to show that the system relied on by the
municipality to discharge its obligations under s. 192 of the The Rural
Municipality Act, 1989 was deficient.  The evidence shows that, prior to
1988, there was no formal system of accident reporting in place.  There was,
nonetheless, an informal system whereby the municipal councillors were
responsible for finding out if there were road hazards.  Information that
hazards existed came to the attention of the councillors via complaints, and
from their own familiarity with the roads within the township under their
jurisdiction.  The trial judge made a palpable error in finding that this
informal system was deficient in the absence of any evidence of the practice of
other municipalities at the time that the accidents occurred and what might
have been a reasonable system, particularly given the fact that the rural
municipality in question had only six councillors.  There is no evidence that a
rural municipality of this type requires the sort of sophisticated
information-gathering process that may be required in a city, where accidents
occur with greater frequency and where it is less likely that word of mouth
will suffice to bring hazards to the attention of the councillors.  154                       
The respondent municipality now has a more formalized system of accident
reporting.  Since 1988,  Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation annually
provides the municipalities with a listing of all motor vehicle accidents which
occur within the municipality and which are reported to the police.   While I
agree that this system may provide the municipality with a better chance of
locating hazards in some circumstances, I do not accept that the adoption of
this system is relevant on the facts of this case.  Only one accident, which
occurred in 1990, was reported to the respondent under this system.  The
appellant adduced no evidence to suggest that this accident occurred at the
same location as the Nikolaisen rollover, or that this accident occurred as a
result of the conditions of the road rather than the negligence of the driver.  155                       
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, it was simply illogical for the
trial judge to infer from the fact of the earlier accidents that the respondent
should have known that the site of the Nikolaisen rollover posed a risk to
prudent drivers.  The three accidents, which took place in 1978, 1985, and
1987, occurred on different curves, while the vehicles involved were proceeding
in the opposite direction.   The accidents of 1978 and 1987 occurred on the
first right-turning curve in the road with the drivers travelling westbound, at
the bottom of the hill.   The accident in 1985 took place on the next curve in
the road with the driver also travelling westbound, again on a different curve
from the one where the Nikolaisen rollover took place.  If anything, these
accidents signal that the municipality should have been concerned with the
curves that were, when travelling westbound, to the east of the site of the
Nikolaisen rollover.  The evidence disclosed no accidents that had occurred at
the precise location of the accident that is the subject of this case.  156                       
Furthermore, the mere occurrence of an accident does not in and of
itself indicate a duty to post a sign.  In many cases, accidents happen not
because of the conditions of the road, but rather because of the negligence of
the driver.  Illustrative in this regard is Mr. Agrey’s accident on Snake Hill
Road in 1978.  Mr. Agrey testified that, just prior to the accident, he had
turned his attention away from the road to talk to one of the passengers in the
vehicle.  Another passenger shouted to him to “look out”, but by the time he
was alerted it was too late to properly navigate the turn.  Mr. Agrey was
charged and fined for his carelessness.  As was discussed in the context of the
standard of care, a municipality is not obligated to make safe the roads for
all drivers, regardless of the care and attention that they are exercising when
driving.  It need only keep roads in such a state of repair as will allow a
reasonable driver exercising ordinary care to drive with safety.  157                       
In addition to the substantial errors discussed above, I would also note
that, in my view, the trial judge was inattentive to the onus of proof on this
issue.  When reviewing the evidence pertaining to other accidents on Snake Hill
Road, the trial judge remarked, at para. 31: “Cst. Forbes does not recall any
other accident on Snake Hill Road during her time at the Shellbrook RCMP
Detachment, from 1987 until 1996.  Cpl. Healey had heard of one other
accident.  Forbes and Healey are only two of nine members of the RCMP
Detachment at Shellbrook” (emphasis added).   By this comment, the trial
judge seems to imply that there may have been more accidents on Snake Hill Road
that had been reported and that the respondent should have known about this. 
With all due respect to the trial judge, if there had been accidents other than
the ones that were raised at trial, it was up to the appellant to bring
evidence of these accidents forward, either by calling the RCMP members to whom
they had been reported, or by calling those who were involved in the accidents,
or by any other available means.  Furthermore, the significance that the trial
judge attributed to the other accidents that occurred on Snake Hill Road was
dependent on her assumption that the respondent should have had a formal
accident-reporting system in place.   The respondent did not bear the onus of
demonstrating that it was not obliged to have such a system; there was, rather,
a positive onus on the appellant to demonstrate that such a system was required
and that the informal reporting system was inadequate.  C.    Did the Trial Judge Err in Finding that
the Accident was Caused in Part by the Failure of the Respondent Municipality
to Erect a Sign Near the Curve?  158                       
The trial judge’s findings on causation are found at para. 101 of her
judgment, where she states:  I find that this accident occurred as a result of
Mr. Nikolaisen entering the curve on Snake Hill Road at a speed slightly in
excess of that which would allow successful negotiation.  The accident occurred
at the most dangerous segment of Snake Hill Road where a warning or regulatory
sign should have been erected and maintained to warn motorists of an impending
and hidden hazard.  Mr. Nikolaisen’s degree of impairment only served to
increase the risk of him not reacting, or reacting inappropriately to a sign. 
Mr. Nikolaisen was not driving recklessly such that he would have intentionally
disregarded a warning or regulatory sign.  He had moments earlier, when departing
the Thiel residence, successfully negotiated a sharp curve which he could see
and which was apparent to him.  I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities
that had Mr. Nikolaisen been forewarned of the curve, he would have reacted and
taken appropriate corrective action such that he would not have lost control of
his vehicle when entering the curve.  159                       
The trial judge’s above findings in respect to causation represent
conclusions on matters of fact.  Consequently, this Court will only interfere
if it finds that in coming to these conclusions she made a manifest error,
ignored conclusive or relevant evidence, misunderstood the evidence, or drew
erroneous conclusions from it (Toneguzzo-Norvell, supra, at p.
121).  160                       
In coming to her conclusion on causation, the trial judge made several
of the types of errors that this Court referred to in Toneguzzo-Norvell.  
To the extent that the trial judge relied on the evidence of Mr. Laughlin, the
only expert to have testified on the issue of causation, I find that she either
misunderstood his evidence or drew erroneous conclusions from it.  The only
other testimony in respect to causation was anecdotal evidence pertaining to
Mr. Nikolaisen’s level of impairment provided by Craig Thiel, Toby Thiel and
Paul Housen.  Although their testimonies provided some evidence in respect to
causation, for reasons I will discuss, it was not evidence on which the trial
judge could reasonably rely.  Nor do I find that the trial judge was entitled
to rely on evidence that Mr. Nikolaisen successfully negotiated the curve from
the Thiel driveway onto Snake Hill Road.  The inference that the trial judge
drew from this fact was unreasonable and ignored evidence that Mr. Nikolaisen
swerved even on this curve.  In addition, the trial judge clearly erred by
ignoring other relevant evidence in respect to causation, in particular the
fact that Mr. Nikolaisen had driven on the road three times in the 18 to 20
hours preceding the accident.  161                       
I cannot agree with the trial judge that the testimony of Mr. Laughlin,
a forensic alcohol specialist employed by the RCMP supports the finding that Mr.
Nikolaisen would have reacted to a sign forewarning of the impending
right-turning curve on which the accident occurred.  The preponderance of Mr.
Laughlin’s testimony establishes that persons at the level of impairment which
Mr. Nikolaisen was found to be at when the accident occurred would be unlikely
to react to a warning sign.  In addition, Mr. Laughlin’s testimony points
overwhelmingly to the conclusion that alcohol was the causal factor which led
to this accident.  The trial judge erred by misapprehending one comment in Mr.
Laughlin’s testimony and ignoring the significance of his testimony when taken
as a whole.  162                       
Based on blood samples obtained by Constable Forbes approximately three
hours after the accident occurred, Mr. Laughlin predicted that Mr. Nikolaisen’s
blood alcohol level at the time of the accident ranged from 180 to 210
milligrams percent.  Mr. Laughlin commented at length on the effect that this
level of blood alcohol could be expected to have on a person’s ability to
drive, testifying:  Well, My Lady, this alcohol level that I’ve calculated here is a very
high alcohol level.  The critical mental faculties [that] are important in
operating a motor vehicle will be impaired by the alcohol.  And any skill that
depends on these mental faculties will be affected.  These include
anticipation, judgment, attention, concentration, the ability to divide
attention among two or more areas of interest.  Because these are affected to
such a degree, it would be unsafe for anybody to operate a motor vehicle with
this level of alcohol in their body.   When asked
about his knowledge of research pertaining to the effects of alcohol on the
risk of being involved in an automobile accident, Mr. Laughlin had this to say:  At this level the moderate user of alcohol risk of causing crash is
tremendously high, probably 100 times that of a sober driver, or even higher. 
And in some cases at this level, I’ve seen scientific literature indicating
that the risk of causing a fatal crash is 2 to 300 times that of a sober
driver. . . . if an impaired person is an experienced drinker there -- it won’t
be that high.  However, there will be an increased risk compared to a sober
state. . . . But above 100 milligrams percent, regardless of tolerance, a
person will be impaired with respect to driving ability.   Following
these comments, Mr. Laughlin discussed the ability of a severely impaired
person to react to the presence of a hazard when driving:  My Lady, I would like to add that the driving task is a demanding one
and involves many multi-various tasks occurring at the same time.  The hazard
for a person under the influence of alcohol is it takes longer to notice a
hazard or danger if one should occur; it takes longer to decide what corrective
action is appropriate, and it takes longer to execute that decision and the
person may tend to make incorrect decisions.  So there is increased risk in
that process.  As well, if the impairment has progressed to the point where the
motor skills are affected, the execution of that decision is impaired.  So it’s
not a very graceful attempt at a corrective action.  As well, some people tend
to make more risks under the influence of alcohol.  They do not apply sound
reasoning and judgment.  They are not able to properly assess the impairment of
their driving skills, they are not able to properly assess the risk, not able
to properly assess the changing road and weather conditions and adjust for
that.  But even if they do recognize those as hazards, they may tend to take
more risks than a sober driver would.  163                       
The above comments support the conclusion that the accident occurred as
a result of Mr. Nikolaisen’s impairment and not as a result of any failure on
the part of the respondent.  Indeed, when the portions of Mr. Laughlin’s
testimony that the trial judge relied on are considered in their context, they
do not support her conclusion that Mr. Nikolaisen would have been able to react
to a sign had one been posted.  When asked by counsel whether it was possible
for an individual with Mr. Nikolaisen’s blood alcohol level to perceive and
react to a road sign, Mr. Laughlin responded:  Yes, it’s possible that a person will see and react to it and maybe
react properly.  It’s possible that they will react improperly or may miss it
altogether.  I think what’s key here is that at this level of alcohol, it’s
more likely that the person under this level of alcohol will either miss the
sign or not react properly compared to the sober driver.  That the driver
with this level of alcohol will make more mistakes than will the sober driver. 
[Emphasis added.]  In the passage
above, it is clear that Mr. Laughlin is merely admitting that anything is
possible, while solidly expressing the view that drivers at this level of
intoxication are more likely to not react to a sign or other warning.  This
view is also apparent in the following passage, in which Mr. Laughlin expands
on the ability of an intoxicated driver to react to signs and other road
conditions:  What happens with respect to perception under the influence of alcohol
is a driver tends to concentrate on the central field of vision, and miss
certain indicators on the periphery, that’s called tunnel vision.  As well, drivers
tend to concentrate on the lower part of that central field of view and
therefore they don’t have a very long preview distance in the course of
operating a motor vehicle and looking down the road.  And so studies
indicate that under the influence of alcohol drivers tend to miss more signs,
warnings, indicators, especially those in the peripheral field of view or
farther down the road.  [Emphasis added.]   164                       
In argument before this Court, the appellant emphasized that although
Mr. Laughlin was the only expert to testify with respect to causation, lay
witnesses testified that Mr. Nikolaisen was not visibly impaired prior to
leaving the Thiel residence.  It is not clear from the trial judge’s reasons
that she relied on testimony to this effect given by Craig Thiel, Toby Thiel
and Paul Housen.  To the extent that she did rely on such evidence to establish
that the accident was caused in part by the respondent’s negligence, I find
this reliance to be unreasonable.  Whereas the lay witnesses in this case were
qualified to give their opinion on whether they, as ordinary drivers, could
safely negotiate the segment of Snake Hill Road on which the accident occurred,
they were not qualified to assess the degree of Mr. Nikolaisen’s impairment. 
The reason for their lack of qualification in this regard was explained by Mr.
Laughlin in the following response to counsel’s question on whether it is
possible to draw a conclusion from the fact that an individual does not exhibit
any impairment of their motor skills and speech:  No, Your Honour, because, My Lady, when you’re looking at motor skill
impairment or for signs of motor skill impairment, you’re looking for signs of
intoxication, not impairment.  Remember I mentioned that the first components
affected by alcohol are cognitive and mental faculties.  These are all
important in driving.  However, it is very difficult when you look at an
individual who has been consuming alcohol to tell that they have impaired in
attention or divided attention, or concentration, or judgment.  So as an
indicator of impairment, motor skills are not reliable.  And if you think
about the Criminal Code  process, they’ve been abandoned 30 years ago as
a useful indicator of impairment.  No longer do we rely on police officers subjective
assessment of person’s motor skills to determine impairment.  [Emphasis added.]   165                       
It is also clear from the trial judge’s reasons that she relied to some
extent on evidence that Mr. Nikolaisen successfully negotiated the curve at the
point where the driveway to the Thiel residence intersected the road.  I agree
with the respondent that this fact is simply not relevant.  The ability of Mr.
Nikolaisen to negotiate this curve does not establish that his driving ability
was not impaired.  As noted by the respondent, at para. 101 of its factum,  he
may have been driving more slowly at this point, or he may simply have been
lucky.  More importantly, this evidence contributes nothing to the issue of
whether or not Mr. Nikolaisen would have reacted to a sign on the curve where
the accident occurred, had one been present.  There was no sign on the curve
one faces upon leaving the driveway, just as there was no sign on the curve
where the accident took place.  166                       
At any rate, the trial judge’s reliance on Mr. Nikolaisen’s successful
negotiation of the curve at the location of the Thiel driveway ignores relevant
evidence that he had swerved or “fish-tailed” when leaving the Thiel
residence.  A reasonable inference to be drawn from this evidence is that while
Mr. Nikolaisen was able to negotiate this curve, he did not do so free from
difficulty.  While this evidence may not be significant in and of itself, it
should have been enough to alert the trial judge to the problems inherent in
the inference she drew from his ability to navigate this earlier curve.  167                       
In addition to ignoring the relevant evidence of the fish-tail marks,
the trial judge failed to consider the relevance of the fact that Mr.
Nikolaisen had travelled Snake Hill Road three times in the 18 to 20 hours
preceding the accident.  In her review of the evidence, she noted at para. 8 of
her reasons that: “Mr. Nikolaisen was unfamiliar with Snake Hill Road.  While
he had in the preceding 24 hours travelled the road three times, only once was
in the same direction that he was travelling upon leaving the Thiel residence.”  168                       
I simply cannot see how the trial judge found accidents which occurred
when motorists were travelling in the opposite direction relevant to the issue
of the respondent’s knowledge of a risk to motorists while at the same time
suggesting that the fact that Mr. Nikolaisen had driven the road in the
opposite direction twice was irrelevant to the issue of whether or not he would
have recognized that the curve posed a risk or that he would have reacted to a
warning sign.  This discrepancy aside, I find the fact that Mr. Nikolaisen had
travelled Snake Hill Road in the same direction when he left the Thiel
residence to go to the Jamboree the evening before the accident highly relevant
to the causation issue.  The finding that the outcome would have been different
had Mr. Nikolaisen been forewarned of the curve ignores the fact that he
already knew that the curve was there.  I agree with the respondent that the
obvious reason Mr. Nikolaisen was unable to safely negotiate the curve on the
afternoon of the 18th, despite having negotiated this curve and others without
difficulty in the preceding 18 to 20 hours was the combined effect of his
drinking, lack of sleep and lack of food.  169                       
In conclusion on the issue of causation, I wish to clarify that the fact
that the trial judge referred to some evidence to support her findings on this
issue does not insulate those findings from review by this Court.  The standard
of review for findings of fact is reasonableness, not absolute deference.  Such
a standard entitles the appellate court to assess whether or not it was clearly
wrong for the trial judge to rely on some evidence when other evidence points
overwhelmingly to the opposite conclusion.  The logic of this approach was
aptly explained by Kerans, supra, in the following passage at p. 44:  The key to the problem is whether the reviewer is
to look merely for “evidence to support” the finding.  Some evidence might
indeed support the finding, but other evidence may point overwhelmingly the
other way.  A court might be able to say that reliance on the “some” in the
face of the “other” was not what the reasonable trier of fact would do; indeed,
it might say that, in all the circumstances it was convinced that to rely on
the one in the face of the other was quite unreasonable.  To say that “some
evidence” is enough, then, without regard to that “other evidence” is to turn
one’s back on review for reasonableness.  D.     Did the Courts Below Err in Finding that
no Common Law Duty of Care Exists Alongside the Statutory Duty Imposed Under
Section 192 of The Rural Municipality Act, 1989?   170                       
The appellant urges this Court to find that a common law duty of care
exists alongside the statutory duty of care imposed on the respondent by s. 192
of The Rural Municipality Act, 1989.   According to the appellant, the
application of the common law duty of care would free the Court from the need
to focus on how a reasonable driver exercising ordinary care would have
navigated the road in question.  The appellant submits that the Court would
instead apply the “classic reasonableness formulation” which, in its view,
would require the Court to take into account the likelihood of a known or
foreseeable harm, the gravity of that harm, and the burden or cost of
preventing that harm.  The appellant argues that the respondent would be held
liable under this test.  171                       
The courts below rejected the above argument when it was put to them by
the appellant.  I would not interfere with their ruling on this issue for the
reason that it is unnecessary for this Court to impose a common law duty of
care where a statutory one clearly exists.  In any event, the application of
the common law test would not affect the outcome in these proceedings.  172                       
I agree with the respondent’s submissions that in this case, where the
legislature has clearly imposed a statutory duty of care on the respondents, it
would be redundant and unnecessary to find that a common law duty of care
exists.  The two-part test to establish a common law duty of care set out in Kamloops
(City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2,  simply has no application
where the legislature has defined a statutory duty.  As was stated by this
Court in Brown v. British Columbia (Minister of Transportation and Highways),
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 420, at p. 424:  . . . if a statutory duty to maintain existed as it does in some provinces,
it would be unnecessary to find a private law duty on the basis of the
neighbourhood principle in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978]
A.C. 728.  Moreover, it is only necessary to consider the policy/operational
dichotomy in connection with the search for a private law duty of care.   All of the
authorities cited by the appellant as support for the imposition of an
independent common law duty of care can be distinguished from the case at hand
on the basis that no statutory duty of care existed (Just, supra;
Brown, supra;  Swinamer v. Nova Scotia (Attorney General),
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 445; Ryan, supra).   173                       
In addition, I find that the outcome in this case would not be different
if the case were determined according to ordinary negligence principles. 
First, were the Court to engage in a common law analysis, it would still look
to the statutory standard of care as laid out in The Rural Municipality Act,
1989, as interpreted by the case law in order to assess the scope of
liability owed by the respondent to the appellant.  As this Court stated in Ryan,
supra, at para. 29:  Statutory standards can, however, be highly relevant to the assessment
of reasonable conduct in a particular case, and in fact may render reasonable
an act or omission which would otherwise appear to be negligent.  This allows
courts to consider the legislative framework in which people and companies must
operate, while at the same time recognizing that one cannot avoid the
underlying obligation of reasonable care simply by discharging statutory
duties.  174                       
Moreover, even under the common law analysis, this Court would be called
upon to question the type of hazards that the respondent, in this case, ought
to have foreseen.  Whatever the approach, it is only reasonable to expect a
municipality to foresee accidents which occur as a result of the conditions of
the road, and not, as in this case, as a result of the condition of the
driver.  175                       
The courts have long restricted the standard of care under the statutory
duty to require municipalities to repair only those hazards which would pose a
risk to the reasonable driver exercising ordinary care.  Compelling reasons
exist to maintain this interpretation.  The municipalities within the province
of Saskatchewan have some 175,000 kilometres of roads under their care and
control, 45,000 kilometres of which fall within the “bladed trail” category. 
These municipalities, for the most part, do not boast large, permanent staffs
with extensive time and budgetary resources.  To expand the repair obligation
of municipalities to require them to take into account the actions of
unreasonable or careless drivers when discharging this duty would signify a
drastic and unworkable change to the current standard.  Accordingly, it is a
change that I would not be prepared to make.  VII.  Disposition  176    
In the result, the judgment of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal is
affirmed and the appeal is dismissed with costs.  Appeal allowed with costs, Gonthier,
Bastarache, Binnie and LeBel
JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant: Robertson Stromberg, Saskatoon;
Quon Ferguson MacKinnon, Saskatoon.  Solicitors for the respondent: Gerrand Rath Johnson, Regina.   