Finney v. Barreau du Québec, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 17, 2004
SCC 36  Barreau du Québec                                                                                          Appellant  v.   and  Attorney General of Canada and Federation of Law Societies of Canada                                                        Interveners  Indexed as: Finney v. Barreau du Québec  Neutral citation: 2004 SCC 36.  File No.: 29344.  2004:  February 12; 2004:  June 10.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache,
Binnie, Arbour and LeBel JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec   Law of professions — Professional
orders — Civil liability — Immunity — Barreau — Scope
of immunity granted to professional orders — Professional Code,
R.S.Q., c. C-26, s. 193.  B was entered on the Roll of the Order of Advocates in
1978.  Between 1981 and 1987, the Barreau’s Committee on Discipline and the
Professions Tribunal found him guilty on at least three occasions of
disciplinary offences.  In 1990, after a lengthy investigation, the
Professional Inspection Committee submitted a report to the Executive Committee
concluding that B was incompetent.  Two years later, the Executive Committee
required that B complete a refresher training period and ordered that he
practise his profession only under the supervision of a tutor.  The
respondent’s difficulties with B began in 1990.  Between 1991 and 1993, she
filed several complaints against B and even contacted the Office des
professions to complain about the Barreau’s inaction.  It was not until 1994
that the syndic served B with a request to have him provisionally struck off
the Roll, which was granted by the Barreau’s Committee on Discipline in
May 1994.  In 1998, B was found guilty on 17 counts and struck off
the Roll of the Order for five years.  In 1996, the respondent launched an
action in damages against the Barreau  for breach of its obligation to protect
the public in the handling of the complaints made against B.  The Superior
Court dismissed the action.  The Court of Appeal allowed the respondent’s
appeal in part and ordered the Barreau to pay her $25,000 for the moral injury
she had suffered.  Held:  The
appeal should be dismissed. It is the Professional Code that sets out the
basic rules governing the organization and activities of professional orders in
Quebec, including the Barreau.  Section 23 of the Code expressly provides
that professional orders are created primarily to protect the public.  To this
end, the Code establishes two mechanisms for monitoring the professional
competence of the members of a professional order and ensuring compliance with
the rules of ethics, namely professional inspection and disciplinary action. 
On the other hand, because of the difficulties and risks to which the
professional orders are exposed in performing their various functions,
s. 193 of the Code prohibits prosecutions of professional orders and their
officers and staff for acts engaged in “in good faith in the performance of
their duties” or functions.  This immunity provision gives professional orders
the scope to act and the latitude and discretion that they need in order to
perform their duties.  This case raises the question of civil liability for
acts or omissions of the Barreau in relation to the performance of its duties
and functions in respect of supervision of the profession of law, that is, the
manner in which the complaints made by the respondent were handled.  The
respondent alleged a number of consecutive faults which continued to be
committed up to 1994.  Since the legal situation of the parties was still in
the course of being created on January 1, 1994, the rules governing
liability in the Civil Code of Québec apply by virtue of the principle
that the new legislation had immediate effect, set out in the Act respecting
the implementation of the reform of the Civil Code.  The Barreau du Québec is a public body and, because of
the specific nature of governments and the diversity and complexity of the
duties assigned to them, art. 1376 C.C.Q. recognizes that the general
rules of liability set out in art. 1457 C.C.Q. apply only “subject to any
other rules of law which may be applicable to them”.  In this case, the changes
to the general rules reflect the nature of the faults that are required to be
shown in order to establish liability that is limited by the partial immunity
granted by s. 193 of the Professional Code.  Since good faith is the
key concept in this provision, the respondent must show that the Barreau acted
in bad faith.  However, in the case of duties relating to the management of
disciplinary cases, it would be contrary to the fundamental objective of
protecting the public set out in s. 23 of the Professional Code if
this immunity provision were interpreted as requiring evidence of malice or
intent to harm in order to rebut the presumption of good faith.  The concept of
bad faith must be given a broader meaning that encompasses serious carelessness
or recklessness.  The conduct of the Barreau, when considered in its
entirety, constitutes a fault for which it cannot claim the immunity set out in
s. 193.  Exceptional though the case may have been, the conduct of the
Barreau was not up to the standards imposed by its fundamental mandate, which
is to protect the public.  The virtually complete absence of the diligence
called for in the situation amounted to a fault consisting of gross
carelessness and serious negligence.  Neither the need to adhere to the
statutory and procedural discipline framework and to act with care and caution
nor the complexity inherent in any administrative process can explain the
slowness seen in this case.  The nature of the complaints and B’s professional
record in fact made it plain that this was an urgent case that had to be dealt
with very diligently to ensure that the Barreau carried out its mission of
protecting the public in general and a clearly identified victim in
particular.  Despite the urgency of the situation the Barreau took over a year
to request provisional striking off.  The very serious carelessness the Barreau
displayed amounts to bad faith, and the Barreau is civilly liable.  As to the
existence of a causal connexion and the assessment of the injury suffered by
the respondent, the Barreau has not shown any error in the Court of Appeal’s
judgment.  Finally, this is an exceptional case in which the
circumstances justify awarding the respondent costs on a solicitor and client
basis since she represented herself until the case came before this Court and
her appeal raises issues of general importance concerning the application of
the legislation governing the professions in Quebec, the implications of which
go beyond her particular case.  Cases Cited  Referred to:  Fortin
v. Chrétien, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 500, 2001 SCC 45; Doré v.
Verdun (City), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 862; Prud’homme v. Prud’homme,
[2002] 4 S.C.R. 663, 2002 SCC 85; Quebec (Commission des
droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) v. Communauté urbaine de
Montréal, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 789, 2004 SCC 30; Morier v. Rivard,
[1985] 2 S.C.R. 716; Québec (Procureur général) v. Deniso Lebel
Inc., [1996] R.J.Q. 1821, leave to appeal refused, [1997]
1 S.C.R. vi; Quebec (Public Curator) v. Syndicat national des
employés de l’hôpital St-Ferdinand, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 211; Augustus
v. Gosset, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 268; Gauthier v. Beaumont,
[1998] 2 S.C.R. 3; Roncarelli v. Duplessis, [1959]
S.C.R. 121; Chaput v. Romain, [1955] S.C.R. 834; Corporation
de St-Joseph de Beauce v. Lessard, [1954] B.R. 475; Directeur de la
protection de la Jeunesse v. Quenneville, [1998] R.J.Q. 44, leave to
appeal refused, [1998] 1 S.C.R. xiii; Edwards v. Law Society of
Upper Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 562, 2001 SCC 80; Cooper v. Hobart,
[2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79; Mackin v. New Brunswick
(Minister of Finance), [2002] 1 S.C.R. 405, 2002 SCC 13;
Roberge v. Bolduc, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 374.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Act
respecting the Barreau du Québec, R.S.Q.,
c. B-1, ss. 81 et seq. [rep. 1994, c. 40,
s. 261], 128.  Act respecting the
implementation of the reform of the Civil Code,
S.Q. 1992, c. 57, ss. 3, 85.  Charter of Human Rights and
Freedoms, R.S.Q., c. C-12, s. 49.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, arts. 300, 1376, 1457, 1474, 2805.  Professional Code, R.S.Q., c. C-26, art. 23, 48, 109, 112, 113, 116, 121 et
seq., 126 et seq., 130, 162, 164, 193 [am. 1988,
c. 29, s. 59], 194, 195, 196.  Supreme Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-26, s. 47 .  Authors Cited   Dussault, René, and
Louis Borgeat.  Administrative Law: A Treatise, vols. 4 and 5,
2nd ed. Toronto: Carswell, 1990.  Giroux, Pierre, et
Stéphane Rochette.  “La mauvaise foi et la responsabilité de l’État”, dans
Développements récents en droit administratif et constitutionnel,
vol. 119.  Cowansville, Qué.: Yvon Blais, 1999, 117.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[2002] R.J.Q. 1639, [2002] R.R.A. 706, [2002] Q.J. No. 1522
(QL), setting aside a judgment of the Superior Court, [1999] R.R.A. 83,
[1998] Q.J. No. 3690 (QL).  Appeal dismissed.   Guy J. Pratte,
Susie N. Paquette and Georges Thibaudeau, for the
respondent.  Michel F. Denis and Michèle Ducharme, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Canada.  William J. Atkinson, for the intervener the Federation of Law Societies of Canada.  English version of the judgment of the Court delivered
by  LeBel J. —  I.  Introduction   II.  Origin of the Case  2                               
Following an order I made on October 22, 2003, the appellant filed
a certificate stating that parts of the record were still covered by a sealing
order and publication ban.  Since some of the facts covered by the publication
ban will be mentioned, the ban will be lifted with respect to the information
disclosed in these reasons.   4                               
The Executive Committee then convened to consider the report of the
Professional Inspection Committee.  Belhassen was given notice to attend and
was heard.  Ultimately, on June 1, 1992, the Executive Committee did not
suspend Belhassen’s right to practise law.  Instead, it decided to require that
he complete a refresher training period, which consisted of participating in
the activities offered by the Continuing Education Department of the Barreau in
family law.  Belhassen was also restricted to practising his profession under
the supervision of a tutor, an eminent Montréal lawyer.  The tutor was to
submit quarterly reports to the Executive Committee.  The tutor agreed to the
appointment and undertook work under that mandate, which ended a year later in
the circumstances described below.     8                               
In the interim, the guerilla war that Belhassen had started in the
courts reached its peak.  The Superior Court was concerned about the deluge of
proceedings, and the unusual nature of those proceedings. The Hon. Pierre A. Michaud,
Associate Chief Justice of the Superior Court, had all of the proceedings
joined and brought before him, and summoned all of the parties involved.  The
Office of the Syndic was given notice by the Superior Court and attended the
hearing, the outcome of which was that any proceeding brought by Belhassen was
to be subject to a special review.  All this time, the tutor noticed nothing.
At the end of April 1993, he complained to the Syndic that he was no
longer able to contact Belhassen.  He then learned about the Superior Court’s
intervention in respect of a series of proceedings, none of which he knew
anything about.  A few days later, he resigned from his position as tutor and
reported to the Executive Committee.  As a result of the respondent’s
complaints, further communications from the Office des professions, the
Superior Court hearing and the breakdown of the refresher training, the
seriousness of the situation created by Belhassen’s behaviour prompted the
Chief Syndic to recommend to the Executive Committee that a syndic ad hoc
be appointed.  The appointment was made in October, and the new syndic took
over the files in November.  9                               
In the interim, as the Court of Appeal observed, [translation] “Belhassen’s guerrilla war
against the [respondent] in the courts was in full gear” (para. 34).  On
October 28, 1993, the lawyer who was then advising the respondent
contacted the Office des professions to stress the seriousness of the case. 
The Office asked the Barreau for an explanation on November 3.  A few days
later, in response to threats from Belhassen, the lawyer withdrew from the
case.  On January 12, 1994, the Office again contacted the Barreau and
asked it to come to the respondent’s assistance.  On January 14, the
syndic ad hoc sent Belhassen a formal notice and gave him 15 days
to explain his actions.  On March 29, 1994, the syndic ad hoc
served Belhassen with a complaint containing 23 counts, and attached a
request to have him provisionally struck off the Roll.  Belhassen was
provisionally struck off by the Committee on Discipline of the Barreau on
May 19, 1994, effective May 24, 1994.  On April 22, 1998, the
Committee on Discipline found Belhassen guilty on 17 counts.  On
August 12, 1998, he was struck off the Roll of the Order for five years,
but retroactively to 1994.  III.  Judicial History  10                           
Before the disciplinary proceedings against Belhassen concluded, the
respondent launched an action against the Barreau in damages, on
January 8, 1996.  In the action as amended on July 31, 1998, the
respondent claimed $975,000 in compensatory, material, moral and exemplary
damages.  The respondent was initially seeking damages against the Barreau and
certain of its senior officials for breach of their obligation to protect the
public in their handling of the complaints made against Belhassen.  The Barreau
vigorously denied any wrongdoing but, on the other hand, cited the immunities
granted by the legislation that governs the professions in Quebec.  A.  Quebec
Superior Court, [1999] R.R.A. 83   B.      Quebec Court of Appeal, [2002]
R.J.Q. 1639 (Deschamps, Robert and Pelletier JJ.A.)   IV.  Relevant
Legislation  13                           
The relevant statutory provisions, as they read at the time of the
dispute, are as follows:  Professional
Code, R.S.Q., c. C-26  23.  The principal function of each  corporation shall be to
ensure the protection of the public.   For this purpose it must in particular supervise
the practice of the profession by its members.  193.  The syndics, assistant syndics, corresponding syndics, the
investigators and experts of a professional inspection committee, the members
of the Office, of a Bureau, of a committee on discipline, of a professional
inspection committee or of a committee of inquiry established by a Bureau, and
the members of a tribunal hearing an appeal from a decision by a committee on
discipline or by a Bureau, shall not be prosecuted for acts done in good faith
in the performance of their duties.  Civil Code
of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64  1376.  The rules set forth in this Book
apply to the State and its bodies, and to all other legal persons established
in the public interest, subject to any other rules of law which may be
applicable to them.  1457.  Every person has a duty to abide by
the rules of conduct which lie upon him, according to the circumstances, usage
or law, so as not to cause injury to another.  Where he is endowed with reason and fails in this
duty, he is responsible for any injury he causes to another person and is
liable to reparation for the injury, whether it be bodily, moral or material in
nature.  He is also liable, in certain cases, to reparation
for injury caused to another by the act or fault of another person or by the
act of things in his custody.  V.  Analysis  A.  The
Nature of the Issues  14                           
The issue in this appeal is the nature of the civil liability rules that
apply to the activities of the Barreau, a public body with administrative,
regulatory and disciplinary powers delegated by the Quebec National Assembly. 
The positions taken by the parties on that liability lead to different
conclusions.  The respondent argued that the rules were similar to the common
law rules of liability.  The appellant argued for rules under which it would be
liable only in exceptional cases, because of the statutory immunities and the
limitation of liability principles that it contends derive from the public law
that applies in Quebec.  15                           
Given these divergent positions, we must first examine the civil law
rules that apply to the liability of professional orders.  It will then be
necessary to determine whether that liability is limited by the immunities or
public law principles, and if so, to what extent.  To complete this analysis,
we will determine whether the conduct of the Barreau constitutes a fault for
which it would have delictual civil liability.  To carry out this analysis, we
must first review the legal framework governing the activities of the Barreau
in Quebec and the functions delegated to professional orders by Quebec
legislation and, more specifically, by the Professional Code.  In the
course of this analysis, we will also review the mechanisms created for
supervising the competence and discipline of lawyers and the obligations that
the applicable legislation governing professions imposes on the Barreau in this
respect.  B.  The
Professional Organization of the Barreau in Quebec  16                           
In Quebec law, it is the Professional Code that sets out the
basic rules governing the organization and activities of the more than
40 professional orders, which include the Barreau.  In addition, the Act
respecting the Barreau du Québec contains special provisions that do not,
however, alter the principles governing its organization and activities that
are set out in the Professional Code.  The Professional Code
states the essential purpose for which independent orders, such as the Barreau
du Québec, are created.  The primary objective of those orders is not to
provide services to their members or represent their collective interests. 
They are created to protect the public, as s. 23 of the Professional
Code makes clear:  23. The principal function of each corporation shall be to
ensure the protection of the public.  For this purpose it must in particular supervise the
practice of the profession by its members.  (See also Fortin v. Chrétien, supra, at para. 11, per
Gonthier J.)  17                           
This legislation gives the members of the Barreau a monopoly over the
performance of a number of professional acts, such as giving consultations,
drawing up pleadings and representing parties before the courts (Act
respecting the Barreau du Québec, s. 128).  Since that monopoly was
not created for private purposes, but rather to recognize the social importance
of the role of the lawyer in a democratic society founded on the rule of law,
it imposes significant obligations on the professional order to monitor the
competence and supervise the conduct of its members once they have been entered
on the Roll of the Order (Fortin v. Chrétien, at paras. 12-18).  18                           
The Professional Code establishes two mechanisms for monitoring
the  professional competence of the members of a professional order and
ensuring compliance with the rules of ethics: professional inspection by the
Syndic and the committees on discipline, and the discipline that they may
impose.  There are other means available to the Barreau to enable it to meet
its objective of preserving the competence, honesty and diligence of its
members, such as professional training, refresher training, information
services and trust account audits.  The only mechanisms of concern for the
purposes of this appeal are professional inspection and discipline. Although
the two share the ultimate goal of maintaining and improving professional
standards, professional inspection is more specifically concerned with lawyers’
competence, while discipline focusses on their conduct.  The role of
professional inspection is preventive, while the role of discipline is
punitive.  As we shall see, however, a single problem may raise both
professional inspection and discipline issues.  This was certainly true in the
Belhassen case.  19                           
Like all other professional orders, the Barreau was required to
establish a Professional Inspection Committee, in accordance with s. 109
of the Professional Code.  The Committee performs a general function of
supervising the manner in which professionals keep their records and offices. 
In addition, at the request of its Bureau or of its own initiative, the
Committee may inquire into the fitness of members to practise their profession,
or their professional competence (s. 112).  The Committee may recommend a
range of measures, including training courses or limitations on the right to
practise law (s. 113).  It is then up to the decision-making bodies of the
Barreau to take the action they consider appropriate.  It should also be noted
that the lawyer in question has to be heard, is entitled to defend himself or
herself and has a right to appeal to the Professions Tribunal in certain cases.  20                           
The other mechanism for protecting the public is discipline.  Under the Professional
Code, an independent functionary, the Syndic, is responsible for
investigating disciplinary complaints and deciding whether a complaint should
be lodged with the Committee on Discipline.  If the situation so warrants, the
Syndic brings the matter to that Committee (ss. 121 et seq.).  The
procedure is adversarial.  The Syndic must inform the lawyer and obtain his or
her version of the facts.  The Committee on Discipline is an administrative
tribunal that is required to apply the rules of the adversarial process and the
principles of procedural fairness (ss. 116 and 126 et seq.).  No
finding of guilt is made, or penalty imposed, until that process has been
completed, and those decisions may be appealed to the Professions Tribunal
(ss. 162 and 164).  As an exception to that rule, the Syndic may, before a
decision is made on a complaint, request the provisional striking off of a
lawyer, inter alia if the protection of the public could be compromised
(s. 130).  This complex mechanism reflects the values that underlie the
Canadian justice system, but neither simplifies nor facilitates the work of the
Barreau’s staff or of the members of the Professional Inspection Committee and
the Committee on Discipline, whose responsibility it is to take action.  The
action that they take is necessarily governed by a binding legal framework.  We
must bear the existence and scope of that framework in mind, in analyzing the
appellant’s situation and assessing its liability.  21                           
On the other hand, because of the difficulties and risks to which the professional
orders are exposed in performing their various functions, the legislature has
granted them immunity for acts engaged in in good faith in the performance of
their duties or functions, within the meaning of and subject to the limits set
out in s. 193 of the Professional Code.  In addition, ss. 194,
195 and 196 limit the availability of judicial review of the decisions of
professional orders and the Professions Tribunal.  C.  The Applicable Rules of Civil Liability   23                           
To answer that question, we must first briefly review the transitional
law problem raised by the coming into force of the Civil Code of Québec on
January 1, 1994, in relation to facts that found an action and that took
place before and after that date, approximately between early 1993 and the
spring of 1994.  Depending on the solution that is reached, the Civil Code
of Québec may or may not apply, and the answer has a direct impact on the
substance of the rules governing the delictual civil liability of a public
body.  To solve this problem, we must refer to the transitional rules of law
set out in the Act respecting the implementation of the reform of the Civil
Code, S.Q. 1992, c. 57 (“Transitional Law Act”).  24                           
Section 85 of the Transitional Law Act provides that the law
in force at the time of the fault or act out of which liability arose:  85.  The conditions of civil liability are
governed by the legislation in force at the time of the fault or act which
causes the injury.  25                           
That provision is problematic in this case, because the facts out of
which liability arose do not boil down to a single isolated event at a
particular point in time.  Rather, as noted earlier, the respondent alleges a
number of consecutive faults which continued to be committed up to 1994.  The
legal situation of the parties was still in the course of being created on
January 1, 1994.  The Civil Code of Québec therefore applies by
virtue of the principle that the new legislation had immediate effect, set out
in s. 3 of the Transitional Law Act:  3.  The new legislation is applicable to
legal situations which exist when it comes into force.  Any hitherto unfulfilled conditions for the creation
or extinction of situations in the course of being created or extinguished are
therefore governed by the new legislation; it also governs the future effects
of existing legal situations.  26                           
The coming into force of the Civil Code of Québec had a
significant impact on the rules governing the civil liability of governments
and public bodies in Quebec.  This change was the result of the new position
assigned to the Civil Code in the hierarchy of the sources of law in
matters within the legislative jurisdiction of the Quebec National Assembly. 
As this Court has had occasion to note in the past, the effect of the
preliminary provision of the Civil Code is that it became the jus
commune of Quebec.  In addition, under art. 1376 C.C.Q. the law that
applies as a general rule to the contractual undertakings and delictual
liability of governments is the law set out in the Civil Code, subject
to the rules of public law; the relevance of those rules to the conduct of the
business of public bodies is recognized by art. 300 C.C.Q.  (Doré v.
Verdun (City), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 862, at paras. 15-17 and
20-21, per Gonthier J.; Prud’homme v. Prud’homme, [2002]
4 S.C.R. 663, 2002 SCC 85, at paras. 28-31; Quebec
(Commission des droits de la personne et des droits de la jeunesse) v.
Communauté urbaine de Montréal, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 789, 2004 SCC 30, at
para. 20).  27                           
As a rule, an examination of the liability of governments begins with
the application of the rules of liability established by the Civil Code of
Québec.  However, art. 1376 C.C.Q. states that the Civil Code
applies only “subject to any other rules of law which may be applicable to
them”.  This reserve on the part of the legislature reflects the specific
nature of governments, and the diversity and complexity of the duties assigned
to them.  Very often, the assessment of a public body’s conduct and decisions
that a court might make based on the simple, straightforward application of the
rules of the jus commune would not provide it with the freedom it needs
in order to perform its functions.  That is why this Court recognizes that
general principles or specific rules of public law may either prevent the
general rules of civil liability from applying altogether or substantially
alter the rules by which they operate (Prud’homme v. Prud’homme,
supra, at para. 31; Quebec (Commission des droits de la personne et
des droits de la jeunesse) v. Communauté urbaine de Montréal, supra,_at para. 22).  28                           
As I noted earlier, the professional orders governed by the Professional
Code perform significant, diverse and often difficult social functions.  To
achieve their fundamental objective of supervising the practice of their
profession, professional orders exercise regulatory powers, manage complex
administrative systems and, on occasion, through the actions of committees,
perform adjudicative functions.   30                           
While reference is sometimes made to general principles that derive from
the case law, the law itself frequently provides the necessary rules.  In fact,
it is important to examine the wording of those rules carefully before
proceeding too hastily to apply the general principles.  This is true in the
case of the Professional Code.  That Act contains an immunity provision,
s. 193, which prohibits prosecutions of professional orders and their
officers and staff for acts engaged in “in good faith in the performance of
their duties” or functions.  The existence of such a provision requires that
courts hearing an action against the Barreau examine the scope of that
provision to determine the circumstances in which a body of that nature may be
liable.  31                           
Although the result of this method is also recognition of the Barreau’s
liability, it is preferable to take an approach different from the one taken by
the Quebec Court of Appeal.  That court declined to apply s. 193, because
in its opinion the appellant had failed to exercise its powers for the purposes
set out in the Act, that is, the protection of the public.  That method has the
disadvantage of confusing review of the legality of a public body’s decisions
with the rules that determine that body’s civil liability.  Undoubtedly those
questions will overlap on occasion, and acts that are illegal and that may be
set aside under the rules that govern review for legality may found an action
in civil liability.  However, this does not often happen, and illegality is not
necessarily synonymous with civil fault, or a source of delictual liability (Morier 
v. Rivard, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 716, at p. 745, per
Chouinard J.; Québec (Procureur général) v. Deniso Lebel Inc.,
[1996] R.J.Q. 1821, at pp. 1836-37, leave to appeal refused, [1997]
1 S.C.R. vi; R. Dussault and L. Borgeat, Administrative Law:
A Treatise (2nd ed. 1990), vol. 5, at p. 190).   D.  The Scope of the Barreau’s Immunity  33                           
In the submission of the Barreau, the key concept in analyzing
s. 193 is good faith.  Article 2805 C.C.Q. establishes a presumption
of good faith.  Moreover, in the appellant’s submission, s. 193, which
applies in this case, shields it from all liability unless its bad faith is
established.  In other words, according to the appellant’s arguments on appeal,
only an action based on proof of intentional fault, which would essentially
amount to malice, would fall outside the purview of s. 193.  In the
appellant’s submission, even if it concedes that it was slow to deal with these
complaints and cases, there is nothing from which it could be concluded that an
intentional fault was committed.  The respondent, relying on the reasoning of
the Court of Appeal, tried to rule out any application of immunity, but argued
that the fault in the conduct of the Barreau was so serious that no protection
was available to it under s. 193 on a correct interpretation of that
provision.  What must therefore be done is to determine what kind of gross
negligence, if any, would fall outside the purview of an immunity provision
like the one in issue here.   1474.  A person may not exclude or limit his
liability for material injury caused to another through an intentional or gross
fault; a gross fault is a fault which shows gross recklessness, gross
carelessness or gross negligence.  He may not in any way exclude or limit his liability
for bodily or moral injury caused to another.  35                           
It remains easier to describe than to define those categories of fault,
as illustrated by a passage from a frequently cited Quebec treatise on the law
of civil liability.  The authors of that work point out that the positive law
recognizes a classification, but the description of the categories demonstrates
the fluidity of their content:  [translation]  165 . . .  However, the courts and now the
legislature (see art. 1474 C.C.Q.) have retained the concept of gross
fault from this classification, a concept that refers, in both contractual and
extracontractual contexts, to conduct that shows recklessness, gross
carelessness or total disregard for the interests of others, and assign
specific legal consequences to it.  The courts have also equated gross fault
with intentional, wilful and fraudulent fault and sometimes, in specific
circumstances, “serious” fault.  (J.-L. Baudouin and P. Deslauriers, La responsabilité
civile (6th ed. 2003), at pp. 123-24)  36                           
In this case, there is no need to revisit this issue in its entirety. 
The nature of the analysis that is required in order to resolve this matter may
be determined by referring to the concept of good faith in s. 193 of the Professional
Code.  That concept lies at the heart of the interpretation and application
of this provision.  On this point, I accept the appellant’s argument that the
respondent’s action must be dismissed if she is unable to rebut the presumption
of good faith under art. 2805 C.C.Q. and show absence of good faith in the
conduct of the Barreau.     40                           
An immunity provision such as the one set out in s. 193 of the Professional
Code is intended to give professional orders the scope to act and the
latitude and discretion that they need in order to perform their duties.  In
the case of duties relating to the management of disciplinary cases, it would
be contrary to the fundamental objective of protecting the public set out in
s. 23 of the Professional Code if this immunity were interpreted as
requiring evidence of malice or intent to harm in order to rebut the
presumption of good faith.  Gross or serious carelessness is incompatible with
good faith.  It may therefore be concluded that, in the case of the exercise of
these case management powers, the requirement that the performance or failure
to perform an act have been committed in bad faith is not a bar to an action in
damages against a professional order that is subject to the Professional
Code.  In accordance with art. 1376 C.C.Q., the rules of civil
liability that are applicable to the actions of the Barreau are the general
rules set out in art. 1457 C.C.Q., with the changes that reflect the
nature of the faults that are required in order to establish liability that is
limited by the partial or qualified immunity granted by s. 193 of the Professional
Code.  I would point out, however, that we need not make a finding as to
the legal principles that would apply to the exercise of adjudicative functions
by bodies such as the committees on discipline and the Professions Tribunal. 
Accordingly, we must now apply the rules that govern liability that were
defined above and determine whether the conduct of the Barreau was such as to
justify the award made against it by the Quebec Court of Appeal.  E.      Application of the Rules of Liability     44                           
The Barreau must exercise judgment and care in performing its
disciplinary functions.  The Syndic must take care in conducting
investigations, and must respect the rights guaranteed to lawyers by the
legislation governing the profession and by the principles of procedural
fairness.  The Syndic may not disbar lawyers of his or her own accord.  A
complex, binding procedure must be followed, and it provides that provisional
striking off is an exceptional measure to be taken by decision of the Committee
on Discipline or the Professions Tribunal.  Neither the need to adhere to the
statutory and procedural discipline framework and act with care and caution nor
the complexity inherent in any administrative process can explain the slowness
and lack of diligence seen in this case. The nature of the complaints and the
lawyer’s professional record in fact made it plain that this was an urgent case
that had to be dealt with very diligently to ensure that the Barreau carried
out its mission of protecting the public in general and a clearly identified
victim in particular.   46                           
One other comment seems timely here, regarding an aspect of the
arguments made by the Barreau regarding the analysis of its civil liability.  
In the appellant’s submission, the common law principles that apply to public
bodies preclude liability in its case.  As the respondent pointed out, in
common law, the Barreau would have been no less liable in the circumstances of
this case if the analysis adopted by this Court in Edwards v. Law Society of
Upper Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 562, 2001 CSC 80, and Cooper
v. Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 CSC 79, had been
applied.  The decisions made by the Barreau were operational decisions and were
made in a relationship of proximity with a clearly identified complainant,
where the harm was foreseeable.  The common law would have been no less
exacting than Quebec law on this point.  F.  Damages
and Causation   G.  Costs   VI.  Conclusion  49                           
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.  I would award the
respondent her costs in this Court on a solicitor and client basis.  Appeal dismissed.  Solicitors for the appellant: Lavery, de Billy, Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondent: Borden Ladner Gervais, Ottawa.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Canada:  Attorney General’s Prosecutor, Montréal.  Solicitors for the intervener the Federation of Law Societies of
Canada: McCarthy Tétrault, Montréal.   