Ryan v. Victoria (City), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 201  Murray Ryan                                                                                     Appellant  v.  The Corporation of the City of Victoria, The Esquimalt and Nanaimo Railway Company and Canadian Pacific Limited/Canadien Pacifique Limitée                    Respondents  Indexed as:  Ryan v. Victoria (City)  File No.:  25704.  1998:  June 17; 1999:  January 28.  Present:  Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci, Major,
Bastarache and Binnie JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia    The trial judge held the Railways and the City jointly
and severally liable in negligence, the former for maintaining dangerously wide
flangeways and the latter for failing to warn of the hazard.  In addition, he
held the Railways liable in nuisance.  The British Columbia Court of Appeal set
aside the nuisance finding and held all of the respondents liable only for
failure to warn.  The Court of Appeal also found the appellant to be
contributorily negligent and liable for 50% of his damages.   Held:  The appeal should be allowed.   Under the second step, it must be  determined whether
any factors exist which should eliminate or limit the duty found under the
first branch of the test.  Policy considerations may serve to negate a duty of
care entirely or to “limit” the “scope” of an existing duty but they do not
give rise to “greater” or “lesser” duties in different cases.  A duty of care
either exists or it does not.  The “scope” of a duty of care can be “limited”
under the Anns/Kamloops test only in the sense that the duty will arise
in certain situations and not in others.  The Anns/Kamloops test is not
concerned with legislative or judicial policies which, as in this case, define
the conduct required to meet an existing duty.  Such policies relate to the
standard of care.    With the abolishment of the special rule, the correct
principles can be stated more clearly.  Compliance with a statutory standard of
care does not abrogate or supersede the obligation to comply with the common
law standard of care.  The requirements are concurrent, and each carries its
own penalty for breach.  However, in appropriate circumstances, compliance
with statutory standards may entirely satisfy the common law standard of care
and thus absolve a defendant of liability in negligence.   Where a statute authorizes certain activities and
strictly defines the manner of performance and the precautions to be taken, it
is more likely to be found that compliance with the statute constitutes
reasonable care and that no additional measures are required.  By contrast,
where a statute is general or permits discretion as to the manner of
performance, or where unusual circumstances exist which are not clearly within
the scope of the statute, mere compliance is unlikely to exhaust the standard
of care.  This approach strikes an appropriate balance among several important
policies, including deference to legislative determinations on matters of
railway safety, security for railways which comply with prescribed standards,
and protection for those who may be injured as a result of unreasonable choices
made by railways in the exercise of official authority.  The Railways’ compliance with the statutory and
regulatory authorities did not exhaust the requisite standard of care in this
case, for two reasons.  First, those authorities were not directly applicable
to the circumstances, and second, they allowed for significant discretion in
the manner of performance.   Even if highway crossing regulatory standards were applicable,
the Railways’ compliance with those standards did not necessarily constitute
reasonable conduct in the circumstances.  The regulations allowed a significant
range as to flangeway width and the railways exercised their discretion as to
the flangeway width within that range.  In exercising that discretion, they
were bound by the common law and were required to take all reasonable steps to
minimize foreseeable harm.  The entire range could not be presumed to be
reasonably safe in all conditions.  The decision to use a wider flangeway width
within the limits allowed by regulation raised an issue of reasonableness, not
of regulatory compliance.  The trial judge’s conclusion was consistent with the
correct principles of law, and it should not have been disturbed by the Court
of Appeal.  A public nuisance has been defined as any activity
which unreasonably interferes with the public’s interest in questions of
health, safety, morality, comfort or convenience.  Whether a particular
activity constitutes a public nuisance is a question of fact.  Many factors may
be considered, including the inconvenience caused by the activity, the
difficulty involved in lessening or avoiding the risk, the utility of the
activity, the general practice of others, and the character of the
neighbourhood.  Statutory authority provides, at best, a narrow defence to
nuisance.  The traditional rule is that liability will not be imposed if an
activity is authorized by statute and the defendant proves that the nuisance is
the “inevitable result or consequence” of exercising that authority.  Here, the
Railways’ decisions, (i) to exceed the minimum flangeway width and (ii) not to
install flange fillers, were a matter of discretion and not the “inevitable
result” or “inseparable consequence” of complying with the regulations.  While findings of fact with regard to the allocation
of fault are not immutable, they should not be reversed by an appellate court
unless it can be established that the trial judge made some palpable and overriding
error which affected his or her assessment of those findings.  No such errors
were made by the trial judge, and the Court of Appeal ought not to have
interfered with his findings on the issue of contributory negligence.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Railway
Act, R.S.C. 1906, c. 37, ss. 222, 223, 235.     Standard Regulations Respecting
the Construction of Crossings at Grade, 55 B.T.C.
III, (Feb. 1, 1965) (later C.R.C., 1184), ss. 1(3) “crossing”, 6.    Authors Cited  Fridman, Gerald Henry Louis.  The
Law of Torts in Canada, vol. I.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1989.  Klar, Lewis N.  Tort Law,
2nd ed.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1996.  Linden, Allen M.  Canadian Tort
Law, 6th ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1997.   Joseph J. Arvay, Q.C.,
and Aaron A. G. Gordon, for the appellant.  Richard R. Sugden, Q.C.,
and Craig P. Dennis, for the respondent The Corporation of the City
of Victoria.  William M. Everett, Q.C.,
and W. S. MacFarlane, for the respondents The Esquimalt and Nanaimo
Railway Company and Canadian Pacific Limited/Canadien Pacifique Limitée.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  //Major J.//  1                                  
Major  J. -- This appeal
considers the effect of statutory authority on the civil liability of
railways.  A motorcyclist was injured while attempting to cross railway tracks
located on an urban street in Victoria, British Columbia.  The motorcyclist
sued the City of Victoria (“the City”) and the railway companies which owned
and operated the tracks (“the Railways”).  The Railways denied liability on the
ground that the tracks were authorized by, and complied with, all applicable
statutes, regulations and administrative orders.  2                                  
The first issue is whether the Railways are liable in negligence.  Under
a long-standing common law rule, the standard of care owed by railways to the
public was normally limited to the discharge of statutory obligations.  The
question is whether that rule should now be discarded, and if so, how statutory
compliance should affect the assessment of liability under ordinary negligence
principles.  3                                  
The second issue is whether the Railways are liable in public nuisance. 
Again, the Railways disclaim liability on the ground that the tracks involved
were authorized by statute and regulations.  The appellant submits that such a
defence is unavailable because the hazard posed by the tracks was not an
“inevitable consequence” of exercising statutory authority.  The final issue is
whether the Court of Appeal erred by reversing the findings of the trial judge
with respect to contributory negligence.  I.  Facts  4                                  
On May 4, 1987, the appellant, Murray Ryan, was thrown from his
motorcycle while attempting to cross railway tracks running down the centre of
Store Street, in downtown Victoria.  The tracks were owned by the respondent
Esquimalt & Nanaimo Railway Company (“E&N”), and were leased and
operated by the respondent Canadian Pacific Limited (“CP”).  The accident
occurred when the front tire of the appellant’s motorcycle became trapped in a
“flangeway” gap running alongside the inner edge of the tracks.  At the time of
the accident, the flangeways on Store Street were approximately one-quarter of
an inch wider than the front tire of the appellant’s motorcycle.  A.  History and Location of the Store Street Tracks  5                                  
In 1907, E&N applied to the Board of Railway Commissioners of Canada
(the “Board”) for permission to construct a branch line along a portion of
Store Street.   E&N submitted a “plan, profile and book of reference” to
the Board, setting forth the specifications of the proposed tracks, pursuant to
s. 222 of the Railway Act, R.S.C. 1906, c. 37 (“1906 Railway Act”). 
In addition, E&N entered into an agreement with the City regarding the
maintenance and operation of the line; the terms of that agreement were
subsequently passed into municipal law.  On March 6, 1908, in accordance with
s. 223 of the 1906 Railway Act, the Board issued Order No. 4421
authorizing the construction of the tracks.  6                                  
E&N leased its railway operations to CP in July of 1912.  By 1926 it
came to CP’s attention that a discrepancy existed between the terms of the 1908
Order and the actual location of the Store Street tracks.  In particular, the
original plans did not specify that the tracks would cross through traffic on
Chatham Street, a side road which intersects Store Street near one end of the
tracks.  CP applied to the Board for a revised authorization of the tracks as
constructed.  On January 18, 1927, the Board issued Order No. 38682, endorsing the
existing location of the tracks with specific reference to the Chatham Street
crossing.  That order provided:  THE BOARD ORDERS that the Applicant Company be, and
it is hereby, authorized to revise the location of its branch line of railway
from a point on its right of way at the easterly limit of Johnson Street
Bridge, thence north-easterly and northerly along Store Street, across Chatham
Street, to and into Block D, in the City of Victoria and Province of British
Columbia, as shown on the said plan and profile on file with the Board under
case No. 2717; the crossing of Chatham Street to be constructed in accordance
with “The Standard Regulations of the Board Affecting Highway Crossings, as
amended May 4th, 1910.”   Track
reconstructions were undertaken in 1944 and 1982, but as those projects did not
significantly alter the location of the tracks, no further orders were obtained
from the Board.  Rail traffic on the Store Street tracks declined steadily over
the years and the tracks were removed in 1993.  B. 
Dimensions of the Flangeways on Store Street  7                                  
When railway tracks run across a street or highway at grade, the rails
are normally embedded in the pavement so as not to impede traffic.  A groove
called a “flangeway” is installed alongside the tracks in order to prevent
derailments while permitting the running rails to remain flush with the road
surface.  The most durable and inexpensive way to construct flangeways is to
lay scrap rail, or “flangerail”, on its side next to the running rail to create
a gap between the track and the surrounding pavement or planking.  This process
was approved by the Board in Order No. 9729 (February 29, 1910) as the standard
design for CP highway crossings, and it has remained the accepted method of
constructing flangeways in Canada for many years.  8                                  
Regulations issued by the Canadian Transport Commission in 1965 and 1980
provide that flangeways at “crossings” may be anywhere from 2.5 to 4.75 inches
wide.  The same dimensions are adopted in CP’s own Standard Practice Circular
29.  It is common ground that the flangeways on Store Street have always
remained within that prescribed range.  From 1944 to 1982, the flangeways were
between 2.75 and 3.25 inches wide.  During the 1982 reconstruction, the
existing flangerail was torn out and replaced with heavier-gauge flangerail on
its side; as a result, the flangeways were enlarged to a width of between 3.75
and 3.94 inches.  9                                  
Despite arguments to the contrary by the respondents, the trial judge
found that at the time of the appellant’s accident, methods and technologies
were available which, if employed, could have eliminated the flangeway gaps on
Store Street entirely, or reduced them to the minimum width -- 2.5 inches --
required under the “crossings” regulations.  Those methods included the use of
rubber-type “flange-fillers”, which are inserted into a flangeway to create an
even surface for road traffic while compressing under the weight of train
wheels.  In particular, the trial judge found that the flange filler “Epflex”
was available in 1982 and was in use in Waterloo, Ontario on tracks which, as
here, ran down the centre of an urban street.  C.  The
Accident  10                              
Store Street is located in a mixed use area near Victoria Harbour.  It
is a two-way street with one lane of traffic running in each direction. The
railway tracks ran down the middle of the street for approximately four blocks,
meandering slowly from one traffic lane to the other in a lazy S-shape.  Posted
signs warned of a hazard to bicyclists but not to motorcyclists.  11                              
The appellant entered Store Street on his motorcycle from a side road. 
Cars were parked on the opposite side of the street, approximately six feet
from the tracks.  The appellant did not cross the tracks immediately but
instead travelled down the centre of Store Street for about two blocks, keeping
the tracks on his right.  When the meandering of the tracks edged him to his
left and into the path of oncoming traffic, he attempted to cross the tracks to
the other side of the street.  He was moving at about 20-25 kilometres per hour
and encountered the tracks at a shallow angle.  As he crossed, the front tire
of his motorcycle, which was three and one-half inches wide at its perimeter,
fell into the flangeway and became wedged there.  The motorcycle rotated over
the top of the trapped tire, and the appellant was thrown forward and injured. 
The record confirms that six prior accidents involving the flangeways on Store
Street -- five of which also involved motorcycles -- were reported to the
Railways or the City of Victoria between 1982 and 1986.  12                              
Following a lengthy trial, the British Columbia Supreme Court held the
Railways and the City jointly and severally liable in negligence, the former
for maintaining dangerously wide flangeways and the latter for failing to warn
of the hazard.  In addition, the trial judge held the Railways liable in
nuisance.  The British Columbia Court of Appeal set aside the nuisance finding
and held all of the respondents liable only for failure to warn.  The Court of
Appeal also found the appellant to be contributorily negligent and liable for
50% of his damages.  II.  Relevant
Statutory and Regulatory Provisions  13                              
One issue is whether the Store Street tracks constitute a “highway
crossing” within the meaning of the Railway Act and applicable
regulations; this is relevant as there are specific and different regulations
for crossings as opposed to a rail line.  Section 235 of the 1906 Railway
Act provides:                                                         Highway
Crossings  235.  The railway may be carried upon, along
or across an existing highway. . . .    That language
is adopted in all subsequent versions of the Act, including s. 196(1) of the Railway
Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. R-2.  A “crossing” is also defined in s. 2 of the Railway-Highway
Crossing at Grade Regulations, SOR/80-748 (“CTC 1980-8 Rail”),  and in
s. 1(3) of General Order No. E-4:  Standard Regulations Respecting the
Construction of Crossings at Grade, 55 B.T.C. III, (Feb. 1, 1965) (“General
Order No. E-4”), as follows:  “Crossing” means any railway crossing of a highway
at grade or any highway crossing of a railway at grade.  The minimum
and maximum dimensions permitted for flangeways at a “crossing” are in s. 6 of
General Order No. E-4:  6.  A space not more than three inches deep and not less than two and
one-half inches wide nor more than four and three-quarters inches wide shall be
provided between the gauge side of the running rail and the planking and/or
other road surface, as the case may be.  A similar
requirement appears in metric form in s. 7 of CTC 1980-8 Rail, which replaced
General Order No. E-4 and was in force when the Store Street tracks were
reconstructed in 1982.  That section provides:  7.  A flangeway with a width of between 65 mm and
120 mm to a depth of between 50 mm and 75 mm shall be provided between the
gauge side of the running rail and the highway surface.   367. . . .  (4)   No inspection under or by the authority of
this Act or the Railway Safety Act , and nothing in this Act or the Railway
Safety Act  and nothing done, ordered, directed, required or provided for,
or omitted to be done, ordered, directed, required or provided for, under or by
virtue of this Act or the Railway Safety Act , shall, except in so far as
a compliance with the Act in question or with the order, direction, requirement
or provision, constitutes a justification for what would otherwise be wrongful,
relieve, or be construed to relieve, any company of or from, or in any way
diminish or affect, any liability or responsibility resting on it by law,
either toward Her Majesty or toward any person, or the wife, husband, parent,
child, executor, administrator, tutor, curator, heir or personal
representative, of any person, for anything done or omitted to be done by that
company, or for any wrongful act, negligence, default, misfeasance, malfeasance
or nonfeasance of that company.  III.  Judicial
History  A.  British
Columbia Supreme Court (1994), 21 M.P.L.R. (2d) 148 (Owen-Flood J.)  15                              
The trial judge relied on Paskivski v. Canadian Pacific Ltd.,
[1976] 1 S.C.R. 687, for the principle that absent “special or exceptional
circumstances”, railway companies cannot be found negligent as long as they
comply with the Railway Act and with orders or regulations issued under
that Act.  However, he held that the crucial issue in this case -- the width of
the flangeways on store street -- was not governed by any relevant statute or
regulation, and in particular was not covered by the regulatory standards which
apply to “highway crossings”.   In the alternative, he found that “special or
exceptional circumstances” existed which required the Railways to exceed the
precautions mandated in those regulations.  He concluded that the Railways were
negligent in failing to build the flangeways at the minimum allowable width or
with some form of flange filler.  16                              
The trial judge also held that the Railways were liable in public
nuisance.  Relying on Tock v. St. John’s Metropolitan Area Board, [1989]
2 S.C.R. 1181, he rejected the Railways’ defence of “statutory authority”
since, in his view, the hazard created was not an inevitable consequence of
discharging any statutory duty.  The trial judge also held that the City of
Victoria was liable for its failure to provide adequate warnings to the public
of the danger on Store Street.  He dismissed a nuisance claim against the City
on the basis that the City had no property interest in the tracks.  Finally, he
held that the appellant was not contributorily negligent, since his decision to
cross the tracks when and where he did was dictated by circumstances beyond his
control and was made in “the agony of the moment”.  Because the trial judge
could not ascribe degrees of fault to the various respondents, he apportioned
liability equally among them.  B.                British Columbia Court of
Appeal (1996), 82 B.C.A.C. 40 (Goldie J.A., Rowles  and Finch JJ.A.
concurring)   17                              
The Court of Appeal held that because the Railways had complied with all
applicable regulations, they could not be found negligent with regard to the
configuration of the Store Street tracks: see Paskivski, supra. 
It noted that the method used to build the flangeways on Store Street was
standard for highway crossings in Canada.  The Court of Appeal also emphasized
that the width of the flangeways was within the allowable range defined in the
“highway crossing” regulations, which he held to be applicable to the Store
Street line.  It rejected the trial judge’s view that the location of the
tracks on a city street was an “exceptional circumstance” which required the
Railways to take steps beyond the standards required in those regulations.  The
trial judge’s finding of negligence was set aside.  18                              
The Court of Appeal also reversed the trial judge’s holding with respect
to nuisance, on the basis that the Railways were protected by the defence of
statutory authority.  In the Court of Appeal’s view, the danger posed by the
flangeways was an “inseparable consequence” of the Board orders which required the
tracks to be laid at street grade with pavement between the rails.  However,
the Court of Appeal did find that both the Railways and the City were at fault
for failing to warn the public of the hazard created by the flangeways. 
Finally, the Court of Appeal reversed the trial judge’s conclusion that there
was no contributory negligence.  It found that the appellant had chosen to
remain on the more dangerous of several possible courses and therefore could
not claim to have acted in the “agony of the moment” when he crossed the
tracks.  The Court of Appeal concluded that the appellant was liable for 50% of
his damages.  IV.  Issues  19                              
The respondents have not challenged the finding that they were liable
for failing to warn the appellant of the hazard created by the flangeways on
Store Street.  That conclusion is not at issue in this appeal.  The three
issues are:  1.    Did the Court of Appeal err in finding that
the Railways were not negligent with regard to the width of the flangeways on
Store Street?  2.    Did the Court of Appeal err in finding that
the flangeways on Store Street did not give rise to liability for public
nuisance?  3.    Did the Court of Appeal err in reversing the
trial judge’s findings with respect to contributory negligence?  V.  Analysis  20                              
This appeal focuses on the relationship between statutory authority and
civil liability.  The appellant submits that the Railways are liable under
theories of negligence and nuisance for installing dangerous flangeways on
Store Street.  The Railways deny liability on the basis that the Store Street
line is a “highway crossing” and its flangeways comply in all respects with the
safety regulations governing such crossings.  The questions are: (1) whether
the regulations relied upon by the Railways are in fact applicable to the Store
Street line, and (2) if so, whether the Railways are nevertheless liable for
failing to exercise their discretion under those regulations so as to minimize
the hazard created by the flangeways.  A.                               
Were the Railways Negligent with Regard to the Width of the
Flangeways on Store Street?   21                              
The first step in the negligence analysis is to determine whether the
Railways owed a duty of care to the appellant with regard to the configuration
of the Store Street tracks.  If such a duty is found to exist, it must then be
determined whether the Railways exercised the standard of care necessary to
avoid breaching that duty.  The relationship between the duty and the standard
of care was explained by MacDonald J.A. of the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal in
Nova Mink Ltd. v. Trans-Canada Airlines, [1951] 2 D.L.R. 241, at p. 254:  It is the function of the Judge to determine whether there is any duty
of care imposed by the law upon the defendant and if so, to define the measure
of its proper performance; it is for the [trier of fact] to determine, by
reference to the criterion so declared, whether the defendant has failed in his
legal duty.                                                                     .
. .   The common law yields the conclusion that there is
such a duty only where the circumstances of time, place, and person would
create in the mind of a reasonable man in those circumstances such a
probability of harm resulting to other persons as to require him to take care
to avert that probable result.  This element of reasonable prevision of
expectable harm soon came to be associated with a fictional Reasonable Man
whose apprehensions of harm became the touchstone of the existence of duty, in
the same way as his conduct in the face of such apprehended harm became the
standard of conformity to that duty. . . .   Thus, a
discussion of duty centres around its existence, while the standard of care
clarifies what the content of the duty is.  Where there is no duty there is no
negligence.  1.  Duty of Care  22                              
The duty of care owed by a railway with respect to public crossings is
determined, as it is for other private and public actors, under the two-step
test in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.), 
at pp. 751-52, which was adopted by this Court in Kamloops (City of)  v.
Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2, and numerous subsequent decisions.  See, e.g., Just
v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; Hercules Managements
Ltd. v. Ernst & Young, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 165.  The two stages of the test
were restated by Wilson J. as follows in Kamloops, at pp. 10-11:  (1)  is there a sufficiently close relationship
between the parties (the [defendant] and the person who has suffered the
damage) so that, in the reasonable contemplation of the [defendant],
carelessness on its part might cause damage to that person?  If so,  (2)  are there any considerations which ought to
negative or limit (a) the scope of the duty and (b) the class of persons to
whom it is owed or (c) the damages to which a breach of it may give rise?   23                              
The first step of the Anns/Kamloops test presents a
relatively low threshold.  In order to establish a prima facie duty of
care, it must be shown that a relationship of “proximity” existed between the
parties such that it was reasonably foreseeable that a careless act by the
Railways could result in injury to the appellant.  24                              
The second step of the Anns/Kamloops test requires that it be
determined whether any factors exist which should eliminate or limit the duty
found under the first branch of the test.  This approach recognizes that while
the test of “proximity” may be met, liability does not necessarily follow.  The
existence of a duty of care must be considered in light of all relevant
circumstances, including any applicable statutes or regulations.  Thus, a
legislative exemption from liability can negate a duty of care in circumstances
where that duty would otherwise arise.  The same holds true for immunities
created by the courts.  A policy decision is made in such cases to prevent the
law of negligence from regulating certain relationships or relieving certain
injuries, notwithstanding a finding of proximity between the parties.  This may
reflect the need to shield specific activities from judicial control, or the
wish to prevent the “floodgates of litigation” from opening into areas of
potentially unlimited liability.  See, e.g., Allen M. Linden, Canadian Tort
Law (6th ed. 1997), at p. 275.  25                              
In addition to negating a duty of care entirely, policy considerations
may also serve to “limit” the “scope” of an existing duty under the second step
of the Anns/Kamloops test.  It is necessary to be clear about what this
means.  The purpose of the Anns/Kamloops test is to establish the
existence of a legal duty, not to determine the standard of care required to
establish liability.  Policy considerations do not give rise to “greater” or
“lesser” duties in different cases.  A duty of care either exists or it does
not.  As discussed below, when the language of “duty” is framed in terms of its
degree or content, what is really at issue is not the duty but the applicable
standard of care.  While the distinction is obvious, courts from time to time
seem to lose sight of that principle.  See, e.g., Wade v. C.N.R., [1978]
1 S.C.R. 1064, at p. 1083.  26                              
The “scope” of a duty of care can be “limited” under the Anns/Kamloops
test only in the sense that the duty will arise in certain situations and not
in others.  Such limitations may be based on broad policy considerations such
as efficiency and economic fairness (see Canadian National Railway Co. v.
Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021, at pp. 1155-60) or on
specific principles of law which operate in particular cases.  See, e.g., Hercules,
supra, at paras. 31-41, and Just, supra, at pp. 1235-36.  The
ultimate determination of whether a duty of care arises or not is an issue
properly framed within the second step of the Anns/Kamloops test and its
answer depends on the factual and legal context of each case.  In that sense,
the test is highly flexible.  27                              
However, the Anns/Kamloops test is not concerned with legislative
or judicial policies which, as in this case, define the conduct required to
meet an existing duty.  Such policies relate to the standard of care.  As a
practical matter, the distinction between limiting the “scope” of a legal duty
under the Anns/Kamloops test or limiting the requisite standard of care
to discharge that duty is an elusive one.  Both formulations go to reducing a
defendant’s exposure to liability, and in most cases the outcome will be the
same under either approach.  As a matter of analytical coherence, however, the
distinction is important.  See Lewis N. Klar, Tort Law (2nd ed. 1996),
at p. 247, and Just, supra, at pp. 1243-44.  Without it, the
entire analysis of duty and standard would be collapsed together into the Anns/Kamloops
framework, a purpose for which that test was not designed.  2.  Standard of Care  28                              
Conduct is negligent if it creates an objectively unreasonable risk of
harm.  To avoid liability, a person must exercise the standard of care that
would be expected of an ordinary, reasonable and prudent person in the same
circumstances.  The measure of what is reasonable depends on the facts of each
case, including the likelihood of a known or foreseeable harm, the gravity of
that harm, and the burden or cost which would be incurred to prevent the
injury.  In addition, one may look to external indicators of reasonable
conduct, such as custom, industry practice, and statutory or regulatory
standards.  29                              
Legislative standards are relevant to the common law standard of care,
but the two are not necessarily co-extensive.  The fact that a statute prescribes
or prohibits certain activities may constitute evidence of reasonable conduct
in a given situation, but it does not extinguish the underlying obligation of
reasonableness.  See R. in right of Canada v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool,
[1983] 1 S.C.R. 205.  Thus, a statutory breach does not automatically give rise
to civil liability; it is merely some evidence of negligence.  See, e.g.,
Stewart v. Pettie, [1995] 1 S.C.R. 131, at para. 36, and Saskatchewan
Wheat Pool, at p. 225.  By the same token, mere compliance with a statute
does not, in and of itself, preclude a finding of civil liability.  See Linden,
supra, at p. 219.  Statutory standards can, however, be highly relevant
to the assessment of reasonable conduct in a particular case, and in fact may
render reasonable an act or omission which would otherwise appear to be
negligent.  This allows courts to consider the legislative framework in which
people and companies must operate, while at the same time recognizing that one
cannot avoid the underlying obligation of reasonable care simply by discharging
statutory duties.  30                              
The foregoing view, though generally accepted, has long been resisted in
railway cases.  For more than 90 years, railway companies have benefited from a
“special rule” at common law which placed them in a privileged position within
the law of negligence.  As long as a railway complied with the requirements
imposed upon it by applicable statutes, regulations and administrative orders,
it was under no further obligation -- absent extraordinary circumstances -- to
act in an objectively reasonable manner.  This rule has usually been framed in
terms of limiting the “duty of care” owed by railways to the public.  It is
more easily understood as limiting the standard of care which railways
must meet under an existing legal duty.  Either way, the effect of the rule was
the same:  it excused railway companies in most cases from the ordinary
obligation of prudence which governs other members of society.  31                              
The roots of the special rule reach back to the turn of the century,
when railways occupied a position of unparalleled economic and social
importance in the development of Canada.  In Grand Trunk Railway Co. v.
McKay (1903), 34 S.C.R. 81, this Court held that the safety measures prescribed
by the Railway Act and the Board of Railway Commissioners were
exhaustive, and railways could not be held liable for failing to take
precautions beyond those requirements.  The harshness of that doctrine was
tempered somewhat by a separate line of cases, beginning with Lake Erie
& Detroit River Railway Co. v. Barclay (1900), 30 S.C.R. 360, which
held that in the event of exceptional danger or extraordinary conditions, a
railway would be required to take greater safety measures than those officially
prescribed.  The McKay and Barclay doctrines have been combined
in subsequent judgments to yield the current rule, which was restated by
Dickson J. (as he then was) in Paskivski, supra, at pp. 698-99:  A long line of cases . . . establishes that a
railway company’s duty of care to users of public crossings is limited to
discharge of statutory obligations under the Railway Act . . . and
compliance with orders of the Canadian Transport Commission -- unless there are
special or exceptional circumstances, in which event a common law duty of care
will require additional precautions or safeguards.   32                              
This Court upheld the special rule in Paskivski, but it did so
with reluctance.  Dickson J. questioned the ongoing relevance of the rule at p.
708:  The past seventy years have wrought many changes within Canada and
today one might perhaps be inclined to question the relevance and validity of a
rule of law which limits the common law duty of care of a railway to the
special case or the exceptional case, particularly if those words are to
receive a strict or narrow construction.  It may well be that the interests of
a young and undeveloped nation are best served by a minimum of impediment to
industrial growth and economic expansion but in a more developed and populous
nation this attitude of laissez faire may have to yield to accommodate
the legitimate concern of society for other vital interests such as the safety
and welfare of children.   Laskin C.J.,
concurring in the result reached by Dickson J., was even more pointed in his
criticism of the rule, at pp. 689-90:  . . . I am unable to appreciate why railway companies, in the conduct
of their transportation operations, are today entitled to the benefit of a
special rule, more favourable to them, by which their common law liability is
to be gauged.  When all allowances are made for the force and legal effect of
the rules and regulations of the regulatory agency, the Canadian Transport
Commission, to which railway companies are subject, and when the question of
their liability turns on the common law of negligence, as is the case here,
they cannot claim to be judged by any different standards than those that apply
to other persons or entities charged with liability for negligence.   33                              
The calls for reform expressed 24 years ago in Paskivski are more
compelling today.  The special status enjoyed by railway companies under the
law of negligence can no longer be justified in principle and the time has come
for that rule to be set aside.  Although a doctrine of such long standing
should not lightly be discarded, there is little to be gained from maintaining
for its own sake a line of jurisprudence which has lost its relevance.  34                              
The Railways contend that the McKay/Barclay rule should be preserved
in deference to the expertise of the Board (now the Canadian Transportation
Agency) on matters of railway safety.  That argument is unpersuasive.  The
orders of an administrative board may be relevant to the determination of
reasonable behaviour in specific circumstances.  However, as noted, such orders
do not oust the underlying standard of reasonableness imposed by common law.  A
railway, like any other company or individual, is subject to generally
applicable principles of negligence, and should not enjoy special protection
when its actions or omissions cause harm to other members of society.  See Harris
v. Canadian Pacific Ltd. (1989), 59 D.L.R. (4th) 151 (B.C.C.A.), at pp.
154-55.  35                              
It is useful to note that even when applying the McKay/Barclay rule,
courts have implicitly recognized that statutory compliance cannot replace the
common law standard of care, and can be accepted as a substitute for that
standard only in certain circumstances.  Thus, in “ordinary” cases, compliance
with the statute has been held to exhaust the requirement of reasonable
conduct; in “exceptional” cases, however, the statutory standard has been
deemed “insufficient” and the common law has been retrieved to fill the gap. 
As Robertson C.J. stated for the Ontario Court of Appeal in Anderson v.
Canadian National Railway Co., [1944] O.R. 169, at p. 177:  . . . under ordinary circumstances, the railway is permitted to carry
on its usual operations in the normal way, at a highway level crossing, without
other precautions and warnings than are prescribed by the Railway Act or by the
Board, but if the operations are carried on in such a way, or are of such a
character, that the public using the crossing is exposed to exceptional danger
. . . or if there are exceptional circumstances . . . that render ineffective
or insufficient the precautions and warnings generally prescribed, then, in
such cases, it may be left to a jury to say whether or not the railway has been
negligent in failing to adopt other measures for the protection of those who
may use the crossing.  36                              
The problem with the McKay/Barclay rule was that instead of
focusing the analysis on whether statutory compliance by the railway was
reasonable in the circumstances, it assumed that step as a matter of law and
forced the plaintiff to rebut the presumption.  See, e.g., Richardson v.
Surrey (Dist.) (1990), 43 B.C.L.R. (2d) 210 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 214.  With
the abolishment of the special rule, the correct principles can now be stated
more clearly.  Compliance with a statutory standard of care does not abrogate
or supersede the obligation to comply with the common law standard of care. 
The requirements are concurrent, and each carries its own penalty for breach. 
However, in appropriate circumstances, compliance with statutory standards may
entirely satisfy the common law standard of care and thus absolve a defendant
of liability in negligence.  See Bux v. Slough Metals Ltd., [1974] 1 All
E.R. 262 (C.A.).  37                              
This approach is consistent with the holding in Canadian National
Railway Co. v. Vincent, [1979] 1 S.C.R. 364.  Although Vincent arose
in the context of Quebec civil law, the reasoning of Pratte J. in that case is
instructive, particularly since the common law standard of care is analogous to
the requirement of reasonable prudence under the Civil Code.  The facts
in Vincent were straightforward.  A child was struck by a train while
riding her bicycle on a railway crossing in a densely populated area.  It was
undisputed that the railway had complied with all relevant safety measures
prescribed by statute and regulations.  The issue was whether the railways
should have taken additional precautions in the circumstances of the case. 
Pratte J. stated at pp. 372-73:  It must be said at the outset that, under the
verdict, appellant is not held liable by reason of any breach of the Railway
Act . . . or of the regulations of the Canadian Transport Commission.  The
issue is rather whether appellant can be found guilty of negligence under . . .
[the Civil Code], although it complied with all the special statutory
and regulatory provisions to which it is subject.  The special provisions
governing appellant certainly do not have the effect of exempting it from the
ordinary law of civil liability.  Savatier in Traité de la responsabilité
civile en droit français, Vol. 1, No. 181, at p. 225, said the
following on this point:  [translation] 181.  Fault
despite compliance with regulations.  When the regulatory authority intervenes to
prescribe certain safeguards, it does so in the interest of third parties, not
to their detriment.  Except where otherwise provided, the precautions it is
prescribing must therefore be viewed as being in no way exhaustive, and as not
preventing those subject to the regulation from being also bound, apart from
it, by any other obligations to exercise prudence.   38                              
Additional support for this view can be found in s. 367(4) of the Railway
Act which provides:  367. . . .  (4)  No inspection under or by the authority of
this Act . . . and nothing in this Act . . . and nothing done, ordered,
directed, required or provided for, or omitted to be done . . . under or by
virtue of this Act . . . shall, except in so far as a compliance with the Act
in question or with the order, direction, requirement or provision, constitutes
a justification for what would otherwise be wrongful, relieve . . . any company
of or from, or in any way diminish or affect, any liability or responsibility
resting on it by law . . . for anything done or omitted to be done by that
company, or for any wrongful act, negligence, default, misfeasance, malfeasance
or nonfeasance of that company.   Section 367(4)
confirms that compliance with statutory standards does not normally exhaust a
railway’s obligations under principles of negligence.  See Vincent, supra,
at p. 373.  A railway is presumptively bound by the common law, subject only to
those situations where compliance with the statute or regulations provides “a
justification for what would otherwise be wrongful”.   Like any exculpatory
provision limiting common law rights, that passage should be narrowly
construed.  In the absence of a clear indication to the contrary, compliance
with statutory standards should not be viewed as excusing a railway’s
obligation to take whatever precautions are reasonably required in the
circumstances.  39                              
The weight to be accorded to statutory compliance in the overall
assessment of reasonableness depends on the nature of the statute and the
circumstances of the case.  It should be determined whether the legislative
standards are necessarily applicable to the facts of the case.  Statutory
compliance will have more relevance in “ordinary” cases -- i.e., cases clearly
within the intended scope of the statute -- than in cases involving special or
unusual circumstances.  See Paskivski, supra, and Anderson,
supra.  It should also be determined whether the legislative standards are
specific or general, and whether they allow for discretion in the manner of
performance.  It is a well-established principle that an action will lie
against any party, public or private, “for doing that which the legislature has
authorized, if it be done negligently”.  See Geddis v. Proprietors of
the  Bann Reservoir (1878), 3 App. Cas. 430 (H.L.), at pp. 455-56; see also
Kamloops, supra, at p. 11, and Just, supra, at p.
1245.  It follows that a party acting under statutory authority must still take
such precautions as are reasonable within the range of that authority to
minimize the risks which may result from its actions.  See Tock,
supra (applying similar principles in the nuisance context).  40                              
Where a statute authorizes certain activities and strictly defines the
manner of performance and the precautions to be taken, it is more likely to be
found that compliance with the statute constitutes reasonable care and that no
additional measures are required.  By contrast, where a statute is general or
permits discretion as to the manner of performance, or where unusual
circumstances exist which are not clearly within the scope of the statute, mere
compliance is unlikely to exhaust the standard of care.  This approach strikes
an appropriate balance among several important policies, including deference to
legislative determinations on matters of railway safety, security for railways
which comply with prescribed standards, and protection for those who may be
injured as a result of unreasonable choices made by railways in the exercise of
official authority.  3.  Application to the Case at Bar  41                              
The first question is whether the Railways owed the appellant a duty of
care.  The Store Street tracks ran down the centre of an urban street, in
direct proximity to the public.  It was plainly foreseeable that carelessness
by the Railways with respect to those tracks could cause injury to users of the
street.  Accordingly, a prima facie duty of care arose under the first
step of the Anns/Kamloops test.  See Harris, supra, at
p. 155.  Turning to the second step of the test, the Railways have not
identified any legislative or judicial policies which would negate that duty or
limit it.  As noted, the authorities relied upon by the Railways concern the
manner of carrying out a specific activity, and do not purport to limit civil
liability.  Those regulations do not affect the existence of a duty of care.  42                              
The standard of care required of the Railways was that of a prudent and
reasonable person in the circumstances, having regard to all relevant factors
including applicable statutes and regulations.  It is undisputed that the
Railways complied with certain safety standards prescribed in regulations and
Board orders.  The question is whether such compliance satisfied the
requirement of objective reasonableness in this case and absolved the Railways
of liability for the appellant’s injury.  43                              
At the outset, it should be noted that the location of the Store
Street tracks does not, by itself, give rise to liability.  The construction of
a branch line on an urban street inevitably creates a risk to the public.  When
a party is specifically authorized to create that risk, compliance with such
authority cannot be negligent.  There is negligence only if, in the performance
of the authorized activity, the party creates a risk that is objectively
unreasonable in the circumstances.  The construction of the Store Street tracks
was authorized by the Board in 1908 on the basis of a detailed plan and
profile, and the location of the tracks was reapproved in 1927.  Pursuant to s.
223 of the 1906 Railway Act, those orders could not have issued unless
the Board was “satisfied that the branch line [was] necessary in the public
interest or for the purpose of giving increased facilities to business”.  It
cannot be said that it was unreasonable for the Railways to comply with those
orders by constructing the tracks in the manner authorized.  44                              
The real issue is whether the Railways were negligent with respect to
the dimensions of the flangeways on Store Street.  In particular, it must be
determined whether the Railways acted unreasonably by enlarging the flangeways
to a width of nearly four inches in 1982, and by failing to install flange
fillers at any time prior to the appellant’s accident.  This issue has to do
with the minimization of risk, and is separate from the Railways’ undisputed
duty to warn the public of the inevitable hazard created by the tracks.  45                              
The Railways have cited two sets of authorities in support of their
contention that they acted reasonably with respect to the flangeways.  First,
they submit that the method which they used to construct the flangeways in 1982
-- flangerail on its side -- is the standard design for flangeways at “highway
crossings”, as confirmed by Board Order No. 9729 dated February 29, 1910. 
Accordingly, they contend that they were under no obligation to employ a
different method or to use different construction materials, such as flange
fillers.  Second, they submit that the width of the flangeways on Store Street
was within the allowable range for a “railway-highway crossing at grade” as
defined in s. 6 of General Order No. E-4.  That provision states:  6.  A space not more than three inches deep and not less than two and
one-half inches wide nor more than four and three-quarters inches wide shall be
provided between the gauge side of the running rail and the planking and/or
other road surface, as the case may be.   A similar
requirement appears in metric form in s. 7 of CTC 1980-8 Rail:   7.  A flangeway with a width of between 65 mm and
120 mm to a depth of between 50 mm and 75 mm shall be provided between the
gauge side of the running rail and the highway surface.  In the
submission of the Railways, the foregoing authorities were applicable to the
entire Store Street track, and defined the standard of care which was
required.  Because they complied with that standard, the Railways contend that
their conduct was reasonable.  The Court of Appeal agreed and reversed the
trial judge’s finding of negligence with respect to the flangeways.  46                              
In my view, the Railways’ compliance with the cited authorities did not
exhaust the requisite standard of care in this case, for two reasons.  First,
those authorities were not directly applicable to the circumstances, and
second, they allowed for significant discretion in the manner of performance. 
These points will be addressed in turn.  (i)  Relevance to the Circumstances of this Case  47                              
The authorities relied upon by the Railways apply to “highway
crossings”.  A typical crossing involves the intersection of a railway and a
highway at a single point, usually at a right angle.  It does not follow that the
standards prescribed for such crossings are also applicable to situations
where, as here, a length of railway track is carried along an urban street for
several blocks.  The evidence in the record is inconclusive on the definition
of a “crossing”.  The Railway Act provides, under the title “Highway
Crossings, etc.”, that a railway “may . . .  be carried upon, along or
across an existing highway. . .”.  See, e.g., Railway Act, R.S.C. 1970,
c. R-2, s. 196(1).  On the other hand, Board Order No. 38682 (January 18, 1927)
stated that only the “crossing of Chatham Street” should comply with
regulations governing “highway crossings”, suggesting that the remainder of the
Store Street line was not a crossing and was not subject to such regulations. 
General Order No. E-4 and CTC 1980-8 Rail provide that a “crossing” is “any
railway crossing of a highway at grade or any highway crossing of a railway at
grade”.  The diagrams accompanying those regulations show an ordinary crossing
at a perpendicular angle.  48                              
The Railways submitted that because the cited regulations are not
expressly limited to “typical” crossings, they should presumptively apply to
all situations in which a railway runs across or along a street at grade.  That
argument misses the point.  It is the common law standard of care which is
presumed to apply.  If a regulatory standard is shown to govern a particular
situation, it may be accepted as a reasonable substitute for the common law in
that case.  However, the regulation must be clearly applicable to a particular
circumstance.  To borrow the language of the “special rule” cases, the
situation must be “ordinary” rather than “special or exceptional”.  See Anderson,
supra, and Paskivski, supra.  49                              
Regardless of whether the Store Street line can be construed as a
“crossing”, it is obviously not a crossing in any ordinary or typical sense. 
The Railways’ witness, Mr. Palasz, conceded during cross-examination that the
Store Street tracks are unlike other highway crossings and are not specifically
provided for under existing regulatory standards:  Q.   What standards are applied to tracks that run
down urban streets as in Store Street?  A.   I think Store Street is unique.  It is the
only track that I know that does run down an urban street. I know there are
some others but it’s the only one that I’ve been involved with.  Q.   So does CP Rail have any standards that are
applicable to tracks that run parallel and down urban streets?  A.   None that I’m aware of.  .
. .  Q.   So, the best you can do, as I understand it
then, is to try and adapt the standard practice circular that relates to
crossings to the situation on Store Street?  Is that my understanding of what
you were trying to do?  A.   We didn’t really have any other
specifications to adhere to, so we did take it as a crossing.  Q.   So you tried to adapt the crossing standards
to the situation on Store Street; do I understand you correctly?  A.   Yes, we used it as a crossing at grade
standard, yes.   As the trial
judge noted, there are important practical differences between a railway line
which cuts across traffic at a right angle and one which runs down the centre
of a street.  In particular, the danger posed by flangeways to riders of
motorcycles and bicycles is far greater when those riders must travel alongside
the gap for four blocks than when they cross over it once at a steep angle.  A
regulatory standard which is reasonable in the second situation may be wholly
inappropriate in the first.  Accordingly, the standards for flangeway widths
defined in General Order No. E-4 and CTC 1980-8 Rail are not definitive of the
standard of care in this case.  (ii) Discretion Under the Regulations  50                              
Even if the standards for “railway-highway crossing” regulations do
apply to the Store Street tracks, the Railways’ compliance with those standards
did not necessarily constitute reasonable conduct in the circumstances. 
General Order No. E-4 and CTC 1980-8 Rail provide that a flangeway may be as
narrow as 2.5 inches (65 millimetres) or as wide as 4.75 inches (126
millimetres).  The decision to construct a flangeway at a particular width
within that range was a matter left to the discretion of the Railways.  In
exercising that discretion, they were bound by the common law and were required
to take all reasonable steps to minimize foreseeable harm.  It cannot be
presumed that the entire range would be reasonably safe in all conditions. 
Indeed, the existence of a range instead of a uniform standard suggests that
the appropriate width for a flangeway depends in part on the particular facts. 
The flangeways installed by the Railways in 1982 were between 3.75 and 3.94 inches
wide.  Had they been narrower by half an inch, the accident at issue in this
case would not have occurred.  The Railways’ decision with respect to that
half-inch raises an issue of reasonableness, not of regulatory compliance.  (iii) Application of the Common Law Standard of Care  51                              
The trial judge correctly held that the Railways were subject to the
common law standard of care.  In applying that standard, he noted that the
Railways have been aware of the risks associated with the flangeways on Store
Street for some time.  In particular, he found that the Railways knew or should
have known of at least three other accidents between 1982 and 1986 which
involved the flangeways and two-wheeled vehicles.  On the basis of all the
evidence adduced, he concluded as follows (at pp. 197-98):  In the case at bar, the defendant Railways ought to
have built the flangeways either at the minimum allowable width or with some
form of flange filler.  It was not enough to proceed on the basis that so long
as their flangeways were durable and did not exceed the maximum regulatory
standards . . . their neighbours must endure the consequent injuries arising
from their “preferred” construction choice.  .
. .  Because of the hazard created and the remedial
measures available to the defendant Railways, I find the defendant Railways
were obliged to take precautions over and above those mandated by statute and
regulation.  This they failed to do.  In the result, I find that the defendant Railways
were negligent.   The trial
judge’s conclusion is consistent with the principles stated above.  It was a
proper exercise of his role as the finder of fact, and it should not have been
disturbed by the Court of Appeal.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed with
respect to the claim of negligence against the Railways.  B.  Did the
Flangeways on Store Street Give Rise to Liability for Public Nuisance?  52                              
The doctrine of public nuisance appears as a poorly understood area of
the law.  “A public nuisance has been defined as any activity which
unreasonably interferes with the public’s interest in questions of health,
safety, morality, comfort or convenience”:  see Klar, supra, at
p. 525.  Essentially, “[t]he conduct complained of must amount to . . . an
attack upon the rights of the public generally to live their lives unaffected
by inconvenience, discomfort or other forms of interference”: See G. H. L.
Fridman, The Law of Torts in Canada, vol. I (1989), at p. 168.  An individual
may bring a private action in public nuisance by pleading and proving special
damage.  See, e.g., Chessie v. J. D. Irving Ltd. (1982), 22 C.C.L.T. 89
(N.B.C.A.).  Such actions commonly involve allegations of unreasonable
interference with a public right of way, such as a street or highway.  See
ibid., at p. 94.  53                              
Whether or not a particular activity constitutes a public nuisance is a
question of fact.  Many factors may be considered, including the inconvenience
caused by the activity, the difficulty involved in lessening or avoiding the
risk, the utility of the activity, the general practice of others, and the
character of the neighbourhood.  See  Chessie, supra, at p. 94. 
The trial judge found, at p. 206, that “the configuration and design of the
railway tracks on Store Street constituted an unreasonable interference to the
public of its right of access”.  He noted that Store Street was a mixed retail,
industrial, and commercial area, and that the Railways should have foreseen the
hazard posed by the flangeways to riders of two-wheeled vehicles.  He found, at
p. 207, that the cost of that hazard should be borne by the Railways as a
matter of policy:  In this case, the defendant Railways clearly
installed that particular flange-rail system without regard to vehicular
traffic.  It was chosen because it cost less, and it was longer lasting and
better suited to the needs of the rail traffic.  However, the result of this
choice of flange-rail, which created an almost 4-inch gap, was to effectively
increase the risks to vehicle traffic.  The cost of that increased risk to
others must fall on the defendant Railways.  It is a “cost of running the
system.”   The Court of
Appeal did not dispute the trial judge’s finding that there was an unreasonable
interference, but held that the Railways had a defence of statutory authority
because “the flangeways were an inseparable consequence of requiring the tracks
to be laid at street grade flush with street level and the roadway paved
between the rails” (p. 68).  The issue is whether the Court of Appeal erred in
that conclusion.  54                             
Statutory authority provides, at best, a narrow defence to
nuisance.  The traditional rule is that liability will not be imposed if an
activity is authorized by statute and the defendant proves that the nuisance is
the “inevitable result” or consequence of exercising that authority.  See
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City Manchester of v. Farnworth,
[1930] A.C. 171 (H.L.), at p. 183; City of Portage La Prairie v. B.C. Pea
Growers Ltd., [1966] S.C.R. 150; Schenck v. Ontario (Minister of
Transportation and Communications), [1987] 2 S.C.R. 289.  An unsuccessful
attempt was made in Tock, supra, to depart from the traditional
rule.  Wilson J. writing for herself and two
others, sought to limit the defence to cases involving either mandatory duties
or statutes which specify the precise manner of performance.  La Forest J.
(Dickson C.J. concurring) took the more extreme view that the defence should be
abolished entirely unless there is an express statutory exemption from
liability.  Neither of those positions carried a majority.  55                             
In the absence of a new rule, it would be appropriate to restate
the traditional view, which remains the most
predictable approach to the issue and the simplest to apply.  That approach was
expressed by Sopinka J. in Tock, at p. 1226:  The defendant must negative that there are alternate methods of
carrying out the work.  The mere fact that one is considerably less expensive
will not avail.  If only one method is practically feasible, it must be
established that it was practically impossible to avoid the nuisance.  It is
insufficient for the defendant to negative negligence.  The standard is a
higher one.  While the defence gives rise to some factual difficulties, in view
of the allocation of the burden of proof they will be resolved against the
defendant.   56                              
Turning to the facts of this case, the question raised by the
traditional test is whether the hazard created on Store Street was an
“inevitable result” of exercising statutory authority; that is, whether it was
“practically impossible” for the Railways to avoid the nuisance which arose
from the flangeways.  As noted previously in the context of negligence, the
regulations relied upon by the Railways prescribed a minimum width of 2.5
inches for flangeways.  The Railways’ decision to exceed that minimum by more
than one inch was a matter of discretion and was not an “inevitable result” or
“inseparable consequence” of complying with the regulations.  The same may be
said of the Railways’ decision not to install flange fillers when such products
became available after 1982.  The flangeways created a considerably greater
risk than was absolutely necessary.  Accordingly, the Court of Appeal erred in
permitting the Railways to assert the defence of statutory authority against
the claim for nuisance.  C.                Did the Court of Appeal Err in
Reversing the Trial Judge’s Findings with Respect to Contributory Negligence?   57                              
In Stein v. “Kathy K” (The Ship), [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802, at p. 808,
it was held that while findings of fact with regard to the allocation of fault
are not immutable, they should not be reversed by an appellate court “unless it
can be established that the learned trial judge made some palpable and
overriding error which affected his assessment of the facts”.  The record
reveals no such errors by the trial judge, and the Court of Appeal ought not to
have interfered with his findings on the issue of contributory negligence. 
Accordingly, the assessment of liability against the appellant for 50% of his
damages is set aside.  VI.   Conclusions
and Disposition  58                              
The Railways were negligent with respect to the width of the flangeways
on Store Street.  The McKay/Barclay “special rule” is abolished, and the
Railways are therefore subject to ordinary principles of negligence.  They owed
a duty of care to the appellant with respect to the flangeways on Store Street,
and that duty required them to exercise reasonable care in the circumstances. 
Their compliance with regulatory standards did not replace or exhaust that
obligation.  Because the Store Street tracks are not a typical
“highway crossing”, the Railways were required to take precautions beyond mere
compliance with the safety standards which govern such crossings.  In
particular, they should have taken steps to minimize the risk to two-wheeled
vehicles by building the flangeways at the minimum allowable width or by
installing flange fillers.  The trial judge’s finding of negligence was
a proper exercise of his discretion as the finder of fact and should not have
been reversed by the Court of Appeal.   59                              
The Store Street tracks created an unreasonable interference with
the public’s use and enjoyment of Store Street and therefore constituted a
public nuisance.  The Court of Appeal erred in finding that
the Railways were entitled to the defence of statutory authority.  The
appropriate test is the traditional rule restated by Sopinka J. in Tock,
supra.  It was not “practically impossible” for the
Railways to avoid the nuisance which arose from the flangeways on Store
Street.  Because the Railways had discretion with
regard to the width of the flangeways, their failure to minimize the hazard was
not an “inevitable consequence” of exercising regulatory authority.  60                              
The Court of Appeal erred in reversing the findings of the trial judge
with regard to contributory negligence.  Those findings were not shown to
constitute palpable and overriding error.  61                              
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed with costs throughout.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Gordon & Velletta,
Victoria.  Solicitors for the respondent The Corporation of the City of
Victoria:  Sugden, McFee & Roos, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the respondents The Esquimalt and Nanaimo Railway
Company and Canadian Pacific Limited/Canadien Pacifique Limitée:  Lawson,
Lundell, Lawson & McIntosh, Vancouver.     