Royal Bank of Canada v. W. Got Associates Electric Ltd.,
[1999] 3 S.C.R. 408  Royal Bank of Canada                                                                      Appellant  v.  W. Got & Associates Electric Ltd. and Donald E. Sanderlin                                                                    Respondents  Indexed as:  Royal Bank of Canada v. W. Got &
Associates Electric Ltd.  File No.:  26081.  1998:  December 2; 1999:  October 15.   on appeal from the court of appeal for alberta  Receivership -- Wrongful appointment of receiver --
Bank obtaining order for appointment of receiver -- Misleading material placed
before Master -- Receiver seizing and liquidating debtor’s assets -- Whether
bank liable.  Contracts -- Notice  -- Contract with no provision
as to notice  -- Demand for repayment of loan made with no or minimal notice --
Whether creditor liable for breach of contract. Damages  -- Exemplary damages -- Master misled in
application for order of receivership -- Misconduct not on level of fraud,
malicious prosecution or abuse of process -- Whether exemplary damages
warranted.  The bank granted Got a revolving line of credit
margined to its accounts receivable and as security obtained a floating charge
debenture, a general assignment of book debts and a personal guarantee of its
president.  Got exceeded the line of credit, and negotiations ensued.  The
security promised by Got was not produced and the other measures Got agreed to
were not acted upon.  The bank finally cut off contact with the respondents,
and intentionally avoided telling them that it would be calling in the
debenture and would be seeking to appoint a receiver.  A notification of
accounts receivable and a letter of demand were served.  The following day, the
bank brought a motion to appoint a receiver.  The lawyer for the respondents
attended without instructions from his clients.  A receiver was appointed, 
took control of the company and subsequently was granted further powers by the
court.  The court later approved the sale of Got’s assets.  The bank sued for its debt.  The respondents defended
the claim and Got filed a counterclaim alleging breach of contract and
conversion, based on the bank’s lack of notice in calling its loan and
appointing a receiver.  Prior to the trial, Got also brought a motion to set
aside the receivership order, but this was later withdrawn, and Got ultimately
co-operated with the receiver pursuant to an agreement that it be permitted to
counterclaim against the bank for damages.  The bank succeeded in its claim for
debt at trial and this decision was upheld on appeal.  The trial judge, on
Got’s counterclaim for damages, found the bank liable in both contract and
tort.  The Court of Appeal unanimously held that the bank was liable for breach
of contract and a majority found it liable in tort as well.  At issue here is
whether a creditor who, without reasonable notice, files a misleading affidavit
in a motion to procure a court-appointed receiver should be liable for damages.  Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.  The bank was liable to Got for breach of contract. 
The debtor must be given reasonable notice of intention to enforce the security
and reasonable time to pay following this notice of intention.  The length of
time required may vary depending on the facts of the case.  Here, the bank
clearly intended to make the demand for payment at the same time as a motion to
appoint a receiver.  There was neither a reason offered to explain why the bank
gave such little notice nor any indication of a cause for urgency or inability
to pay the debt.  While an action for conversion may lie, it was unnecessary to
consider it because damages in this case were the same for contract and tort.  The award of exemplary damages in commercial disputes
is an extraordinary remedy.  Here, it was within the trial judge’s discretion
to award such damages as the bank’s conduct seriously affronted the
administration of justice.  In upholding the award notwithstanding its
reservations, the Court viewed the trial judge’s concerns cumulatively, gave
due weight to his advantage in assessing the need for deterrence and
condemnation of the abuse of the court’s process and recognized the need to
maintain proper business practices.  The suggestion that banks be held to a
higher standard of scrutiny was not endorsed.  Cases Cited  Applied:  Lister
(R.E.) Ltd. v. Dunlop Canada Ltd., [1982] 1 S.C.R. 726; Mister Broadloom
Corporation (1968) Ltd. v. Bank of Montreal (1979), 25 O.R. (2d) 198, rev’d
on other grounds (1983), 44 O.R. (2d) 368, leave to appeal refused, [1984] 1
S.C.R. v; BG Checo International Ltd. v. British Columbia Hydro and Power
Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12; referred to:  Massey v. Sladen
(1868), L.R. 4 Ex. 13; Pax Management Ltd. v. Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 998; Jeannette B.B.Q. Ltée v. Caisse Populaire
de Tracadie Ltée (1991), 117 N.B.R. (2d) 129, leave to appeal refused,
[1992] 1 S.C.R. viii; Kavcar Investments Ltd. v. Aetna Financial Services
Ltd. (1989), 70 O.R. (2d) 225; Royal Bank of Canada v. Nobes (1982),
49 N.S.R. (2d) 634; Vorvis v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 1085.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Alberta Court of Appeal
(1997), 196 A.R. 241, 141 W.A.C. 241, [1997] 6 W.W.R. 715, [1997] A.J. No. 373
(QL), dismissing an appeal from a judgment of McDonald J. (1994), 150 A.R. 93,
17 Alta. L.R. (3d) 23, [1994] 5 W.W.R. 337, [1994] A.J. No. 94 (QL), granting
in an action to recover debt a counterclaim for damages for conversion with
supplementary reasons (1994), 154 A.R. 277, 18 Alta. L.R. (3d) 140.  Appeal
dismissed.  Frank R. Foran, Q.C.,
and M. G. Massicotte, for the appellant.  F. David Cook and John
A. Weir, Q.C., for the respondents.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
McLachlin and Bastarache JJ.
--  This appeal raises the question of whether a creditor who, without
reasonable notice, files a misleading affidavit in a motion to procure a public
receiver should be liable for damages.  The Alberta Court of Appeal unanimously
held that the creditor was liable for breach of contract.  We agree, and would
dismiss the appeal.   I.  Factual
Background  2                                  
In 1980, the Royal Bank of Canada (“the bank”) granted the corporate
respondent (“Got”) a revolving line of credit margined to its accounts
receivable.  As security, the bank obtained a floating charge debenture payable
on demand, a general assignment of book debts and a personal guarantee limited to
a principal amount of $1,350,000 plus interest from the respondent Mr.
Sanderlin, the president of Got.  3                                  
In November 1983, the bank reduced the line of credit to $1,150,000.  In
early 1984, an employee of Got represented that, pursuant to the bank’s request
to reduce inventory, Got had hired a new employee to be responsible for
reducing inventory.  In fact, no new employee was hired and nothing appears to
have been done to meet the bank’s request.  Got also made certain
representations to the bank in respect of the security.  In mid-March 1984, the
operating line exceeded Got’s limit by $130,000 and Got was asked to bring the
loan within margin.  Despite representations that the bank could expect
payments from Mr. Sanderlin and related companies, such deposits were never
made.  Over the next few months, the respondents repeatedly promised additional
security to the bank, but never delivered.  4                                  
In April 1984, Mr. Sanderlin was warned not to issue any large cheques
until the loan was brought within its limits.  The trial judge found ((1994),
150 A.R. 93, at p. 134) that he “forgot” this warning and issued cheques
totalling $140,000, that the bank returned NSF.  Again Mr. Sanderlin promised
to provide further security, and the bank certified part of the expenditure. 
After further negotiations, the bank agreed to provide excess loan facilities
to cover Got’s expenses in exchange for further security to be provided by five
specific assignments.  5                                  
On May 25, 1984, Got’s solicitor, Mr. Covey, met with the bank’s
employee, Mr. Hood, and assured him that the security would be completed
forthwith.  The trial judge found that the bank undertook to provide a comfort
letter in which the bank would state that it would carry on business with Got
without enforcing security, so long as the business was progressing.  Mr. Hood
gave Mr. Sanderlin an ultimatum asking that all securities be provided by May
29, failing which the bank would “notify receivables on our own” (p. 104).  On
May 29, Mr. Sanderlin still had not brought in the additional security and
advised that if the bank did not honour payroll cheques, it “would have an
electrical business”.  It was the view of the bank’s officers that Mr.
Sanderlin did not intend to co-operate and was engaging in “constant stall
tactics”.  6                                  
On May 30, 1984, the bank told Mr. Sanderlin that if the security was
not in by 3 p.m., it would have to return the payroll cheques.  Later that day,
Mr. Covey informed the bank that, as he had to attend court that day, the
security instrument could not be signed until May 31 or June 1.  Mr. Sanderlin
promised that Can-Am Electric Ltd., a related company, would deposit funds into
Got’s account to cover the payroll cheques.  No such payment was made.  The
bank returned the payroll cheques and notified creditors that payments should
be made directly to the bank.  The trial judge found that up to this point the
bank’s conduct was not open to criticism.  7                                  
After 3 p.m. on May 30, 1984, the bank cut off contact with Got and
Mr. Sanderlin, and intentionally avoided telling them that it would be
calling in the debenture and would be seeking to appoint a receiver.  On the
morning of May 31, 1984, a notification of accounts receivable and a letter of
demand were served to Mr. Covey’s office, the head office of Got pursuant
to the debenture, and to Got’s place of business.  8                                  
During the afternoon of May 31, Mr. Covey accidentally encountered Mr.
Bailey, solicitor for the bank, who informed him that he was on his way to the
Law Courts to obtain an order to appoint a receiver.  He was unsuccessful in
seeing a judge that afternoon, but appeared before Master Funduk on the morning
of June 1, 1984.  The Master required Mr. Bailey to notify Mr. Covey, and the
matter was heard in the afternoon of the same day.  While Mr. Covey was in
attendance, the trial judge found that he had no notice of the bank’s actions
nor instructions from Got or Mr. Sanderlin and hence was unable to properly
represent them at the hearing.  The Master refused an adjournment on the basis
that the order was a mere preservation order and that nothing would be done to
realize any assets until June 21.  9                                  
The receiver took control of the company on June 1, 1984.  On June 6,
1984, Bowen J. issued a consent order permitting the receiver to borrow money
and directing Mr. Sanderlin to produce records relating to the construction
projects.  The trial judge found that by June 18, 1984, the receiver had taken
steps, including terminating contracts and firing employees, that were beyond
the scope of the powers granted in the June 1 order of Master Funduk.  On
August 15, 1984, the court granted the receiver further powers.  On September
26, 1984, and again on December 3, 1984, the court approved of the sale of
Got’s assets.   II.  The
Legal Proceedings  10                              
The bank sued for its debt.  Got and Mr. Sanderlin defended the claim
and Got filed a counterclaim alleging breach of contract and conversion, based
on the bank’s lack of notice in calling its loan and appointing a receiver.  It
also sued the receiver for negligently mismanaging and liquidating the
business, a matter not on appeal.  Prior to the trial, Got also brought a
motion to set aside the receivership order, but this was later withdrawn, and
Got ultimately co-operated with the receiver.  Got’s abandonment of its
proceedings to set aside the receiver was predicated on an agreement that Got
be permitted to counterclaim against the bank for damages.  The effect of this
agreement was disputed in the subsequent proceedings.  The bank brought a
motion to strike the paragraphs of Got’s defence and counterclaim impugning the
receivership order, on the ground that to call the validity of the receivership
order into question would constitute an impermissible collateral attack on the
order, which was res judicata.  The motions judge, upheld on appeal,
rejected the bank’s request.  The bank’s debt claim and Got’s counterclaim for
damages proceeded to trial.  11                              
The trial judge, McDonald J., granted both the claim and the
counterclaim.  He found that the bank had failed to give Got the required
notice of its intention to put Got into receivership and had failed to allow
Got reasonable time for repayment.  He also dismissed the bank’s argument that
it was contractually excused from giving Got reasonable notice.  12                              
In addition, McDonald J. found that the bank’s wrongful conduct in
securing the receivership order was not limited to insufficient notice; he
concluded that the bank had misled Master Funduk in obtaining the receivership
order by tendering a misleading affidavit.  The trial judge found that the
affidavit of the bank’s officer, Mr. McTavish, submitted in support of the
receivership motion, failed to meet the duty of candour and utmost good faith
required for ex parte orders.  The two most serious errors in the
affidavit were the suggestion that the bank had reason to believe that Got
would move the inventory and the failure to disclose that the bank had already
secured its financial position by notifying the debtor’s accounts receivable
and perfecting the assignment of book debts.  McDonald J. concluded that,
absent the false air of urgency created in the affidavit, the receivership
order would not have been granted.  13                              
The trial judge also rejected the bank’s renewed insistence that Got’s
action was procedurally barred by the collateral attack rule.  He similarly
dismissed the bank’s alternative procedural argument that the court’s
appointment of a public receiver shielded it from liability, holding that the
bank’s misleading conduct in securing the public receiver placed it in the same
position as if it had simply appointed the receiver privately.  14                              
Accordingly, McDonald J. found the bank liable in tort for conversion of
Got’s assets and awarded compensatory damages, as well as exemplary damages in
the sum of $100,000 to send a clear message of the impropriety of the bank’s
grave and irrevocable conduct and misuse of the judicial system by rushing to foreclose
on Got and misleading the judge in obtaining the receiver.  He also found that
the bank forfeited its right to rely on Mr. Sanderlin’s personal guarantee
of Got’s loan.  15                              
The majority of the Court of Appeal ((1997), 196 A.R. 241) upheld the
judgment of McDonald J. and affirmed the bank’s liability in conversion. 
Hetherington J.A., dissenting in part, would have held that the bank was not
liable in conversion.  The majority agreed with her that the bank was liable
for breach of contract for failing to give notice as required by the
debenture.  Hetherington J.A. would have remanded the case for recalculation of
damages on a contractual basis and consequent re-examination of mitigation.  III.  Analysis  1.  Is the
Bank Liable for Breach of Contract?  16                              
The Court of Appeal unanimously agreed that the bank breached its
implied contractual obligations to Got by (1) not giving reasonable time to
respond to its demand for payment and (2) not giving notice of its intention to
apply for an order appointing a receiver and manager.  17                              
The bank counters that the receivership order was a preservation order
that did not require a demand or reasonable notice and that the granting of the
order precludes claims for breach of contract.  We would reject these
arguments.  Even though Master Funduk appears to have intended to give Got 21
days for repayment, paragraph 18(c) of the receivership order authorized the
receiver to “take steps for the preservation or realization of the
undertaking, property and assets of Got” (emphasis added), and paragraph 20
allowed the receiver to apply to the court to approve a distribution of the net
proceeds of sale.  Thus, we would accept the view of the courts below that this
was an order for both preservation and realization.  18                              
According to this Court’s decision in Lister (R.E.) Ltd. v. Dunlop
Canada Ltd., [1982] 1 S.C.R. 726, the bank was required to give the debtor
reasonable notice of its intention to enforce the security and reasonable time
to pay following this notice of intention.  The debtor must be given “some
notice on which he might reasonably expect to be able to act”:  Massey v.
Sladen (1868), L.R. 4 Ex. 13, at p. 19.  In determining the length of time
amounting to reasonable notice, courts generally employ the following criteria,
established in Mister Broadloom Corporation (1968) Ltd. v. Bank of Montreal
(1979), 25 O.R. (2d) 198 (H.C.), at p. 208, reversed on other grounds (1983),
44 O.R. (2d) 368, leave to appeal refused, [1984] 1 S.C.R. v:  (1)   the amount of the loan; (2)   the risk to the creditor of losing his money
or the security;  (3)   the length of the relationship between the
debtor and the creditor;  (4)   the character and reputation of the debtor;  (5)   the potential ability to raise the money
required in a short period;  (6)   the circumstances surrounding the demand for
payment; and  (7)   any other relevant factors.  19                              
It is clear from the trial judge’s assessment of the chronology of
events that the bank’s intention was to make the demand for payment at the same
time as a motion to appoint a receiver.  According to the trial judge, at p.
109, the bank and its solicitors proceeded “with no intention at all of seeing
that a genuine demand be given, or that any time (much less, reasonable time)
be given to respond, or that any notice be given of the application to the
court for the appointment of a receiver”.  20                              
The length of time required may vary widely depending on the facts of
the case.  In some cases, giving very little or almost no notice is reasonable
in the circumstances.  For example, if there is an appreciable risk that the
debtor will abscond with negotiable assets, if the debtor’s assets are
depreciating quickly or if a debtor is unable to meet its obligations
regardless of the amount of notice, it may be reasonable to proceed on little
notice:  Pax Management Ltd. v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce,
[1992] 2 S.C.R. 998; Jeannette B.B.Q. Ltée v. Caisse Populaire de Tracadie
Ltée (1991), 117 N.B.R. (2d) 129 (C.A.), leave to appeal refused, [1992] 1
S.C.R. viii; Kavcar Investments Ltd. v. Aetna Financial Services Ltd.
(1989), 70 O.R. (2d) 225 (C.A.); Royal Bank of Canada v. Nobes (1982),
49 N.S.R. (2d) 634 (C.A.).  21                              
In this case, no reason has been offered to explain why the bank gave so
little notice.  There is no indication that there was a cause for urgency or
that Got would be absolutely unable to pay the debt.  Thus, there is no reason
to question the finding of the trial judge, affirmed on appeal, that the amount
of notice provided by the bank was unreasonable.  The bank is, therefore,
liable to Got for breach of contract.  2.  Is the Bank
Liable for Conversion?  22                              
In BG Checo International Ltd. v. British Columbia Hydro and Power
Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12, this Court accepted the proposition that
where a given wrong supports an action both in contract and in tort, a party
may sue in either or both.  The only limit to concurrency was based on the
principle of the primacy of private ordering and allowed for a restriction on
the right to sue in tort where an express or implied contractual obligation
limits or contradicts the tort duty.  Thus, it is theoretically possible for
the bank to be liable both in contract and in tort.  However, since damages in
this case are the same for contract and tort, as discussed later in these
reasons, it is unnecessary to consider the matter of conversion.  3.  Damages
for Breach of Contract  23                              
The trial judge and the majority of the Court of Appeal dealt with
damages on the basis of conversion.  Hetherington J.A., in the minority of the
Court of Appeal, based her decision on contract and would have remitted the
matter to the trial judge for reassessment of damages on the basis of breach of
contract.  24                              
While finding liability for breach of contract, we conclude that the
damages awarded on the basis of conversion represent an appropriate assessment
of damages for the breach of contract in this case, and we therefore find it
unnecessary to refer the matter back for assessment of damages for breach of
contract.  (a)  Compensatory Damages  25                              
Where a claim is made for the same wrongful acts under different heads
of liability, compensatory damages will generally be similar, subject to
adjustment for the particular wrong targeted by a particular cause of action. 
This position was clearly stated in BG Checo, supra, where a
majority of this Court held, at p. 38, that:  In situations of concurrent liability in tort and contract, however, it
would seem anomalous to award a different level of damages for what is
essentially the same wrong on the sole basis of the form of action chosen,
though, of course, particular circumstances or policy may dictate such a
course.  In this case,
there are no special features which call for different damages for contract and
tort.  The conversion action is concerned with damages for the appropriation of
goods; the breach of contract action is concerned with damages for the same
wrong.  Therefore, compensatory damages in this case are the same.  The trial
judge did not err in assessing damages for conversion.  It follows that in
considering this matter on the basis of contract, there is no reason to
interfere with the trial judge’s determination or to send the matter back for
reassessment.  (b)  Exemplary Damages  26                              
The trial judge and the Court of Appeal awarded exemplary damages for
the egregious conduct of the bank and we would not disturb this finding. 
Punitive damages are available for breach of contract, although, as McIntyre J.
held in Vorvis v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R.
1085, at p. 1107, the circumstances that would justify punitive damages for breach
of contract in the absence of actions also constituting a tort are rare:  . . . while it may be very unusual to do so, punitive damages
may be awarded in cases of breach of contract.  It would seem to me, however,
that it will be rare to find a contractual breach which would be appropriate
for such an award . . . .  Where the defendant has breached the
contract, the remedies open to the plaintiff must arise from that contractual
relationship, that “private law”, which the parties agreed to accept.  The
injured plaintiff then is not entitled to be made whole; he is entitled to have
that which the contract provided for him or compensation for its loss.  This
distinction will not completely eliminate the award of punitive damages but it
will make it very rare in contract cases.  27                              
The trial judge explained that his substantial award of exemplary
damages was intended to address the following five concerns:  1.    that the court will not condone a clear
violation of the rule of law that requires a debenture-holder to give
reasonable notice;  2.    that the court will not condone an abuse of
its process for commercial advantage;  3.    that because no crime had been committed, no
other form of punishment was available;  4.    that the bank’s conduct caused grave and
irrevocable consequences to the business of its client;  5.    that courts are entitled to expect honest
behaviour from the major chartered banks.  28                              
It is argued  that these five concerns do not rise to the level required
to trigger an award for exemplary damages.  We agree that the first concern of
the trial judge, deterrence, may not, taken alone, justify exemplary damages. 
As a rule, deterrence can be achieved through the award of compensatory damages
and refusal to grant exemplary damages is not condonation of the violation of
the rule of law.  We also question the third concern, the absence of other
forms of punishment.  With regard to the trial judge’s fifth concern, we would
not endorse the suggestion that the bank could be subjected to a higher
standard of scrutiny than the average commercial litigant because of its
privileged condition in Canadian society.  Nevertheless, this is a case where
the conduct of the bank “seriously affronts the administration of justice”, as
stated by the trial judge.  We agree that the bank’s conduct did not have to
rise to the level of fraud, malicious prosecution, or abuse of process to
justify an award of exemplary damages.  29                              
Therefore, despite our reservations, we agree that it was within the
discretion of the trial judge to award exemplary damages.  Viewing the trial
judge’s concerns cumulatively, and giving due weight to the advantage he had to
assess the need for deterrence and condemnation of the abuse of the court’s
process, as well as the need to maintain proper business practices, we are not
prepared to interfere with the award for exemplary damages in this case.  We
emphasize, however, that an award for exemplary damages in commercial disputes
will remain an extraordinary remedy.  IV.  Conclusion  30                              
We would, therefore, dismiss the appeal with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Howard, Mackie, Calgary. Solicitors for the respondents:  Weir, Bowen, Edmonton.   * Cory J. took no part in the judgment.  