Martel Building Ltd. v. Canada, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 860  Her Majesty The Queen                                                                   Appellant  v.  The Martel Building Ltd.                                                                  Respondent  Indexed as:  Martel Building Ltd. v. Canada  Neutral citation:  2000 SCC 60.  File No.:  26893.  2000:  February 17;  2000:  November 30.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Iacobucci, Major,
Bastarache, Binnie and Arbour JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal  Torts — Negligence — Economic loss — Whether
Canadian law recognizes duty of care on parties in commercial negotiations —
Whether tort of negligence extends to damages for pure economic loss arising
out of conduct of pre-contractual negotiations.  Torts — Negligence — Economic loss — Whether
tender-calling authority  owed duty of care to bidders in drafting tender
specifications — Whether sphere of recovery for pure economic loss should be
extended to cover circumstances surrounding preparation of tender
specifications.  Contracts — Tenders
— Obligation to treat all bidders fairly — Whether  tender-calling authority
breached its implied contractual duty to treat all bidders fairly and equally —
If so, whether bidder’s loss caused by contractual breach.  The respondent leased most of a building to the
appellant.  Prior to the end of the lease, the respondent’s CEO met a
subordinate of the appellant’s Chief of Leasing to discuss renewing the lease. 
The appellant instructed its Chief of Leasing to obtain a proposed rental rate
even though it intended to commence a tender process but  no action was taken. 
The Chief of Leasing did not contact the respondent when directed to report on
the status of negotiations and, at monthly meetings, led the appellant to
believe that a proposed lease rate was forthcoming but nobody informed the
respondent of this expectation.  The respondent’s CEO twice contacted the
appellant,  resulting in a meeting which the CEO believed was to commence
negotiations but in which the appellant maintains that it told the CEO that it
would proceed to tender unless it received a very attractive offer. The CEO
presented proposed rental rates that fell outside a range suggested by an
appraisal commissioned by the appellant. The appellant set a date to complete
negotiations and, when that date passed, began steps to approve a tender by
preparing a report. The report first recommended a lease renewal but no final
decision was made before a revised report recommended proceeding to tender due
to declining market rental rates.  Approval for a tender was obtained.  The CEO
heard rumours that a tender was to begin and telephoned the Chief of Leasing. 
The parties met the same day an expression of interest was advertised to
solicit interest in the tender.  The CEO said he left the meeting with an
understanding that the appellant would recommend a lease renewal if he offered
a rate of $220 per square metre.  Two days after the meeting, he advised the
Chief of Leasing that he could offer that rate; however, the appellant decided
that remaining terms would have to be settled that day. The respondent could
not respond that quickly.  Its offer was rejected and tender documents were
issued.  Under the terms of the call for tenders the appellant was not
obligated to accept the lowest bid. The respondent submitted the lowest of four
bids. The appellant conducted a financial analysis of the bids to consider the
total costs that would be incurred as a result of accepting any one tender and
added to the respondent’s bid approximately $1,000,000 for fit-up costs and
$60,000 to cover the installation of a secured card access system.  The tender
was awarded to a competitor.  The Federal Court, Trial Division found that the
appellant owed and breached a duty of care in its conduct of the negotiations
but that the respondent had failed to prove that the appellant’s negligence
caused the respondent to lose the lease renewal. The Federal Court of Appeal
acceded to the respondent’s tort claim. The court held that a duty of care had
been breached not only in the context of the negotiations, depriving the
respondent of the opportunity to negotiate a renewal of the lease, but also in
the context of the tender, depriving the respondent of both the opportunity to
participate fairly in the tender process and of a reasonable expectation of
being awarded the contract. The court concluded that a causal link clearly
existed between the respondent’s loss and the appellant’s negligence.  Held:  The appeal
should be allowed.  Although the common law traditionally did not allow
recovery of economic loss where a plaintiff had suffered neither physical harm
nor property damage, the law now recognizes five categories of compensable
economic loss. The respondent’s allegation of negligence in the conduct of commercial
negotiations does not fall within these categories. That by itself, however,
does not preclude the claim since the categories of economic loss are not
closed.  To enlarge the categories or identify a new head of economic loss it
is useful to set out a framework that emphasizes policy considerations in any
case.  In determining whether to extend a duty of care in an area not
previously categorized, the flexible two-stage analysis set out in Anns
should be applied.  Here,  the relationship between the parties gave rise to a prima
facie duty of care. Proximity is indicated by the pre-existing lease
arrangement, the parties’ communications, and evidence of genuine and mutual
contracting intent.  Even in the absence of any serious potential for
indeterminate liability, however, there are a number of ancillary policy
considerations that necessitate precluding the extension of the tort of
negligence into commercial negotiations.  First, the goal of commercial
negotiations is often to realize a financial gain at the expense of the other
party.  Second, socially and economically useful conduct could be deterred by
depriving a party of any advantageous bargaining position.  It would defeat the
essence of negotiation and hobble the marketplace to label a party’s failure to
disclose its bottom line, its motives or its final position as negligent. 
Third, tort law could become after-the-fact insurance against failures to act
with due diligence or to hedge risk of failed negotiations through the pursuit
of alternative strategies or opportunities.  Fourth, the courts would assume a
significant regulatory function — scrutinizing the minutia of pre-contractual
conduct — when other causes of action provide alternative remedies.   Fifth,
needless litigation should be discouraged.  In the circumstances of this case,
any prima facie duty of care is outweighed by the deleterious effects
that would be occasioned through an extension of a duty of care into the
conduct of negotiations.  With respect to the tendering process, the preparation
of tender documents and the subsequent evaluation of bids involve different
considerations, and each event must, to a certain extent, be analysed
separately.  A call to tender is an offer to contract whereas a binding
contract may arise once a responsive bid is submitted for evaluation.  Express
obligations based on terms in tender documents and implied obligations based on
custom, usage or the presumed intention of the parties may arise once a bid is
submitted.  The parties in this case intended to initiate contractual relations
by the call for and submission of the tender and to include an implied term to
treat all bids fairly and equally.  A privilege clause reserving the right not
to accept the lowest or any bids does not exclude the obligation to treat all
bidders fairly. The tender documents must be examined to determine the extent
of this obligation. Here, these documents conferred upon the appellant
significant latitude in evaluating the tenders.  No contractual breach can be found
in relation to the addition of fit-up costs to the respondent’s bid since the
appellant was expressly entitled to add fit-up costs which it deemed
necessary.  Furthermore, fit-up costs were added to all bids, using the same
standard or method of calculation.  In this regard, the appellant complied with
its implied contractual obligation to treat all bidders fairly and equally. 
There is no evidence of any colourable attempt to use fit-ups to achieve a
desired result. The appellant could also add costs to the respondent’s bid for
a contiguous space specification because this was an express requirement in the
tender document to which all bidders had to comply.  The appellant did breach
its duty to treat all bids fairly by adding the cost of a secured card system
solely to the respondent’s bid.  Damages for this breach, however, are
precluded for want of causation because this did not cause the respondent to
lose a reasonable expectation of winning the tender.  Even without this cost
addition, the respondent’s bid was significantly greater than the winning bid.  A tendering relationship is defined by contract and in
this case the contract analysis subsumes any duty of care the respondent seeks
to have recognized under tort law.  While an action in tort may lie
notwithstanding the existence of a contract, in assessing whether a tortious
duty should be recognized where a contract defines the rights and obligations
of the parties, courts will look to the contract as informing any duty in tort
law. Here, the tort claim by the respondent cannot succeed for the same reasons
that the contractual claim failed.   Nor did the appellant breach a duty of
care in drafting the tender specifications by including a contiguous space
requirement.  The trial judge’s findings do not support the respondent’s claim
that this requirement had been mistakenly added to the specifications. The
respondent also conceded that the requirement was one with which all other
bidders needed to comply.  Further, absent the contiguous space requirement,
the respondent’s bid would still have been more expensive than the successful
bid. Costs not attributable to this requirement made the respondent’s bid
uncompetitive.  In any event, the appellant did not owe the respondent a duty
of care in drafting the tender specifications. The respondent’s claim that the
tender specifications were prepared negligently alleges a duty in an area not
previously recognized and  the Anns two-step analysis indicates that the
sphere of recovery for pure economic loss should  not be extended to cover the
circumstances surrounding the preparation of the tender specifications in this
case.   Assuming without deciding that sufficient proximity existed between the
parties, any prima facie duty of care is negated by policy
considerations.  In particular, the integrity of the tender process would
become questionable if, by reason of a past relationship with, or special
knowledge of, a potential bidder, there could be an enforceable obligation to
take the interests of that particular bidder into account.  It is imperative
that all bidders be treated on an equal footing.  Cases Cited  Applied: Anns v.
Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; referred to:  D’Amato
v. Badger, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 1071; Rivtow Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron
Works, [1974] S.C.R. 1189; Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk
Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021;  Cattle v. Stockton
Waterworks Co. (1875), L.R. 10 Q.B. 453; Winnipeg Condominium
Corporation No. 36 v. Bird Construction Co., [1995] 1 S.C.R. 85; Kamloops
(City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Bow Valley Husky (Bermuda) Ltd.
v. Saint John Shipbuilding Ltd., [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1210; Hercules
Managements Ltd. v. Ernst & Young, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 165; B.D.C. Ltd.
v. Hofstrand Farms Ltd., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 228; Just v. British Columbia,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; The Queen in Right of Ontario v. Ron Engineering &
Construction (Eastern) Ltd., [1981] 1 S.C.R. 111; M.J.B. Enterprises
Ltd. v. Defence Construction (1951) Ltd., [1999] 1 S.C.R. 619; Canadian
Pacific Hotels Ltd. v. Bank of Montreal, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 711; Best
Cleaners and Contractors Ltd. v. The Queen, [1985] 2 F.C. 293; Chinook
Aggregates Ltd. v. Abbotsford (Municipal District) (1989), 35 C.L.R. 241; Martselos
Services Ltd. v. Arctic College (1994), 111 D.L.R. (4th) 65, leave to
appeal refused, [1994] 3 S.C.R. viii; Northeast Marine Services Ltd. v.
Atlantic Pilotage Authority, [1995] 2 F.C. 132; Tarmac Canada Inc. v.
Hamilton-Wentworth (Regional Municipality) (1999), 48 C.L.R. (2d) 236; Vachon
Construction Ltd. v. Cariboo (Regional District) (1996), 136 D.L.R. (4th)
307; Health Care Developers Inc. v. Newfoundland (1996), 136 D.L.R.
(4th) 609; Murphy v. Alberton (Town) (1993), 114 Nfld. & P.E.I.R.
34; Kencor Holdings Ltd. v. Saskatchewan, [1991] 6 W.W.R. 717; Colautti
Brothers Marble Tile & Carpet (1985) Inc. v. Windsor (City) (1996), 36
M.P.L.R. (2d) 258; Yorkton Flying Services Ltd. v. Saskatchewan (Minister of
Natural Resources), [1995] 9 W.W.R. 184; Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 147; Queen v. Cognos Inc., [1993] 1 S.C.R. 87; BC
Checo International Ltd. v. British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority,
[1993] 1 S.C.R. 12; Twin City Mechanical v. Bradsil (1967) Ltd. (1996),
31 C.L.R. (2d) 210, rev’d (1999), 43 C.L.R. (2d) 275; Ken Toby Ltd. v.
British Columbia Buildings Corp. (1997), 34 B.C.L.R. (3d) 263, rev’d
(1999), 62 B.C.L.R. (3d) 308.  Authors Cited  Cherniak, Earl A., and Elissa How.
“Policy and Predictability:  Pure Economic Loss in the Supreme Court of Canada”
(1999), 31 Can. Bus. L.J. 209.  Feldthusen, Bruce.  “Economic Loss
in the Supreme Court of Canada:  Yesterday and Tomorrow” (1990-91), 17 Can.
Bus. L.J. 356.  Feldthusen, Bruce.  Economic
Negligence:  The Recovery of Pure Economic Loss, 4th ed.  Toronto: 
Carswell, 2000.  Feldthusen, Bruce. “Liability for
Pure Economic Loss:  Yes, But Why?” (1999), 28 U. W. Austl. L. Rev. 84.  Linden, Allen M.  Canadian Tort
Law, 6th ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1997.  Wallace, I. N. Duncan. 
“Contractual Relational Loss in Canada” (1998), 114 L.Q.R. 370.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal,
[1998] 4 F.C. 300, 229 N.R. 187, 163 D.L.R. (4th) 504, [1998] F.C.J. No. 1031
(QL), setting aside a judgment of the Trial Division (1997), 129 F.T.R. 249,
[1997] F.C.J. No. 483 (QL), dismissing the plaintiff’s action. Appeal allowed.  David Sgayias, Q.C.,
and F. B. Woyiwada, for the appellant.  James H. Smellie and M.
Lynn Starchuk, for the respondent.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
Iacobucci and Major JJ. —
This appeal calls for an extension of the tort of negligence to include a duty
of care on parties during negotiations, during the preparation of calls for
tender and during the evaluation of bids submitted in response to such calls. 
In each instance the respondent sought damages for pure economic loss.  I.  Factual
Background 2                                  
The respondent, The Martel Building Limited (“Martel”), is the owner of
a building at 270 Albert Street in the City of Ottawa (“Martel Building”). The
National Capital Region Division of the Department of Public Works
(“Department”) leased most of the rentable space in the Martel Building under a
10-year lease with an expiration date of August 31, 1993.  The lease contained
an option for renewal.  3                                  
The Department was responsible for contracting for space on behalf of
government agencies such as the Atomic Energy Control Board (“AECB”), the
principal physical tenant in this case.  4                                  
The Department is divided into a number of branches with varying roles
in the administration of its Public Works function.  Here, two branches of the
Department were involved:  the Realty Services Branch and the Accommodation
Branch.  Two sections of the Accommodation Branch played a role.  The Asset
Management Section ascertained space requirements.  The Investment Management
Section (“Accommodation (IM)”) evaluated the options available to the Crown. 
The Realty Services Branch included a “Leasing” department that negotiated with
landlords for the acquisition of space on behalf of the Crown and informed the
Accommodation Branch of the conditions of the relevant rental market, in this
case Ottawa.  5                                  
For ease of reference, nothing will be lost in these reasons by
referring to all the government divisions as the Department.  6                                  
Prior to the expiration of the lease, Martel’s President and Chief
Executive Officer, Mr. McMurray, arranged to meet with Mr. Séguin, the Chief of
Leasing for the Department, to negotiate a renewal.  In March of 1991, Mr.
McMurray met with Mr. Bray, a subordinate of Mr. Séguin.  He informed him of
Martel’s desire to negotiate a renewal of the lease and provided him with a
copy of Martel’s proposed “retrofit” of the Martel Building, which it hoped to
complete in conjunction with a renewal of the lease to complement recent
“fit-ups” completed by the tenant AECB.  A “retrofit” is a renovation of the
common areas of a building generally undertaken by the landlord.  In contrast,
a “fit-up” represents leasehold improvements undertaken by a tenant with
respect to the space it usually occupies exclusively.  7                                  
In May 1991, Mr. McMurray wrote to Mr. Séguin, reiterating the contents
of the prior meeting with Mr. Bray.  In June, Mr. Séguin reported to Mr.
Ratcliffe, the Acting Director of Accommodation (IM), that Martel was
interested in renegotiating its lease and inquired whether the Department would
be interested in a renewal.  Mr. Ratcliffe told him the Department intended to
proceed with calling for tenders but at the same time requested Mr. Séguin to
obtain a proposed rental rate from Martel.  8                                  
Mr. Séguin delegated to Mr. Bray the responsibility of contacting Mr.
McMurray.  No action was taken.  Nor did Mr. Séguin contact Mr. McMurray
despite being directed by Department officials in October of 1991 to report on
the status of negotiations with Martel.  9                                  
In February of 1992,  Mr. Séguin was to obtain a proposal from Martel
based upon a defined lease term.  Moreover, at the monthly meetings of the
Department held between October of 1991 and April of 1992, Mr. Séguin led the
Department to believe that a proposed rental rate was forthcoming from Martel. 
Neither Mr. Séguin nor anyone else from the Department informed Mr. McMurray of
this expectation.  In fact, the only step taken by Mr. Séguin during this
period was to arrange that an appraisal report be prepared on the Martel
Building by a private contractor.  10                              
Mr. McMurray made two attempts to contact the Department between May of
1991 and April of 1992 for the purpose of arranging a meeting to discuss a
renewal.  The first attempt on December 17, 1991, was fruitless, but a second
attempt in the spring of 1992 resulted in a meeting being scheduled for April
15, 1992.  11                              
Different accounts were given at the trial on what happened at the April
15 meeting.  The Department maintained that it informed Mr. McMurray that a
decision had been made to proceed with the tender process unless Martel made a
particularly attractive offer to the Department.  Mr. McMurray’s version, which
the trial judge accepted, was that while he always understood tendering to be a
possibility, he was told the meeting was the commencement of negotiations for a
renewal of the lease.  Consistent with his version of the meeting, Mr. McMurray
presented the Department officials present, Messrs. Séguin and Mahar, with
proposed rental rates.  Mr. Séguin then informed Mr. McMurray that a private
appraisal had been commissioned and that he would inform Martel when it had
been completed.  12                              
As considerable lead time would be required to relocate the tenant AECB
prior to the August 1993 expiry of the Martel lease, the Department set June
30, 1992 as the “drop-dead date” by which time negotiations with Martel would
have to be completed, or the tendering process would start.  The drop-dead date
was extended later to October 2, 1992.  13                              
Between June and September of 1992, Mr. McMurray met with Mr. Mahar on
several occasions to present proposed rental rates.  These proposals did not
fall within the market range suggested by the appraisal commissioned by the
Department,  which it was agreed did not include the costs of the proposed
retrofit.  The parties did not have contact again until October 14, 1992, when
Mr. McMurray, having heard that the tendering for space was to begin,
telephoned Mr. Séguin.  14                              
It turned out that after the initial June 30, 1992 drop-dead date had
passed, the Department began the initial steps required to proceed to tender
for the AECB space.  The Department required two approvals to tender and
eventually to lease the space.  The first, preliminary project approval
(“PPA”), had to be obtained before the tender process began.  The second,
effective project approval (“EPA”), was sought after tenders had been received
and evaluated.  The authority to grant these approvals varies with the amount
of space to be acquired and the value of the lease.  In the AECB’s case, the
authority to grant PPA rested with the Assistant Deputy Minister -
Accommodation (“ADM”) and the authority to grant EPA rested with the Treasury
Board.  15                              
The Department had an internal advisory structure geared toward
preparing a recommendation for approval by the ADM.  It was a time-consuming process.
An Investment Analysis Report (“IAR”) analysed the various options for
obtaining rental space and made a recommendation.  The report then proceeded
through a bureaucratic chain ultimately resulting in the Investment Management
Board (“IMB”) of the Department making a recommendation to the ADM.  16                              
The IAR recommended renegotiating the Martel lease.  It was considered
by the Department in late September, but no decision was made.  The Department
considered a revised report on October 9 but, due to declining rental rates in
Ottawa  recommended that the matter proceed to tender.  Within the Department,
the IMB was not involved in the tender proposal.  Approval for tendering was
obtained from the ADM although the evidence did not establish on what date that
occurred.  17                              
Amid rumours that the AECB space was proceeding to tender, Mr. McMurray
telephoned Messrs. Mahar and Séguin again on October 14 and 15. As a result of
these calls Mr. McMurray received a letter confirming that the tendering
process was proceeding and stipulating that the Department would not accept any
proposal from Martel subsequent to October 22.  18                              
The October 22 deadline was subsequently extended to October 27.  The
parties held a meeting on October 27, the same day on which an expression of
interest advertisement for tender of the AECB space appeared in the Ottawa
Citizen newspaper.  Mr. McMurray said he left the meeting with the
understanding that if he met a $220/m2 rental rate, the Department
would recommend to the Treasury Board that the Martel lease be renewed.  19                              
Mr. McMurray advised Mr. Séguin by telephone on October 29 that Martel
could meet the $220/m2 rental rate.  On October 30 Martel submitted
a written offer of a rate of $249/m2 plus an allowance, calculated
by the Department to be an effective rate of $219.39/m2.  On the
same day the Department decided that the remaining terms of the Martel lease,
including the full details of the proposed retrofit, would have to be settled
that day otherwise tendering would proceed.  Martel was unable to provide
finalized retrofit plans by that afternoon.  On November 26 a letter was sent
advising Mr. McMurray that Martel’s October 30 offer was rejected.  Tender
documents were issued the same day with a deadline for submitting bids of
December 3, 1992.  20                              
Martel bid on the project.  When the bids were opened, Martel’s bid was
the lowest of the tenders.  Martel was not awarded the contract.  21                              
Under the terms of the call for tenders the Department was not obligated
to accept the lowest or any bid.  Moreover, the Department conducted a
financial analysis of the bids to consider the total costs that would be
incurred as a result of accepting any one tender.  These costs included fit-up
costs, contiguous space requirements, and a secured card access system.  The
Martel Building’s fit-up costs were calculated to be approximately one million
dollars.  As well, the Department added $60,000 to Martel’s bid to cover the
installation of a secured card access system.  Based upon a net present value
calculation, Martel’s bid was higher than the second lowest initial bid of
Standard Life.  The tender was awarded to Standard Life.  II.  Judicial
History  1.  Federal
Court, Trial Division (1997), 129 F.T.R. 249  22                              
Martel sued in contract and in tort.  In contract, Martel claimed the
appellant had breached an implied term to renew the lease arising out of either
the lease itself or an agreement reached between the parties on or about
October 30, 1992.  Martel’s claim in tort rested on the Department’s alleged
breach of a duty to negotiate in good faith and on its alleged negligent
conduct of the negotiation and tender processes.  23                              
The trial judge dismissed the contract claim.  She also declined to
consider liability based on a duty to negotiate in good faith when she was
sceptical that such a duty existed under Canadian law.  She did not address
negligence in the tendering process, but noted that “a somewhat arbitrary
assessment of fit-up costs appears to have been added to the financial analysis
of the plaintiff’s bid” (para. 76).  24                              
In the context of negotiations, the trial judge concluded that the
relationship between the parties was sufficiently proximate to give rise to a
duty of care in negligence.  She held it was reasonably foreseeable the
Department’s carelessness might cause damage to Martel.  She further concluded
that the Department was negligent in its conduct of the negotiations.  25                              
However, she concluded that Martel had not established causation as it
failed to prove that the Department’s negligence caused Martel to lose the
10-year renewal.  She dismissed the plaintiff’s action.  2.  Federal
Court of Appeal, [1998] 4 F.C. 300  26                              
The Federal Court of Appeal held that the trial judge was correct that a
duty of care arose from the conduct of the negotiations and that it had been
breached. It too declined to consider whether a duty to negotiate in good faith
had emerged in Canadian law.  27                              
The Federal Court of Appeal also addressed negligence in the tendering
process.  It held that “[n]egligence in the tendering process was a matter
before the Trial Judge which she failed to address” (para. 31).  In this
respect, it found that the call for tenders gave rise to an implied contractual
obligation to treat all bidders fairly.  In turn, this obligation placed the
parties in sufficient proximity to give rise to a duty of care.  It concluded
that the Department had breached this duty through evaluating the bids
according to undisclosed conditions which included the addition of fit-up
costs, secured card access system costs and contiguous space requirements.  28                              
The court held that in the context of the negotiations, the Department’s
negligence deprived Martel of the opportunity to negotiate a renewal of the
lease.  In the context of the tender, the Department’s negligence deprived
Martel of both the opportunity to participate fairly in the tender process and
a reasonable expectation of being awarded the contract.  29                              
The court disagreed with the trial judge on causation.  It concluded
that the Department’s conduct was the principal, if not the only cause, of
Martel losing the opportunity to negotiate and losing its reasonable
expectation of being awarded the contract under a fair and proper tendering
process.  30                              
The Federal Court of Appeal allowed the appeal with costs.  It found the
Department liable in negligence and ordered a continuance of the trial on the
issue of damages.  III.  Issues  31                              
This appeal raises two issues:  1.                                
Given that one owes a duty of care not to harm those who might
foreseeably suffer damage, does a duty of care exist to that same group with
respect to negotiations?  Does the tort of negligence extend to damages for
pure economic loss arising out of the conduct of pre-contractual negotiations?  2.                                
Did the Court of Appeal err in finding that the Department owed Martel a
duty of care in the tendering process and that this duty was breached?   IV.  Analysis   1.                Given that one owes a duty of
care not to harm those who might foreseeably suffer damage, does a duty of care
exist to that same group with respect to negotiations?  Does the tort of
negligence extend to damages for pure economic loss arising out of the conduct
of pre-contractual negotiations?  32                              
A central issue in this appeal is the extent to which Canadian
jurisprudence recognizes a duty of care on parties in negotiations.  If a cause
of action exists in this context, it is apparent that the damages claimed would
be a purely economic loss.  33                              
The appellant submitted that to extend the tort of negligence into the
conduct of commercial negotiations would be an unnecessary and unsound invasion
of the marketplace.  It argued that this case involves business risks inherent
in commercial negotiation, risks which should be borne by parties and not be
re-allocated through the imposition of a duty of care.  34                              
A breach of a duty of care in negotiations would, in this case, result
in the loss of an opportunity to negotiate a lease renewal.  This is a claim
for damages not accompanied by physical injury or property damage.  What is
left is a claim for pure economic loss.  See D’Amato v. Badger, [1996] 2
S.C.R. 1071, at para. 13.  35                              
As a cause of action, claims concerning the recovery of economic loss
are identical to any other claim in negligence in that the plaintiff must
establish a duty, a breach, damage and causation.  Nevertheless, as a result of
the common law’s historical treatment of economic loss, the threshold question
of whether or not to recognize a duty of care receives added scrutiny relative
to other claims in negligence.  36                              
An historical review of the common law treatment of recovery for 
economic loss has been undertaken by this Court on several occasions.  See Rivtow
Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron Works, [1974] S.C.R. 1189; Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021;
and D’Amato, supra. Rather than re-canvassing the jurisprudential
genealogy reviewed in these cases, it is enough to say that the common law
traditionally did not allow recovery of economic loss where a plaintiff had
suffered neither physical harm nor property damage.  See Cattle v. Stockton
Waterworks Co. (1875), L.R. 10 Q.B. 453.  37                              
Over time, the traditional rule was reconsidered.  In Rivtow and
subsequent cases it has been recognized that in limited circumstances damages
for economic loss absent physical or proprietary harm may be recovered.  The
circumstances in which such damages have been awarded to date are few.  To a
large extent, this caution derives from the same policy rationale that
supported the traditional approach not to recognize the claim at all.  First,
economic interests are viewed as less compelling of protection than bodily
security or proprietary interests.  Second, an unbridled recognition of
economic loss raises the spectre of indeterminate liability. Third, economic losses
often arise in a commercial context, where they are often an inherent business
risk best guarded against by the party on whom they fall through such means as
insurance.  Finally, allowing the recovery of economic loss through tort has
been seen to encourage a multiplicity of inappropriate lawsuits.  See D’Amato,
supra, at para. 20, and A. M. Linden, Canadian Tort Law (6th ed.
1997), at pp. 405-6.  38                              
In an effort to identify and separate the types of cases that give rise
to potentially compensable economic loss, La Forest J., in Norsk, supra,
endorsed the following categories (at p. 1049):  1.    The Independent Liability of Statutory
Public Authorities;  2.    Negligent Misrepresentation;  3.    Negligent Performance of a Service;  4.    Negligent Supply of Shoddy Goods or
Structures; 5.    Relational Economic Loss.  See B.
Feldthusen, “Economic Loss in the Supreme Court of Canada: Yesterday and
Tomorrow” (1990-91), 17 Can. Bus. L.J. 356, at pp. 357-58; Winnipeg
Condominium Corporation No. 36 v. Bird Construction Co., [1995] 1 S.C.R.
85, at para. 12; and D’Amato, supra, at para. 30.  39                              
The allegation of negligence in the conduct of negotiations does not
fall within any of these classifications.  Thus, Martel’s claim is novel when
weighed against the prior jurisprudence of this Court.  That by itself should
not preclude the claim.  The question is whether the numbered categories ought
to be enlarged or some other method identified to include a new head of
economic loss.  To answer this question it is useful to set out a framework for
the recognition of new categories such as that advanced by Martel.  40                              
In attempting to mould such a framework, it is noteworthy that this
Court has looked beyond the traditional bar against recovery of pure economic
loss in favour of a case-specific analysis that seeks to weigh the unique
policy considerations which arise.  See Rivtow, supra, at pp.
1211-12; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2, at p. 33; Norsk,
supra, at p. 1054, per La Forest J., and at p. 1155, per
McLachlin J.; Winnipeg Condominium, supra, at para. 32; and D’Amato,
supra, at paras. 31-34.  41                              
A presumptive exclusionary rule exists only within the narrow realm of
contractual relational economic loss.  This phrase is intended to define an
economic loss suffered via a plaintiff’s contractual relationship with a third
party to whom the defendant is already liable for property damage.  Prior to Bow
Valley Husky (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Saint John Shipbuilding Ltd., [1997] 3
S.C.R. 1210, it was undetermined whether the recognition of contractual
relational economic loss was to be approached incrementally on a case-by-case
basis, as with the other categories of economic loss, or through recognized
categorical exceptions to a narrow exclusionary rule.  This debate arose out of
the differing approaches expressed by McLachlin J. (as she then was) and La
Forest J. in Norsk.  The substance of these positions was reviewed in D’Amato
and need not be repeated for the purpose of this appeal.  42                              
In Bow Valley, at para. 48, McLachlin J. resolved this debate,
affirming that recovery for contractual relational economic loss is
presumptively excluded, subject to categorical exceptions.  However, the
categories of recoverable loss are not closed and new ones may emerge as
different cases arise.  The majority in Bow Valley approved her
reasons.  See Iacobucci J. at para. 113:  I understand my colleague’s discussion of this
matter to mean that she has adopted the general exclusionary rule and
categorical exceptions approach set forth by La Forest J. in Norsk. . .
.  She points out that both her reasons and those of La Forest J. in Norsk
recognize that the categories of recoverable contractual relational economic
loss are not closed.  43                              
It is important to distinguish between the Bow Valley majority’s
reference to the categories of contractual relational economic loss, which
falls within the fifth category, and the other four categories of economic loss
listed above.  This distinction is relevant because contractual relational
economic loss receives unique treatment within the broader scope of economic
loss in general.  In this connection, we reject the  assertions of certain
commentators who have suggested that the same approach applies to all five
categories of economic loss following the Bow Valley decision: see E. A.
Cherniak and E. How, “Policy and Predictability: Pure Economic Loss in the
Supreme Court of Canada” (1999), 31 Can. Bus. L.J. 209, at p. 232, and
I. N. D. Wallace, “Contractual Relational Loss in Canada” (1998), 114 L.Q.R.
370, at pp. 374-77.  44                              
Unlike the other areas of economic loss, contractual relational economic
loss continues to operate under a presumption against recovery.  The following
categories of contractual relational economic loss are, to date, the sole
exceptions to this presumption:  1.    Where the claimant has a possessory or
proprietary interest in the damaged property;  2.    General average cases; and  3.    Where the relationship between the claimant
and the property owner constitutes a joint venture.  45                              
However, as noted above, these three categorical exceptions within
contractual relational economic loss categories are not closed.  The same is
true for the five broader categories of economic loss: see Norsk, supra,
at pp. 1150-53, per McLachlin J.  As Professor Linden, supra,
states, “further categories of economic loss cases will have to be identified
beyond the five general ones of Professor Feldthusen” (p. 421).  The reason for
the broader five categories is merely to provide greater structure to a diverse
range of factual situations by grouping together cases that raise similar
policy concerns.  These categories are merely analytical tools.  46                              
Canadian jurisprudence has consistently applied the flexible two-stage
analysis of Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728
(H.L.), originally adopted in Kamloops, supra,  in determining
whether to extend a duty of care in a given case.  The Anns approach has
been applied in this manner to each of the first four categories of economic
loss.  See, for example, Hercules Managements Ltd. v. Ernst & Young,
[1997] 2 S.C.R. 165, at para. 19 (negligent misrepresentation); Winnipeg
Condominium, supra, at para. 32 (negligent supply of shoddy goods or
structures); and B.D.C. Ltd. v. Hofstrand Farms Ltd., [1986] 1 S.C.R.
228 (negligent performance of a service).  It is likely that any extension to
the categorical exceptions of contractual relational economic loss also would
be considered under the same analysis. See Bow Valley, supra, at
paras. 52-56, per McLachlin J., and para. 113, per Iacobucci J.  47                              
The Anns  approach is equally applicable when, as in this appeal,
the claim alleges a duty of care in an area not previously categorized.  The
respondent’s submission has to be considered within that framework.  48                              
This analysis begins with the oft-repeated question:  Was there a sufficiently close relationship between Martel and the
Department so that, in the reasonable contemplation of the Department,
carelessness on its part might cause damage to a party such as Martel with whom
it negotiated?  49                              
See Hercules Managements, supra, at paras. 23-24, per
La Forest J.:  ... the term “proximity” itself is nothing more than a label expressing
a result, judgment or conclusion; it does not, in and of itself, provide a
principled basis on which to make a legal determination.  .
. .  The label “proximity”, as it was used by Lord Wilberforce in Anns,
supra, was clearly intended to connote that the circumstances of the
relationship inhering between the plaintiff and the defendant are of such a
nature that the defendant may be said to be under an obligation to be mindful
of the plaintiff’s legitimate interests in conducting his or her affairs.  50                              
So as to infuse the term “proximity” with greater meaning, the courts
take into account a variety of factors in ascertaining whether the relationship
between two parties gives rise to a prima facie duty of care.  See
McLachlin J. in Norsk, supra, at p. 1153:  In determining whether liability should be extended to a new situation,
courts will have regard to the factors traditionally relevant to proximity such
as the relationship between the parties, physical propinquity, assumed or
imposed obligations and close causal connection.  And they will insist on
sufficient special factors to avoid the imposition of indeterminate and
unreasonable liability.  51                              
It may be foreseeable that carelessness on the part of one negotiating
party  may cause an opposite negotiating party economic loss.  Generally,
negotiation is undertaken with a view to obtaining mutual economic gain.  Given
the bilateral nature of most negotiations, such gains are sometimes obtained at
the other party’s expense.  Although negotiations often provide synergistic
effects for all concerned, the prospect of causing deprivation by economic loss
is implicit in the negotiating environment.  The causal relationship in
contractual negotiations is usually significant for a finding of proximity.  In
the circumstances of this appeal, the appellant’s pre-existing contractual
arrangement with Martel is an impressive indicator of proximity.  52                              
Both the pre-existing lease arrangement and the communications between
the appellant and respondent here are indicators of proximity.  That does not
mean that any exchange loosely viewed as a negotiation will necessarily give
rise to a proximate relationship.  The expression of interest does not
automatically create proximity absent some evidence of genuine and mutual
contracting intent.  We are satisfied that the parties in this appeal evidenced
such an intent.  The communications between the appellant and Martel disclose a
readiness to arrive at an agreement despite the fact one was never reached.  53                              
We conclude that the circumstances of this case satisfy the first stage
of Anns and raise a prima facie duty of care. Although the
Department is a government actor, in its negotiations with Martel, it was
exercising an operational rather than a policy function.  As such, this finding
of a prima facie duty of care is not precluded by the appellant claiming
to have exercised a bona fide discretionary policy decision.  See Kamloops,
supra,  at p. 35, and Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R.
1228.  54                              
In the wake of a finding of proximity, the second question in Anns
arises:  Are there any policy considerations that serve to negative or limit (a)
the scope of the prima facie duty of care (b) the class of persons to
whom it is owed or (c) the damages to which a breach of it may give rise?  55                              
Notwithstanding our finding of proximity above, there are compelling
policy reasons to conclude that one commercial party should not have to be
mindful of another commercial party’s legitimate interests in an arm’s length
negotiation.  56                              
As noted by McLachlin J. in Norsk, supra, at pp. 1154-55:  While proximity is critical to establishing the
right to recover pure economic loss in tort, it does not always indicate
liability.  It is a necessary but not necessarily sufficient condition of
liability.  Recognizing that proximity is itself concerned with policy, the
approach adopted in Kamloops (paralleled by the second branch of Anns)
requires the Court to consider the purposes served by permitting recovery as
well as whether there are any residual policy considerations which call for a
limitation on liability.  This permits courts to reject liability for pure
economic loss where indicated by policy reasons not taken into account in the
proximity analysis.  57                              
The scope of indeterminate liability remains a significant concern
underlying any analysis of whether to extend the sphere of recovery for
economic loss.  In this appeal, however, the inherent nature of negotiations in
this case place definable limits on the ultimate extent of liability so that
concerns of indeterminacy are not determinative in this appeal.  58                              
Here, the class of potential claimants is limited to those persons that
the  Department directly negotiated with.  Although both La Forest and
McLachlin JJ. rejected the “knowledge of the plaintiff” test in Norsk as
noted in Hercules Managements, supra, at para. 37, knowledge of
the plaintiff remains a policy factor that may militate against indeterminacy.  59                              
In addition, although the quantum of damages arising out of failed
negotiations may be quite high, it is limited by the nature of the transaction
being negotiated.  As noted by the court below, Martel’s claim is clearly
restricted to the loss of an opportunity to conclude a 10-year lease renewal. 
While there are serious difficulties in valuing a lost opportunity, the extent
of the loss has definable limits.  60                              
However, simply addressing indeterminacy does not represent the sole
hurdle to extending a duty of care.  This conclusion has caused concern and has
been commented on.  See Norsk, supra, at pp. 1067-68, per
La Forest J.; Bow Valley, supra,  at para. 55, per
McLachlin J., and B. Feldthusen, “Liability for Pure Economic Loss: Yes, But
Why?” (1999), 28 U. W. Austl. L. Rev. 84, at p. 87.  61                              
In light of the diverse array of factual circumstances that can fall
under the moniker of pure economic loss, unique policy considerations may
infuse the analysis of any given case.  Indeed, notwithstanding the fact that
indeterminacy does not rear its head sufficiently in this appeal, there are a
number of ancillary policy considerations that necessitate precluding the
extension of the tort of negligence into commercial negotiations.  Even in the
absence of any serious potential for indeterminate liability, these factors are
sufficient to deny recovery notwithstanding the finding of proximity.  What we
have identified as ancillary policy considerations weighing against recovery
are defined by the following five illustrations.  62                              
First, the very object of negotiation works against recovery.  The
primary goal of any economically rational actor engaged in commercial
negotiation is to achieve the most advantageous financial bargain.  As noted
above, in the context of bilateral negotiation, such gains are realized at the
expense of the other negotiating party.  From an economic perspective, some
authors describe negotiation as a zero-sum game involving a transference rather
than loss of wealth: see Cherniak and How, supra, at p. 231; and B.
Feldthusen, Economic Negligence: The Recovery of Pure Economic Loss (4th
ed. 2000), at p. 14.  63                              
Perhaps following the traditional view that, at least in some
circumstances, economic losses are less worthy of protection than physical or
proprietary harm, it has been noted that the absence of net harm on a social
scale is a factor weighing against the extension of liability for pure economic
loss.  That is to say, negotiation merely transfers wealth between parties. 
Although one party may suffer, another often gains.  Thus, as an economic
whole, society is not worse off:  see Feldthusen, “Liability for Pure Economic
Loss: Yes, But Why?”, supra, at p. 102:  ...many pure economic losses are qualitatively different from physical
damage.  They represent not social loss, as occurs when property is damaged or
destroyed, but private loss when wealth is transferred from one party to
another with nothing being lost overall.  The plaintiff’s loss will often be a
competitor’s gain.  To hold the defendant liable for transfer losses as if they
were true losses will over-deter useful conduct.  64                              
Second, as Feldhusen notes in the above passage, to extend a duty of
care to pre-contractual commercial negotiations could deter socially and
economically useful conduct.  The encouragement of economically efficient
conduct can be a valid concern in favour of the extension of liability for pure
economic loss.  See Winnipeg Condominium, supra, at para.
37.  Equally,  in other circumstances, this goal may be a valid rationale
against extending liability.  65                              
In essence, Martel claims that the appellant was negligent in not
providing it with adequate information concerning the appellant’s bargaining
position or its readiness to conclude a renewal.  The appellant’s conduct in
negotiating with Martel  might be construed as “hard bargaining”.  The
Department’s agents displayed casual contempt towards Martel and its personnel
as illustrated by broken appointments and general disregard of the minimal
courtesy Martel could have reasonably expected.  However indifferent the agents
of the Department appear from the record, that by itself does not create a
cause of action.  Doubtless, the appellant’s ability to assume such a position
in relation to Martel was due to its dominant position in the Ottawa leasing
market.  The foregoing all point to the advantages enjoyed by the Crown, but do
not point to liability.  66                              
In many if not most commercial negotiations, an advantageous bargaining
position is derived from the industrious generation of information not
possessed by the opposite party as opposed to its market position as here. 
Helpful information is often a by-product of one party expending resources on
due diligence, research or other information gathering activities.  It is
apparent that successful negotiating is the product of that kind of industry.  67                              
It would defeat the essence of negotiation and hobble the marketplace to
extend a duty of care to the conduct of negotiations, and to label a party’s
failure to disclose its bottom line, its motives or its final position as
negligent.  Such a conclusion would of necessity force the disclosure of
privately acquired information and the dissipation of any competitive advantage
derived from it, all of which is incompatible with the activity of negotiating
and bargaining.  68                              
Third, to impose a duty in the circumstances of this appeal could
interject tort law as after-the-fact insurance against failures to act with due
diligence or to hedge the risk of failed negotiations through the pursuit of
alternative strategies or opportunities.  This Court has previously expressed a
reluctance to extend pure economic loss in this manner.  See D’Amato, supra,
at para. 51.  69                              
Notwithstanding Martel’s hope that the negotiations would produce a
favourable outcome, it could at any point have concluded that the Department
was not serious or interested in concluding a renewal of the Martel Building
lease, but simply delaying for an undisclosed reason and seeking other
potential landlords. While Martel may have suffered from its innocence and
optimism, at least some of the responsibility for the delays in communication
evident in this appeal can be attributed to it.  The retention of
self-vigilance is a necessary ingredient of commerce.  70                              
Fourth, to extend the tort of negligence into the conduct of commercial
negotiations would introduce the courts to a significant regulatory function,
scrutinizing the minutiae of pre-contractual conduct.  It is undesirable to
place further scrutiny upon commercial parties when other causes of action
already provide remedies for many forms of conduct.  Notably, the doctrines of
undue influence, economic duress and unconscionability provide redress against
bargains obtained as a result of improper negotiation.  As well, negligent
misrepresentation, fraud and the tort of deceit cover many aspects of
negotiation which do not culminate in an agreement.  71                              
A concluding but not conclusive fifth consideration is the extent to
which needless litigation should be discouraged.  To extend negligence into the
conduct of negotiations could encourage a multiplicity of lawsuits.  Given the
number of negotiations that do not culminate in agreement, the potential for
increased litigation in place of allowing market forces to operate seems
obvious.  72                              
For these reasons we are of the opinion that, in the circumstances of
this case, any prima facie duty is significantly outweighed by the
deleterious effects that would be occasioned through an extension of a duty of
care into the conduct of negotiations.  We conclude then that, as a general
proposition, no duty of care arises in conducting negotiations.  While there
may well be a set of circumstances in which a duty of care may be found, it has
not yet arisen.  73                              
As a final note, we recognize that Martel’s claim resembles the
assertion of a duty to bargain in good faith.  The breach of such a duty was
alleged in the Federal Court, but not before this Court.  As noted by the
courts below, a duty to bargain in good faith has not been recognized to date
in Canadian law.  These reasons are restricted to whether or not the tort of
negligence should be extended to include negotiation.  Whether or not
negotiations are to be governed by a duty of good faith is a question for
another time.  2.                Did the Court of Appeal err in
finding that the Department owed Martel a duty of care in the tendering process
and that this duty was breached?  (a)  Introduction  74                              
The second branch of this case deals with the tendering process which
followed the unfruitful negotiations.  Martel alleged that the Department was
negligent in failing to exercise due care in preparing the tender documents,
and in evaluating Martel’s bid made in response to the call for tenders.  As
mentioned above, the trial judge did not address the Department’s liability, if
any, arising from the tendering process.  However, Desjardins J.A., in the
Federal Court of Appeal, addressed this issue and found that the Department
owed Martel a duty of care in the tender process under tort principles.  This
duty imposed upon the Department the “obligation to ensure fair treatment in
the tenders by avoiding such factors as undisclosed preferences and awards of
contracts to non-conforming bidders” (para. 37).  Desjardins J.A. explained
that this duty arose out of an implied contractual obligation to treat all
bidders fairly.  75                              
The Court of Appeal held that the Department had breached its duty to
treat Martel’s bid fairly.  Desjardins J.A. based this conclusion on the trial
judge’s following  findings: (1) that the contiguous space requirement had not
been required initially by the AECB and had been negligently added to the
tender specifications; (2) that “a somewhat arbitrary assessment of fit-up
costs appear[ed] to have been added to the financial analysis of the
plaintiff’s bid” (paras. 37 F.C. and 76 F.T.R.); (3) that some of the costs
arbitrarily assessed to Martel’s tender were attributable to the contiguous
space requirements; (4) that there had not been any mention of fit-up costs
being required if the tenant stayed in the Martel building; and (5) that the
costs of a secured card access system had been added to Martel’s bid, and not
to the Standard Life bid.  Upon closer examination, it can be seen that the
above findings related to both the preparation of the tender documents and the
evaluation of the bid.  Findings (1) and (4) related to the preparation of the
tender documents, while findings (2), (3) and (5) related to the subsequent evaluation
of the bid.  76                              
With respect, we believe that the Court of Appeal erred by conflating
the drafting (or preparation) of the tender documents and the tender evaluation
issues.  The preparation of tender documents and the subsequent evaluation of
bids involve different considerations, and each event must, to a certain
extent, be analysed separately.  As will be explained below, once the bids were
submitted in response to the invitation to tender, the so-called Contract A was
formed which imposed contractual obligations, both express and implied, on the
parties involved in the tender process.  While the evaluation of bids directly
relates to the performance of this contract, the preparation of the tender
documents on the other hand involves events which occurred before this contract
was formed.  Thus, we believe that the Department’s liability with respect to
the manner in which the tender documents were drafted, and the way in which the
bids were subsequently evaluated, must be addressed separately.  77                              
In this connection, we note that counsel for Martel argued before our
Court that the Department’s duty in tort did not relate to its ability to
estimate fit-up costs or evaluate the bids, but rather to its alleged failure
to use reasonable care and diligence in drafting the tender specifications. 
More specifically, Martel contends that the Department was negligent in
including the contiguous space as a requirement in the tender documents.  In
this Court, Martel took a narrower approach on the evaluation issue than did
the Court of Appeal.  However, we have reviewed the evaluation issue as dealt
with in the Court of Appeal.  78                              
But before doing so, we should briefly recall the general principles of
the law of tenders to set the stage for discussing the alleged negligence in
the preparation of the tender documents and any liability arising in the
evaluation of the bids.  We will also review how the law of contract applies to
the tender process in this case, as we find it important to discuss the nature
of the tender process and the duties which generally flow from it.  A
discussion of Martel’s negligence claim will then follow.   (b)  The Tendering Process  (i)  General Principles of the Law of Tenders  79                              
Any discussion of the duties or obligations arising from the tender
process must begin with reference to The Queen in Right of Ontario v. Ron
Engineering & Construction (Eastern) Ltd., [1981] 1 S.C.R. 111.  This
case established that an invitation to tender may constitute an offer to
contract which, upon the submission of a bid in response to the call for
tenders, may become a binding contract.  Estey J. explained that this contract,
which he labelled “Contract A”, imposed certain obligations upon the contractor
who had submitted a tender.  He differentiated this contract from “Contract B”,
the ultimate construction contract resulting from the award of one of the
tenders.  80                              
In M.J.B. Enterprises Ltd. v. Defence Construction (1951) Ltd.,
[1999] 1 S.C.R. 619, this Court confirmed that Contract A also imposes
obligations on the owner.  It further explained that Ron Engineering
does not stand for the proposition that Contract A will always be formed, nor
that the irrevocability of the tender will always be a term of such contract. 
Whether the tendering process creates a preliminary contract is dependant upon
the terms and conditions of the tender call.  This Court stated as follows, at
para. 19:  What is important, therefore, is that the
submission of a tender in response to an invitation to tender may give rise to
contractual obligations, quite apart from the obligations associated with the
construction contract to be entered into upon the acceptance of a tender,
depending upon whether the parties intend to initiate contractual relations by
the submission of a bid.  If such a contract arises, its terms are governed by
the terms and conditions of the tender call.  81                              
The Court also held that, while the terms stipulated in tender documents
created express obligations in the context of Contract A, this contract, like
all contracts, could also include implied obligations.  The inclusion of
implied terms may be based on custom or usage, as the legal incidents of a
particular class or kind of contract, or based on the presumed intention of the
parties where it is necessary to give a contract business efficacy or where it
meets the “officious bystander” test: Canadian Pacific Hotels Ltd. v. Bank
of Montreal, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 711, at p. 775; M.J.B. Enterprises, supra,
at para. 27.  82                              
The tender documents involved in M.J.B. Enterprises included, as 
in the case at bar, a privilege clause stating that the lowest or any tender
would not necessarily be accepted.  The Court noted that in determining the
intention of the parties, attention must be paid to the express terms of the
contract.  In light of the privilege clause, the Court rejected the proposition
that the party who had instigated the tender call was required to accept the lowest
compliant tender.  The express language of the tender documents, which
manifested a contrary intention, governed.  However, an obligation to accept
only compliant bids could be implied based on the presumed intention of the
parties.  This obligation was not incompatible with the privilege clause.  83                              
It is now well established that parties to a tender process may have
reciprocal obligations arising from Contract A either expressly or impliedly. 
In the case at bar, Desjardins J.A. held that the appellant owed the respondent
a duty of care in tort to treat all bidders fairly and equally.  However, she
explained that such duty arose out of a coextensive implied contractual
obligation.  84                              
Various appellate courts have found the need to imply a contractual term
into Contract A to treat all bidders fairly and equally.  Best Cleaners and
Contractors Ltd. v. The Queen, [1985] 2 F.C. 293 (C.A.), is often referred
to as one of the earlier cases suggesting such a duty.  Also, in Chinook
Aggregates Ltd. v. Abbotsford (Municipal District) (1989), 35 C.L.R. 241,
the British Columbia Court of Appeal unanimously held at p. 248 that the party
calling for tenders was under a duty to “treat all bidders fairly and not to
give any of them an unfair advantage over the others”.  Legg J.A., speaking for
the Court, concluded that the owner had breached this implied contractual
obligation by adopting a policy of preferring local contractors whose bids were
within 10 percent of the lowest bid in awarding the contract, when that
preference was not revealed by, nor stated in, the tender documents.  The
tenderers were not notified of this policy to avoid alerting local contractors
to the fact that they were afforded a preference.  It was held that the
privilege clause did not give the owner the right to attach an undisclosed
condition to its offer.  85                              
The implied contractual duty of fair and equal treatment was also
discussed in Martselos Services Ltd. v. Arctic College (1994), 111 D.L.R.
(4th) 65 (N.W.T.C.A.), leave to appeal refused, [1994] 3 S.C.R. viii.  The
majority held that in order to protect the integrity of the bidding system,
there should be “a duty to treat all bidders equally but still with due regard
to the contractual terms incorporated into the tender call” (p. 71).  See also:
Northeast Marine Services Ltd. v. Atlantic Pilotage Authority, [1995] 2
F.C. 132 (C.A.);  Tarmac Canada Inc. v. Hamilton-Wentworth
(Regional Municipality) (1999), 48 C.L.R. (2d) 236 (Ont. C.A.); Vachon
Construction Ltd. v. Cariboo (Reginal District) (1996), 136 D.L.R. (4th)
307 (B.C.C.A.); Health Care Developers Inc. v. Newfoundland (1996), 136
D.L.R. (4th) 609 (Nfld. C.A.).  Many other lower courts have also recognized an
implied contractual duty to treat all bidders fairly and equally:  Murphy v.
Alberton (Town) (1993), 114 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 34 (P.E.I.S.C.T.D.); Kencor
Holdings Ltd. v. Saskatchewan, [1991] 6 W.W.R. 717 (Sask. Q.B.); Colautti
Brothers Marble Tile & Carpet (1985) Inc. v. Windsor (City) (1996), 36
M.P.L.R. (2d) 258 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)); Yorkton Flying Services Ltd. v.
Saskatchewan (Minister of Natural Resources), [1995] 9 W.W.R. 184 (Sask.
Q.B.).  It should be noted that to the extent that any of the foregoing cases
may be interpreted as suggesting that the lowest bid must be accepted despite
the presence of a privilege clause, or that the irrevocability of the tender
must form part of Contract A, we reiterate that such approach has clearly been
rejected by this Court: M.J.B. Enterprises, supra.  (ii)  Application of the Law of Tenders  86                              
Pursuant to the foregoing, we are of the view that the parties in the
case at bar intended to initiate contractual relations by the call for and
submission of the tender.   The Department offered to consider bids for the
lease of the AECB space through a two-stage tender process.  An expression of
interest first appeared in the Ottawa Citizen newspaper on October 27, 1992. 
Then, on November 26, the Department couriered to four  parties, including
Martel, a formal invitation to submit a tender for the AECB space requirement,
together with the Lease Tender Document package.  87                              
While the tender documents contained detailed terms and conditions
pertaining to the ultimate leasing contract to be entered into, they also
included terms and conditions governing the relations of the parties under
Contract A (see especially the Instructions to Offerors, the Statement of
Requirements, and the Offer Form).  The bidders were required to comply with
the provisions, requirements and standards of the Lease Tender Document, as
established by the Department (see clause 3.2 of the Instructions to Offerors). 
Tenderers were also instructed to include a security deposit with their sealed
tender.  In submitting a tender in response to the formal invitation, Martel
accepted the Department’s offer and agreed to comply with its requirements (see
clauses 2.1 and 2.2.1 of the Offer Form).  Following the analysis in Ron
Engineering and M.J.B. Enterprises, Contract A clearly came into
being in the circumstances of this case.  Significantly, counsel do not dispute
the emergence of Contract A.  88                              
In the circumstances of this case, we believe that implying a term to be
fair and consistent in the assessment of the tender bids is justified based on
the presumed intentions of the parties.  Such implication is necessary to give
business efficacy to the tendering process.  As discussed above, this Court
agreed to imply a term in M.J.B. Enterprises that only compliant bids
would be accepted since it believed that it would make little sense to expose
oneself to the risks associated with the tendering process if the tender
calling authority was “allowed, in effect, to circumscribe this process and
accept a non-compliant bid” (para. 41).  Similarly, in light of the costs and
effort associated with preparing and submitting a bid, we find it difficult to
believe that the respondent in this case, or any of the other three tenderers,
would have submitted a bid unless it was understood by those involved that all
bidders would be treated fairly and equally.  This implication has a certain
degree of obviousness to it to the extent that the parties, if questioned,
would clearly agree that this obligation had been assumed.  Implying an
obligation to treat all bidders fairly and equally is consistent with the goal
of protecting and promoting the integrity of the bidding process, and benefits
all participants involved.  Without this implied term, tenderers, whose fate
could be  predetermined by some undisclosed standards, would either incur
significant expenses in preparing futile bids or ultimately avoid participating
in the tender process.  89                              
A privilege clause reserving the right not to accept the lowest or any
bids does not exclude the obligation to treat all bidders fairly. 
Nevertheless, the tender documents must be examined closely to determine the
full extent of the obligation of fair and equal treatment.  In order to respect
the parties’ intentions and reasonable expectations, such a duty must be
defined with due consideration to the express contractual terms of the tender. 
A tendering authority has “the right to include stipulations and restrictions
and to reserve privileges to itself in the tender documents” (Colautti
Brothers, supra, at para. 6).  90                              
For ease of reference, we reproduce below the relevant clauses of the
tender documents.                                                        Instructions
to Offerors                                                                      ...  3.  EVALUATION PROCESS  3.1       The evaluation of Offers received is an
on-going process and the Lessee reserves the right to terminate any further
consideration of any Offer at any time during the Acceptance Period. ...  3.4       In undertaking the financial analysis,
the Lessee will discount all cash flows, including front-end costs, and
incentives, as they happen over the original term of the Lease, (extensions are
excluded).  All cash flows are then depicted as a net present value cost to the
Crown fixed as of the commencement date of the Lease.  (a)       In completing the financial analysis,
the Lessee will make certain estimates for this project, including, but not
limited to, the following:  .1 fit-up costs (including but not limited to, all or part of the
Unit Costs supplied for estimated quantities deemed necessary in                                        the
Lessee’s opinion to fulfil the fit-up requirements);  .2 moving costs;  .3 signage;  .4 screens; and,  .5 consultants.  (b)       In addition to the above, in cases where
the premises offered are currently under lease by the Lessee and it is
estimated by the Lessee, in its sole opinion, that a temporary relocation of
the occupants and/or furniture could become necessary to allow for the
completion of all or any portion of the improvements to be made to the premises
(this includes the improvements to be completed by both the Offeror and the
Lessee), the Lessee may also make certain estimates of the additional costs
expected to be incurred by the Lessee including, but not limited to, the
following:  (aa) moving of furniture and equipment;  (bb) fit-up costs of temporary accommodation;  (cc) all rental costs of suitable temporary accommodation; and,  (dd) installation of telecommunications equipment.  (c)       For the purpose of the financial
analysis, the following provisions will apply:  (i)    all costs estimated by the Lessee shall be
final;  (ii)   the measurements quoted in the Offer will be
utilized;  (iii) with respect to any allowance which is unclear, the Lessee’s decision on how to apply the allowance in the analysis shall be final.  3.5  Notwithstanding 3.3 above, the Lessee
reserves the unqualified right to do a comparative evaluation of all Offers
received and evaluate them based on considerations which in the sole opinion of
the Lessee would yield to the Lessee the best value.  This evaluation may be on
such matters as, but not limited to, quality of space offered, the efficiency
of the space offered, building design and access, and the level at which all
requirements are met or achieved in comparison to the rental rate being
requested.  4.  ACCEPTANCE                     4.1.      The Lessee may
accept any Offer whether it is the lowest or not or may reject any or all
Offers. [Emphasis added.]   Moreover, the
document referred to as “Statement of Requirements” outlined the type of space
required:  5.    SPACE  5.1  Category and amount of space required:  (a)       Basic office space: approximately but
not less than 7,420 contiguous square metres.  [Emphasis added.]   91                              
The express terms of the tender call clearly conferred upon the
Department significant latitude in evaluating the tenders.  Not only did the
Lease Tender Document include the standard privilege clause, but it also
outlined factors which could be considered by the Department in evaluating the
tenders.  Notably, the provisions of the Lease Tender Document explicitly left
it up to the lessee to determine which fit-up costs were necessary (see clause
3.4(a).1), and indicated that the Department’s cost estimates would be final
(see clause 3.4(c)(i)).  The breadth of the Department’s discretion in
analysing the bids is further highlighted by clause 3.5 of the Instructions to
Offerors.  This language is clear and unequivocal, and was included in the
specifications which were sent to Martel.  92                              
While the Lease Tender Document affords the Department wide discretion,
this discretion must nevertheless be qualified to the extent that all bidders
must be treated equally and fairly.  Neither the privilege clause nor the other
terms of Contract A nullify this duty.  As explained above, such an implied
contractual duty is necessary to promote and protect the integrity of the
tender system.  93                              
In assessing the competing bids, the Department engaged in a financial
analysis.  In the courts below, questions were raised with respect to the costs
added to the respondent’s bid relating to fit-ups, the contiguous space
requirement, and a secured card access system.  94                              
Admittedly, $812,736 was added to the Martel bid for fit-up costs. 
However, as the Department pointed out, the Court of Appeal appears to have
ignored that fit-up costs were also added to the other three bidders.  In fact,
$2,362,231.20 was added to the Commonwealth Building bid, $2,951,750.20 to the
Constitution Square Tower II bid, and $1,808,179.80 to the Standard Life bid. 
These figures were derived from the Unit Price Tables submitted by each
tenderer as part of their bid, using a general scenario to fit-up a 900 square
metre area.  This resulted in an average cost per square metre of fitted-up
space.  A certain percentage was then added uniformly to the four rates to
account for increased costs that the Department had experienced in the past
when using this computation.  95                              
We cannot find any breach of Contract A related to the addition of
fit-up costs.  The Department was expressly entitled to add fit-up costs which
it deemed necessary.  Furthermore, fit-up costs were added to all bids,
using the same standard or method of calculation.  In this regard, the
Department complied with its implied contractual obligation to treat all
bidders fairly and equally.  A duty to treat all bidders fairly in this context
means treating all bids consistently, applying assumptions evenly.  There is no
evidence of any colourable attempt to use fit-ups to achieve a desired result. 
In light of the trial judge’s finding that “it was fit-up costs . . . that made
the plaintiff’s bid the second lowest rather than the lowest bid” (para. 57),
the respondent’s claim is considerably weakened.  96                              
Martel also argued that, in evaluating its bid, the Department should
have taken into account its recent expenditure of $1.4 million to improve the
AECB’s premises in the Martel Building.  With respect, we disagree.  Martel is
essentially asking to be given special treatment based on its previous
relationship with the Department.  However, this would clearly give Martel an
unfair advantage over the other bidders.  It must be remembered that upon
submitting a tender in response to the invitation to tender, the other three
bidders also entered into Contracts A with the Department.  Therefore, pursuant
to the implied obligation of fair and equal treatment, the Department acted
properly in disregarding any past or planned improvements of the Martel
Building by not accounting for them in Martel’s bid.  97                              
With respect to the costs related to the contiguous space specification,
it cannot be maintained that these costs should not have been added to Martel’s
bid where such requirement was an express term of Contract A: Statement
of Requirements, clause 5.1(a).  In assessing Martel’s bid, the Department
prepared two “scenarios” which illustrated the costs involved should the AECB
remain in the Martel Building.  The first scenario detailed the costs to be
incurred should AECB be reorganized onto contiguous floors (Scenario A), while
the second provided the figures to be added for non-contiguous space should the
tenant remain in situ (Scenario B).  At trial, when asked why Scenario A
was ultimately chosen for the purpose of the calculation, Mr. Mahar explained
that “Scenario A is what was required in the tender”.  Mr. Mahar also testified
that “Scenario A follows the letter of the tender document.  We had asked for
7,420 usable square metres of contiguous space”.  98                              
Consistent with the principles canvassed above, we find that not only
was the Department entitled to apply the contiguous space requirement to
Martel’s bid, but the Department was also in fact required to adopt that
scenario consistent with the Lease Tender Document.  The contiguous space
requirement was an express term of Contract A.  To ignore that requirement
would have resulted in a violation of that provision.  Moreover, as all other
bidders were expected to take into account and to comply with the contiguous
space requirement in responding to the tender, the Department was bound, under
its implied contractual duty to treat all bidders fairly and equally, to apply
this specification to Martel.  Martel could not be given any unfair advantage
based on its previous relationship with the Department.  Thus, in subjecting
Martel to the explicit words of the tender document, the Department fulfilled
its obligation to all parties.  99                              
As discussed above, we believe that in conducting its financial
analysis, the Department did not breach any duty by adding costs for fit-ups
and contiguous space to Martel’s bid.  However, the addition of $60,000 solely
to Martel’s bid to account for a secured card system is problematic.  At trial,
Mr. Mahar explained that the costs for this option had been added to Martel’s
figures because the “other three buildings that [they] were looking at had that
capability”.  However, the trial judge noted that “[t]his was not entirely
true” since the Department “subsequently had to install systems in two of the
Standard Life building elevators” (para. 60).  100                          
Given the clear provision included in the tender document which
specified that the Department reserved to itself broad rights in evaluating the
bids based on its own considerations, we do not find that the addition of such
costs was problematic per se.  However, the Department failed to add the
secured card costs consistently to all bids.  Consequently, the appellant
breached its implied contractual duty to treat all bidders fairly and equally
in this respect only.  101                          
However, counsel for the Department argued before our Court that the
addition of the secured card system of $60,000 is a non-issue since the
difference between the successful bid and Martel’s bid was over $500,000.  This
leads us to the question of causation.  102                          
To be recoverable, a loss must be caused by the contractual breach in
question.   As noted above, the only breach of Contract A is limited to the
addition of the security system costs to Martel’s bid.   However, we conclude
that damages for this breach of Contract A are precluded for want of
causation.  We also find that the Department’s breach did not cause Martel to
lose a reasonable expectation of receiving Contract B.  Even if the costs for a
security system were deducted from Martel’s bid (or also added to the Standard
Life bid), the difference between the two bids would remain significant.  While
the trial judge noted that “it was fit-up costs . . . that made the
plaintiff’s bid the second lowest rather than the lowest” (para. 57 (emphasis
added)), the fit-up costs, as explained above, were added fairly and
consistently to all bidders.  At the end of the day, we also believe that
Martel lost Contract B because Standard Life made a better offer.  In this
respect, we note that Standard Life included compelling inducements in its bid
which the Department discounted in evaluating that bid, as clause 3.4 of the
Instructions to Offerors enabled the Department to do.  In effect, Standard
Life submitted a significant leasehold improvement allowance plus 18 months of
free rent which considerably lowered its bid.  While the tender document
included a clause that the lowest or any bid would not necessarily be accepted,
the Department properly exercised its discretion in awarding Contract B to
Standard Life, whose bid  in its opinion yielded the best value.  103                          
We conclude that Martel did not suffer any loss as a result of the
conduct of the Department in the evaluation of the bids.  The addition of the
secured card access system costs by the Department to Martel’s bid did not
deprive Martel of an opportunity of being selected as the successful bidder.  104                          
In passing, we note that Desjardins J.A. also framed the loss in
question as “the loss of opportunity to fairly participate in the tender”
(para. 40).  Assuming without deciding that the loss of opportunity to
participate fairly is analytically different from, and independent of, the loss
of a reasonable expectation of receiving the contract, it is arguable that the
addition of the costs for the  secured card system caused Martel to lose the
opportunity to participate fairly (i.e., subject to equal treatment) in the
tender.  However, in the circumstances of this case, the addition of $60,000 to
Martel’s bid is of such negligible significance that damages would be nominal
and judgement on this limited item is not warranted.  Accordingly, we would not
make any finding of recovery on this point.  (c)   General Negligence Claims                     (i)    Evaluation of Tenders  105                          
While the tendering relationship is one which is defined by contract,
Martel bases its cause of action on tort law.  As discussed above with respect
to negotiations, recognizing a duty of care in the tendering process would
represent an extension of the categories under which recovery for pure economic
loss has been granted.  As noted above, the Federal Court of Appeal acceded to
Martel’s tort claim and accepted that the Department owed Martel a tortious
duty of care arising out of the implied contractual obligation to treat all
bidders fairly.  In relation to the evaluation of the tenders, Desjardins J.A.
held at para. 37 that the Department had breached its duty of care in tort to
act fairly toward Martel based on the trial judge’s findings of fact that “a
somewhat arbitrary assessment of fit-up costs appear[ed] to have been added to
the financial analysis of the plaintiff’s bid”; that some of the costs
arbitrarily assessed to Martel’s tender were attributable to the contiguous
space requirements; and that the cost of a secured card access system had been
added to the Martel bid, and not to the Standard Life bid.  106                          
In our view, the enumeration of the alleged foregoing breaches clearly
reveals that the contract analysis, as canvassed above, subsumes any duty of
care that Martel seeks to have recognized under tort.  In this connection, we
acknowledge that it is well established that an action in tort may lie
notwithstanding the existence of a contract.  However, it is equally clear that
in assessing whether a tortious duty should be recognized where a contract
already defines the rights and obligations of the parties in a chosen
relationship, courts will look to the contract as informing that duty.  Nothing
prevents reliance on a concurrent or alternative liability in tort if the
contract does not limit or negative the right to sue in tort.  Where concurrent
liability in tort and contract exists a party may elect to bring an action in
tort in place of an action for breach of contract: see Central Trust Co. v.
Rafuse, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 147; Queen v. Cognos Inc., [1993] 1 S.C.R.
87; BG Checo International Ltd. v. British Columbia Hydro and Power
Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12.  107                          
However, in the circumstances of this case, regardless of whether there
exists a coextensive duty in tort to treat tenderers fairly and equally in
evaluating the bids, Martel’s tort claim cannot succeed for the same reasons
that a contractual claim would fail.  The duty of care alleged in tort in the
case at bar is the same as the duty which is implied as a term of Contract A;
this is not a case where Martel is suing in tort to avail itself of a more
generous limitation period, or some other advantage offered only by tort law.  108                          
Finally, we note that Desjardins J.A. relied on two cases to support the
view that a duty to treat all bidders fairly and equally has been recognized in
the context of tort claims.  However, we note that both cases have subsequently
been reversed by appellate courts: Twin City Mechanical v. Bradsil (1967)
Ltd. (1996), 31 C.L.R. (2d) 210 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)), rev’d (1999), 43
C.L.R. (2d) 275 (Ont. C.A.); Ken Toby Ltd. v. British Columbia Buildings
Corp. (1997), 34 B.C.L.R. (3d) 263 (S.C.), rev’d (1999), 62 B.C.L.R. (3d)
308 (C.A.).  In addition, reliance in tort was necessary because both cases
involved situations where a subcontractor sought redress against the
tender calling authority who had received bids from the general contractor. 
Since there was no privity of contract between the subcontractor and the owner,
liability could only be founded in tort.  In both cases, the appellate courts
refrained from deciding whether or not a duty of care was owed in such
situations, and preferred to limit their decisions to the fact that a breach
could not be established.  We believe that the issue of whether a duty of care
can arise between a subcontractor and an owner must be left to a case in which
it arises.                     (ii)  Drafting of Tender
Documents  109                          
We now turn to the Department’s alleged negligence in drafting the
tender documents.  Counsel for Martel focussed on this issue and argued that
the requirement for contiguous space had been carelessly inserted into the
tender specifications.  Martel submitted that without this carelessly added
term,  no further fit-up assessment would have been necessary.  110                          
In the Court of Appeal, Desjardins J.A. found that the Department had
been negligent in failing to exercise due care in preparing the tender
documents.  She stated, at para. 37, that:  [The trial judge] also found that some of the costs arbitrarily
assessed to the [respondent]’s bid were attributable to the tender’s contiguous
space requirements, which had not been required initially by AECB and which,
obviously, had been negligently added to the tender specifications by Mr.
Mahar, resulting in a higher bid for the [respondent]. [Emphasis added.] In Desjardins
J.A.’s view, this further supported the conclusion that the Department had
breached its duty to act fairly towards Martel.  Our response is two-fold.  111                          
First, while Desjardins J.A.’s foregoing passage appears to suggest
otherwise, the trial judge did not find that the contiguous space requirements
had been negligently added to the tender specifications.  This conclusion was
reached only in the Federal Court of Appeal.  That is not to say that the trial
judge did not comment on the preparation of the tender documents.  On the
contrary, she noted that in the past, Mr. Mahar had only prepared one or two other
expression of interest advertisements and that he had been working from a
precedent which called for tenders on contiguous space.   Reed J. added at
para. 36: “if one were seeking new space for the AECB, it would only
make sense to require that the space be contiguous” (emphasis in original).  We
question whether Martel’s submission that the contiguous space requirement had
been mistakenly added to the specifications can be supported by the
trial judge’s findings.  Martel conceded that contiguous space was a
requirement with which all other bidders needed to comply.  Therefore, it would
be difficult to accept (though we make no finding on this issue) that this
requirement was carelessly added in the tender specifications.  112                          
Second, contrary to Desjardins J.A.’s conclusion, the costs attributable
to the contiguous space requirements did not “resul[t] in a higher bid for
[Martel]” (para. 37).  On the contrary, as we noted above, the trial judge
explicitly concluded that “it was fit-up costs over and above these
[costs attributable to the tender’s contiguous space requirements] that made
the plaintiff’s bid the second lowest rather than the lowest” (para. 57). 
Thus, as the Department points out, the short answer to this debate is that the
inclusion of the contiguous space requirements and the fit-up costs associated
thereto did not, at the end of the day, make Martel’s bid more expensive than
the Standard Life bid.  As mentioned above, in conducting its evaluation, the
Department calculated fit-ups, both on the basis of contiguous space in the
Martel Building, and on the basis of the AECB remaining in situ. 
Scenario B illustrates that the Department concluded that fit-up costs would
still have been required even if the tenant remained in situ in the
Martel Building.  Absent the contiguous space requirement, Martel’s bid would
still have been approximately $300,000 more expensive than the successful bid.  113                          
In any event, we conclude that the Department did not owe Martel a duty
of care in drafting the tender specifications.  Martel’s claim that the tender
specifications were prepared negligently alleges a duty in an area not
previously recognized.  To determine whether the sphere of recovery for pure
economic loss should be extended to cover the circumstances surrounding the
preparation of the tender specifications in this case, the Anns two-step
analysis must be applied.  114                          
Assuming without deciding that sufficient proximity existed between the
parties, any prima facie duty of care would be negated by policy
considerations.  Indeed, considerations unique to the tendering process nullify
any duty of care sought by Martel.  First and foremost, we agree with the
Department that it would call into question the integrity of the tender process
if, by reason of a past relationship with, or special knowledge of, a potential
bidder, there could be an enforceable obligation to take the interests of that
particular bidder into account.  While Martel argues that a duty of care would not
entail taking into account the interests of a particular bidder, we note that
all of its arguments relate to factors that are specific to its previous
relationship with the Department.  115                          
In effect, all of Martel’s submissions on this point pertain to information
it obtained during the course of its previous negotiations with the
Department.  During the course of its negotiations with the Department, there
was no suggestion that further fit-ups would be required in the Martel building
or that the AECB, as tenant, desired contiguous space.  Therefore, Martel
alleges that the tender specifications “did not reflect the reality of the
situation”.  While Martel concedes that once the bids were opened the
Department could not hold private conversations with any bidder, it
nevertheless maintains that the Department should have advised it beforehand of
the requirements that would be considered.  116                          
With respect, we do not find this line of argument very persuasive. 
Once the Department decided to proceed by way of tender, it was not required to
take into account its past relationship with Martel.  To recognize that the
Department owed a duty to Martel would be inconsistent with the basic rationale
of tendering.  As explained in M.J.B. Enterprises, supra, this
rationale seeks to replace negotiation with competition.  In this respect, it
is imperative that all bidders be treated on an equal footing, and that no
bidder be provided differential treatment on the basis of some previous
relationship with the party making the call for tenders.  It would defeat the
purpose of fair competition to allow one bidder to be given some advantage from
its previous dealings. The submission of a tender bid requires a great deal of
effort and expense.  Parties should at the very least be confident that their
initial bids will not be skewed by some underlying advantage in the drafting of
the call for tenders conferred upon only one potential bidder.  117                          
A party calling for tenders has the discretion to set out its own
specifications and requirements. This includes the discretion to change its
mind with respect to the terms or preferences that were discussed in the course
of non-committal negotiations.  Tender requirements are not negotiable.  To
decide otherwise would in fact force the party making the call for tenders to
continue in its negotiations with one potential bidder even after those
negotiations have proven unfruitful.  118                          
 The terms of the call may grant a great deal of discretion upon the
tender calling authority in evaluating the bid, and tenderers must make various
assumptions and estimations in submitting a tender.  As such, inherent risks
are involved in submitting a tender bid, risks of which Martel was aware. 
Martel cannot by reason of its previous relationship with the Department expect
or require under general principles of negligence some special position when it
comes to tendering.  Absent negligent misrepresentation upon which Martel would
have relied to its detriment in entering into Contract A, we believe that it would
be contrary to the underlying principles of the tender regime to accept that
the Department owed it a duty of care in drafting the tender documents.  119                          
Finally, recognizing a duty of care in such a context could have
significant repercussions on the tendering process and create many
uncertainties.  In this case, contiguous space was explicitly required in the
tender specifications.  Martel is essentially asking this Court to import a
common law duty of care in the drafting of the call for the express purpose of
avoiding this contractual provision.  Accepting Martel’s argument would have
the effect of providing an out for those people who do not submit compliant
bids.  Indeed, other unsuccessful, non-compliant bidders could attempt to sue in
negligence and argue that various terms of Contract A “did not reflect the
reality of the situation”.  We believe that this further consideration clearly
illustrates why a duty of care should not be imposed on the tender calling
authority in drafting the tender documents.  V.  Disposition  120                          
In our view, the Federal Court of Appeal erred in allowing the
respondent’s claim.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the
Court of Appeal is set aside with costs in this Court and the courts below, and
the judgment of the Federal Court, Trial Division, is restored.   Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellant:  The Deputy Attorney General of Canada,
Ottawa.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt,
Ottawa.   