Arndt v. Smith, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 539  Margaret Smith                                                                                 Appellant  v.  Carole Arndt and Dennis Jackson                                                    Respondent  Indexed as:  Arndt v. Smith  File No.:  24943.  1997:  January 29; 1997:  June 26.   on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia   A sued her physician S for costs associated with
rearing her daughter, who was congenitally injured by chickenpox A had
contracted during her pregnancy.  She contended that had S properly advised her
of the risk of injury to her fetus, she would have terminated the pregnancy and
avoided the costs she now incurs.  S contended that A would not have terminated
the pregnancy even if she had been fully advised, and therefore asserted that
the loss claimed was not caused by the failure to advise of risk.  The trial
judge dismissed A’s claim.  Evaluating her testimony at trial that she would
have had an abortion against the fact that she desired a child, that she was
sceptical of “mainstream” medical intervention, that an abortion in the second
trimester held increased risks and that an abortion would have required the
approval of a committee on health grounds, the trial judge concluded that A
would not, on a balance of probabilities, have aborted the pregnancy.  Also
supportive of the trial judge’s conclusion was evidence that the risk of
serious injury to the fetus was very small and medical advisers would have
recommended against an abortion.  The Court of Appeal held that the trial judge
had applied the wrong test and directed a new trial.  Held (Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be
allowed.    It is appropriate to infer from the evidence in this
case that a reasonable person in the plaintiff’s position would not have
decided to terminate her pregnancy in the face of the very small increased risk
to the fetus posed by her exposure to the virus which causes chickenpox.  While
A did make a very general inquiry concerning the risks associated with maternal
chickenpox, there was nothing to indicate to the doctor that she had a
particular concern in this regard.  Further, factors such as A’s desire for
children and her suspicion of the mainstream medical profession can be taken
into consideration when determining what a reasonable person in her position
would have done if informed of the risks.  As found by the trial judge, the failure
to disclose some of the risks to the fetus associated with maternal chickenpox
did not affect A’s decision to continue the pregnancy to term.  It follows that
the failure to disclose did not cause the financial losses for which she is
seeking compensation.   The trial judge applied the right test in this case
and did not err in dismissing the action on the ground that A had failed to
establish that S’s failure to advise her of the risk to her fetus from
chickenpox caused the loss associated with the rearing of her disabled
daughter.  While he paid lip service to the reasonable person test, he resolved
the issue of causation by asking what the plaintiff herself would have done in
all the circumstances.  He considered a number of external circumstances,
including the fact that an abortion in the second trimester would have been
riskier than an earlier abortion and the need to obtain the approval of a
committee for any abortion.  He went on to consider factors going to A’s state
of mind, including the fact that she very much wanted to have a child, that she
had a natural skepticism of mainstream medicine and had so informed S and that
she stated she did not want an ultrasound scan of the developing fetus.  The
fact that the medical profession would not have recommended an abortion in
these circumstances also supports the trial judge’s conclusion that A would not
have chosen an abortion had she been advised of the very small increased risk
to the fetus posed by chickenpox.  Per Sopinka and
Iacobucci JJ. (dissenting):  As found by McLachlin J., the appropriate test of
causation in the present circumstances is not to ask what the “reasonable
person” would have done in A’s position, but is to ask what A herself would
have done had she been fully apprised of the risks to the fetus resulting from
her chickenpox.  The trial judge did not apply the appropriate test, however,
but applied an objective test.  He repeatedly referred to the pivotal role
played in his causation analysis by the “reasonable and prudent expectant mother”
and did not consider A’s evidence  that she would have aborted the fetus if
fully informed of the relevant risks because of his view of the objective
nature of the causation test.  At best, the trial judge’s reasons are unclear
on the question of which test for causation was applied.  This lack of clarity
itself would warrant a new trial.  In the further alternative, even if the
trial judge did purport to apply a nominally subjective test, the failure to
consider A’s testimony would constitute an error of law justifying a new
trial.  Cases Cited  By Cory J.  Applied:  Reibl v. Hughes, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 880; referred to:  Hollis
v. Dow Corning Corp., [1995] 4 S.C.R. 634.  By McLachlin J.  Considered:  Reibl
v. Hughes, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 880; referred to:  Norberg v. Wynrib,
[1992] 2 S.C.R. 226; Hollis v. Dow Corning Corp., [1995] 4 S.C.R. 634; Laferrière
v. Lawson, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 541; Chatterton v. Gerson, [1981] 1 Q.B.
432; Hills v. Potter, [1983] 3 All E.R. 716; Sidaway v. Bethlem Royal
Hospital Governors, [1985] 1 All E.R. 643; Ellis v. Wallsend District
Hospital (1989), 17 N.S.W.L.R. 553; Canterbury v. Spence, 464 F.2d
772 (1972); Young v. Northern Territory of Australia (1992), 107 F.L.R.
264; Bernard v. Char, 903 P.2d 667 (1995); Scott v. Bradford, 606
P.2d 554 (1979); Smith v. Reisig, 686 P.2d 285 (1984); Arena v.
Gingrich, 733 P.2d 75 (1987); Cobbs v. Grant,
502 P.2d 1 (1972); Martin v. Insurance Corp. of
British Columbia (1979),
13 B.C.L.R. 163.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Limitation Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 236, s. 3(1)(a).  Authors Cited  Fleming,
John G.  The Law of Torts, 6th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1983.  Fontigny,
Nadine.  “When Yes Really Means Yes:  The Law of Informed Consent in Canada
Revisited” (1996), 4 Health L. Rev. 17.   Osborne, Philip H.  Annotation to
Arndt v. Smith (1995), 25 C.C.L.T. (2d) 264.  Osborne, Philip H.  “Causation and
the Emerging Canadian Doctrine of Informed Consent to Medical Treatment”
(1985), 33 C.C.L.T. 131.  Robertson,
Gerald.  “Informed Consent Ten Years Later:  The Impact of Reibl v. Hughes” (1991), 70 Can.
Bar Rev. 423. APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (1995), 6 B.C.L.R. (3d) 201, 126 D.L.R. (4th) 705, [1995] 7 W.W.R.
378, 61 B.C.A.C. 57, 100 W.A.C. 57, 25 C.C.L.T. (2d) 262, reversing a decision
of the British Columbia Supreme Court (1994), 93 B.C.L.R. (2d) 220, [1994] 8
W.W.R. 568, 21 C.C.L.T. (2d) 66, dismissing the respondents’ claim against the
appellant physician.  Appeal allowed, Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting.  Christopher E. Hinkson,
Q.C., and Andrew F. Wilkinson, for the appellant.  Nathan H. Smith, for
the respondents.  The judgment of Lamer C.J. and La Forest,
L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, Cory and Major JJ. was delivered by  //Cory J.//  1                                  
Cory J. -- I have had the
benefit of reading the cogent reasons of McLachlin J. I agree with her analysis
regarding the Limitation Act issue and with her disposition of this
appeal.  However, I come to a different conclusion as to the test which should
be applied when determining whether the loss claimed by the plaintiff was
caused by the doctor’s failure to advise of the risk.  2                                  
The starting point for this question must be Reibl v. Hughes,
[1980] 2 S.C.R. 880, which set out the basic principles for assessing causation
in cases involving allegations of negligence by doctors.  Reibl involved
an action by a patient against a surgeon for failing to warn him of the risk of
paralysis associated with  the elective surgery performed by that surgeon.  One
of the defences raised was that even if the surgeon had disclosed all of the
risks of the procedure, the plaintiff would nonetheless have gone ahead with
the operation.  In other words, the physician disputed whether his negligent
failure to disclose had, in fact, caused the plaintiff’s loss.   4                                  
Laskin C.J. shared the authors’ concerns about the subjective test, and
rejected the pure subjective approach to causation.  He explained at
p. 898 that the plaintiff’s testimony as to what he or she would have
done, had the doctor given an adequate warning, is of little value:  It could hardly be expected that the patient who is suing would admit
that he would have agreed to have the surgery, even knowing all the
accompanying risks.  His suit would indicate that, having suffered serious
disablement because of the surgery, he is convinced that he would not have
permitted it if there had been proper disclosure of the risks, balanced by the
risks of refusing the surgery.  Yet, to apply a subjective test to causation
would, correlatively, put a premium on hindsight, even more of a premium than
would be put on medical evidence in assessing causation by an objective
standard. In other
words, the plaintiff would always testify that the failure to warn was the
determining factor in his or her decision to take the harmful course of
action.  Accordingly the subjective test would necessarily cause the trier of
fact to place too much weight on inherently unreliable testimony.  5                                  
While an objective test would prevent an inappropriate emphasis being
placed on the plaintiff’s testimony, Laskin C.J. thought that a purely
objective test also presented problems.  At p. 898, he discussed his
paramount concern with an approach based on the actions of a hypothetical
reasonable person:  . . . a vexing problem raised by the objective standard is
whether causation could ever be established if the surgeon has recommended
surgery which is warranted by the patient’s condition.  Can it be said that a
reasonable person in the patient’s position, to whom proper disclosure of
attendant risks has been made, would decide against the surgery, that is,
against the surgeon’s recommendation that it be undergone?  The objective
standard of what a reasonable person in the patient’s position would do would
seem to put a premium on the surgeon’s assessment of the relative need for the
surgery and on supporting medical evidence of that need.  Could it be
reasonably refused?  In short, the
purely objective standard might result in undue emphasis being placed on the
medical evidence, essentially resulting in a test which defers completely to
medical wisdom.   I think it is the safer course on the issue of
causation to consider objectively how far the balance in the risks of surgery
or no surgery is in favour of undergoing surgery.  The failure of proper
disclosure pro and con becomes therefore very material.  And so too are any
special considerations affecting the particular patient.  For example, the
patient may have asked specific questions which were either brushed aside or
were not fully answered or were answered wrongly.  In the present case, the
anticipation of a full pension would be a special consideration, and, while it
would have to be viewed objectively, it emerges from the patient’s particular
circumstances.  So too, other aspects of the objective standard would have to
be geared to what the average prudent person, the reasonable person in the
patient’s particular position, would agree to or not agree to, if all material
and special risks of going ahead with the surgery or foregoing it were made
known to him.  Far from making the patient’s own testimony irrelevant, it is
essential to his case that he put his own position forward.  The adoption of an objective standard does not mean
that the issue of causation is completely in the hands of the surgeon. Merely
because medical evidence establishes the reasonableness of a recommended
operation does not mean that a reasonable person in the patient’s position
would necessarily agree to it, if proper disclosure had been made of the risks
attendant upon it, balanced by those against it.  The patient’s particular
situation and the degree to which the risks of surgery or no surgery are
balanced would reduce the force, on an objective appraisal, of the surgeon’s
recommendation.  Admittedly, if the risk of foregoing the surgery would be
considerably graver to a patient than the risks attendant upon it, the
objective standard would favour exoneration of the surgeon who has not made the
required disclosure.  Since liability rests only in negligence, in a failure to
disclose material risks, the issue of causation would be in the patient’s hands
on a subjective test, and would, if his evidence was accepted, result
inevitably in liability unless, of course, there was a finding that there was
no breach of the duty of disclosure.  In my view, therefore, the objective
standard is the preferable one on the issue of causation.   These words
are as persuasive today as they were when they were written.  The test
enunciated relies on a combination of objective and subjective factors in order
to determine whether the failure to disclose actually caused the
harm of which the plaintiff complains.  It requires that the court consider
what the reasonable patient in the circumstances of the plaintiff would
have done if faced with the same situation.  The trier of fact must take into
consideration any “particular concerns” of the patient and any “special
considerations affecting the particular patient” in determining whether the
patient would have refused treatment if given all the information about the
possible risks.    To elaborate
on the distinction between manufacturers and doctors, I believe it is important
to note that negligence actions against members of the medical profession based
on a failure to warn will inevitably be hypothetical, because they are based on
constructing what would have happened if the patient had been fully informed of
the risks of a procedure.  This introduces a degree of uncertainty into the
analysis.  Often, this uncertainty will be increased by the difficulty of
determining the extent of a doctor’s obligation to inform in a case where,
based upon his or her professional knowledge and experience, the doctor
believed that the risk was too insignificant to warrant advising the patient of
it.  On the other hand, pharmaceutical manufacturers have no reason not to
provide the medical profession at least, if not the public generally, with all
available information concerning the medication they put on the market.  It
follows that it is eminently sensible to apply a more flexible standard of
causation to doctors than to manufacturers.    At p. 690,
Sopinka J. stated his preference for the modified objective standard:  The Reibl approach is a more reliable method of determining what
[the plaintiff’s] choice would have been.  The subjective test places too much
of a premium on the plaintiff’s present belief as to what it would have been.  In the end,
therefore, both the majority and minority judgments explicitly endorsed the
continued application of the modified objective test from Reibl for
negligence actions by a patient against a doctor.  The decision in Hollis
is a very strong and recent affirmation of the Reibl test and should not
be lightly disregarded.  9                                  
Some of the criticisms directed at the Reibl test may stem from
confusion as to what Laskin C.J. intended in his adoption of a modified
objective test.  The uncertainty surrounds the basic premise that the test
depends upon the actions of a reasonable person in the plaintiff’s
circumstances.  Which aspects of the plaintiff’s personal circumstances
should be attributed to the reasonable person?  There is no doubt that
objectively ascertainable circumstances, such as a plaintiff’s age, income,
marital status, and other factors, should be taken into consideration. 
However, Laskin C.J. didn’t stop there.  He went on and stated that “special
considerations” affecting the particular patient should be considered, as
should any “specific questions” asked of the physician by the patient. In my
view this means that the “reasonable person” who sets the standard for the
objective test must be taken to possess the patient’s  reasonable beliefs,
fears, desires and expectations.  Further, the patient’s expectations and
concerns will usually be revealed by the questions posed. Certainly, they will
indicate the specific concerns of the particular patient at the time consent was
given to a proposed course of treatment.  The questions, by revealing the
patient’s concerns, will provide an indication of the patient’s state of mind,
which can be relevant in considering and applying the modified objective test.   11                              
As another example, let us consider a patient who asks his doctor about
a proposed procedure, and particularly poses questions as to whether there
might be any effect on his hearing, without advising the doctor of his
particular passion for the singing of operatic sopranos.  If the doctor fails
to inform the patient of the possibility that the procedure could limit his
ability to hear in the upper ranges, the Reibl test would allow the
trier of fact to consider the questions posed by the patient in determining
whether he would have consented to the proposed treatment if he had been
properly informed of all the risks.  Again, the questions asked by this patient
may act as an indication of his own reasonable fears and concerns, which are
appropriate modifiers of the hypothetical reasonable person.   [T]he patient’s particular concerns must also be reasonably based. . .
.  Thus, for example, fears which are not related to the material risks which
should have been but were not disclosed would not be causative factors.  Clearly,
evidence of reasonable fears and concerns can be taken into
consideration and this is evidence which could go to establishing the
plaintiff’s subjective state of mind.  Therefore, it is apparent that Laskin
C.J. intended that the reasonable subjective beliefs of the patient should be
attributed to the hypothetical reasonable person used to set  the objective standard
in order to properly reflect the circumstances of the plaintiff.  13                              
If the patient’s fears and beliefs were not considered when assessing
how the “reasonable person in the patient’s position” would have responded had
all risks of a procedure been disclosed, absurd verdicts could be produced. 
For example, let us suppose that a plaintiff brought an action based on her
doctor’s failure to disclose that there was a very significant risk of her
giving birth to a disabled child, that the risk was material and the only issue
was causation.  If the plaintiff’s beliefs are not to be considered, the trier
of fact could conclude that a reasonable person in the position of the
plaintiff would have chosen to terminate the pregnancy and find in favour of
the patient even if the plaintiff was so resolutely and unalterably opposed to
abortion that she would never have terminated the pregnancy.  The failure to
disclose would not have been the actual cause of the harm.  Despite this, under
the purely objective standard, the plaintiff could recover.  This example
demonstrates why it is important to include some subjective aspects in the
assessment of what the reasonable person in the position of the plaintiff would
have done if all the risks had been disclosed.  14                              
Laskin C.J. carefully noted that purely subjective fears which are
not related to the material risks should not be taken into account in
applying the modified objective test.  In other words, fears which are
idiosyncratic, which do not relate directly to the material risks of a proposed
treatment and which would often be unknown to a physician, cannot be
considered. This is what ensures that the objective standard truly is based on
the actions of a “reasonable person”.  It means that a doctor will not be held
responsible for damages attributable to a plaintiff’s idiosyncrasies.  It
ensures that a plaintiff would not be able to successfully prove causation
simply by demonstrating an irrational fear which, had the physician disclosed
all the risks, would have convinced the plaintiff to forego medical treatment. 
For example, if a doctor failed to tell the patient that one of the risks of a
procedure was an allergic reaction which could cause a temporary red rash on
the skin, and the patient had an irrational belief that a rash is a highly
significant and dangerous sign of evil spirits in the body, the patient could
not successfully prove causation by demonstrating that he would not have
proceeded with the treatment on the basis of this irrational fear.  15                              
Reibl is a very significant and leading authority.  It marks the
rejection of the paternalistic approach to determining how much information
should be given to patients.  It emphasizes the patient’s right to know and
ensures that patients will have the benefit of a high standard of disclosure. 
At the same time, its modified objective test for causation ensures that our
medical system will have some protection in the face of liability claims from
patients influenced by unreasonable fears and beliefs, while still accommodating
all the reasonable individual concerns and circumstances of plaintiffs.  The
test is flexible enough to enable a court to take into account a wide range of
the personal circumstances of the plaintiff, and at the same time to recognize
that physicians should not be held responsible when the idiosyncratic beliefs
of their patients might have prompted unpredictable and unreasonable treatment
decisions.  16                              
The Reibl test has had the desired effect of ensuring that
patients have all the requisite information to make an informed decision
regarding the medical procedure they are contemplating.  Members of the medical
and legal professions are familiar with its requirements.  It strikes a
reasonable balance, which cannot be obtained through either a purely objective
or a purely subjective approach.  A purely subjective test could serve as an
incitement for a disappointed patient to bring an action.  The plaintiff will
invariably state with all the confidence of hindsight and with all the enthusiasm
of one contemplating an award of damages that consent would never have been
given if the disclosure required by an idiosyncratic belief had been made. 
This would create an unfairness that cannot be accepted.  It would bring
inequitable  and unnecessary pressure to bear upon the overburdened medical
profession.  On the other hand, a purely objective test which would set the
standard by a reasonable person without the reasonable fears, concerns and
circumstances of the particular plaintiff would unduly favour the medical
profession.  17                              
It has been said that a subjective test, despite its dangers, is the
most logical.  Yet pure logic cannot achieve the fairness attained by the
application of Reibl test.  It is said that there is nothing to
distinguish between the subjective test and the modified objective test.  If
that were the case there could be no grounds for complaint from those who
favour the subjective test.  Yet in my view there is a very real distinction. 
The modified objective test serves to eliminate from consideration the honestly
held but idiosyncratic and unreasonable or irrational beliefs of patients.  The
Reibl test is fair and has recently been approved in the Hollis
case.  No useful purpose would be served by changing it.  Indeed, to do so may
unnecessarily add to the high cost of providing medical care.  In short, I see
no reason to abandon the modified objective test to causation set down  in Reibl,
a test which asks whether a reasonable person in the circumstances of the
plaintiff would have consented to the proposed treatment if all the risks had
been disclosed.  18                              
Turning now to this appeal, it is appropriate to infer from the evidence
that a reasonable person in the plaintiff’s position would not have decided to
terminate her pregnancy in the face of the very small increased risk to the
fetus posed by her exposure to the virus which causes chickenpox.  Ms. Arndt
did make a very general inquiry concerning the risks associated with maternal
chickenpox.  However, it should not be forgotten that the risk was indeed very
small.  In the absence of a specific and clearly expressed concern, there was
nothing to indicate to the doctor that she had a particular concern in this
regard.  It follows that there was nothing disclosed by Ms. Arndt’s
question which could be used by the trier of fact as an indication of a
particular fear regarding the possibility of giving birth to a disabled child
which should be attributed to the hypothetical reasonable person in the
patient’s situation.  Further, factors such as the plaintiff’s desire for
children and her suspicion of the mainstream medical profession can be taken
into consideration when determining what a reasonable person in the plaintiff’s
position would have done if informed of the risks.  It is not necessary to
assess the relative importance these beliefs would have in the determination of
the question of causation.  It is sufficient to observe that all these are
factors indicating the state of mind of the plaintiff at the time she would
have had to make the decision, and therefore may be properly considered by the
trier of fact.  I agree with the trial judge that the failure to disclose some
of the risks to the fetus associated with maternal chickenpox did not affect
the plaintiff’s decision to continue the pregnancy to term.  It follows that
the failure to disclose did not cause the financial losses for which the
plaintiff is seeking compensation.  19                              
I would allow this appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal  and reinstate the judgment of the trial judge.  The defendant should
have her costs of the proceedings in this Court and the courts below.  The following are the reasons delivered by  //Sopinka
and Iacobucci JJ.//  20                              
Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ.
(dissenting) -- We have read the reasons of our colleague McLachlin J.    We
agree with her analysis of the Limitation Act issue and also agree with
much of her analysis on causation.  In particular, we agree that the
appropriate test of causation in the present circumstances is not to ask what
the “reasonable person” would have done in the position of the plaintiff Ms.
Arndt, but rather the appropriate test is to ask what Ms. Arndt herself would
have done had she been fully apprised of the risks to the fetus resulting from
her chickenpox.  We respectfully disagree, however, with McLachlin J.’s
proposed disposition of the present appeal.  21                              
McLachlin J. concludes that the trial judge in the instant case applied
the appropriate test of causation by asking himself whether the particular
plaintiff at bar would have carried the fetus to term had she been fully
apprised of the risks.  She states at para. 34 that while the trial judge
“allud[ed] to a ‘reasonable person’ test, [he] asked himself whether, on all
the evidence, the plaintiff would have chosen to abort her pregnancy had she
been advised of the risk of injury to her fetus from her chickenpox.”  She
further states at para. 69 that the trial judge simply “paid lip service to the
reasonable person test”.  We cannot agree with her conclusion in this regard.  22                              
In our view, the trial judge applied an objective test.  In the
alternative, at best the reasons for judgment are unclear as to which test was
applied.  In the further alternative, even if the trial judge did purport to
apply a nominally subjective test, in doing so, he wrongly disregarded the
testimony of the plaintiff, on the basis that it could play no role in his
causation analysis.  The presence of any one of these alternatives necessitates
a new trial.  23                              
Certain portions of the judgment are consistent with the application of
a subjective test.  For example, as McLachlin J. points out, the trial judge
stated ((1994), 93 B.C.L.R. (2d) 220, at p. 223):  In the case at bar, I find Ms. Arndt would have
chosen in foresight to carry Miranda to full term had she been fully cognizant
of all the risks and the chance of such risks occurring.  24                              
However, in our opinion, other parts of the trial judge’s reasons indicate
that the causation test applied was not subjective, as McLachlin J. maintains,
but rather objective.  On more than one occasion, the trial judge emphasized
the need to determine causation according to an objective standard.  For
example, he said (at p. 222):  If a physician fails to warn his or her patient of
all material risks, the issue of whether that patient would have requested a
therapeutic abortion had she been advised of those risks must be determined
objectively by the trier of fact after taking into account the patient and
her particular circumstances. [Emphasis added.]  And, later in
his reasons (at p. 230):  [W]here a pregnant woman has not been fully warned of all risks faced
by her fetus, and then makes an uninformed consent regarding abortion, the law
dictates that trial judges must determine, on an objective basis, whether or
not a “reasonable and prudent” expectant mother would have undergone a
therapeutic abortion had she been adequately warned. [Emphasis added.]  25                              
The most telling argument against the view that the trial judge applied
a subjective test is his treatment of the evidence of the plaintiff.  Under the
subjective test, the function of the objective evidence is to test the
reliability of the plaintiff’s assertion as to what her conduct would have been
if properly warned.  The plaintiff’s evidence is crucial in this regard.  While
the plaintiff’s evidence must be evaluated by reference to its reasonableness,
in the final analysis it is the plaintiff’s evidence that is either accepted or
rejected.  In the instant case, having adverted to the plaintiff’s testimony
that she would have aborted the fetus if fully informed of the relevant risks,
the trial judge goes on to imply that this testimony is not relevant.  He said
(at p. 235):  Given my finding of Dr. Smith’s negligence, I must
now determine if Ms. Arndt would have aborted her fetus had she received
sufficient information.  Ms. Arndt testified that she would have aborted her
pregnancy if she had been told of “any risk of abnormalities at all”.  I
must, however, determine this issue objectively, replacing the actual plaintiff
with the “reasonable and prudent” expectant mother. [Emphasis added.]   26                              
Thus, the trial judge repeatedly referred to the pivotal role played in
his causation analysis by the “reasonable and prudent expectant mother” and did
not consider the plaintiff’s evidence because of his view of the objective
nature of the causation test.  Given these clear statements by the trial judge,
we cannot agree with McLachlin J.’s conclusion that, in fact, the trial judge
applied a subjective test.  On the contrary, we would conclude that the trial
judge purported in substance to apply an objective test.  At best, the trial
judge’s reasons are unclear on the question of which test for causation was
applied.  This lack of clarity itself would warrant a new trial.  27                              
Even if it is held that the trial judge did apply a subjective test, the
failure to consider the testimony of the plaintiff would constitute an error of
law.  As set out above, while disregard for the plaintiff’s testimony may be
consistent with an objective test for causation, it is not consistent with the
subjective test, a test which seeks to ascertain how this plaintiff
would have acted if fully informed of the relevant risks.  Of course, a trial
judge need not accept the plaintiff’s evidence, but he or she must at
least consider it in determining whether this particular plaintiff would
have acted differently had the negligence not occurred.  Therefore, in our
view, even if the trial judge applied a subjective test, he erred in refusing
to consider Ms. Arndt’s testimony.  28                              
To illustrate the importance of testimony in this context, suppose a
hypothetical plaintiff is negligently ill-informed of the risks of a particular
medical treatment and the treatment goes awry, causing injury to the
plaintiff.  Suppose further that there is evidence that almost every patient in
the plaintiff’s situation would not take this treatment if fully informed. 
While other evidence suggests that the plaintiff should succeed, if the
plaintiff testifies that she would have gone ahead with the treatment even if
informed and the trial judge accepts this testimony, the plaintiff cannot
succeed.  Conversely, if there is evidence indicating that almost every patient
would have taken the treatment despite the risks, but the plaintiff testifies
that she would not have done so and the trial judge accepts this testimony, the
plaintiff should succeed.  Testimonial evidence, while tested against other
available evidence, may be pivotal in each case.  29                              
In our view, the trial judge in the present case, by refusing to
consider the plaintiff’s testimony, misdirected himself and the judgment he
reached therefore cannot stand.  As an additional reason for this conclusion,
the trial judge considered factors such as the plaintiff’s preference for
homeopathic medicine and the fact that the pregnancy was planned which, in our
view, are of dubious assistance in determining what the plaintiff would have
done had she been fully informed.  It is not at all inconsistent either with a
planned pregnancy or with a preference for homeopathic medicine for the
plaintiff to claim that she would have had an abortion had she been fully
informed of the risks.  By basing his conclusion in part on these factors, in
our view the trial judge cast further doubt on his finding on causation.  30                              
Because of the flaws in the trial judge’s consideration of causation, in
our view his  judgment cannot stand.  We would dismiss the appeal and order a
new trial on causation, applying the test set out in McLachlin J.’s reasons.  The following are
the reasons delivered by  //McLachlin J.//  McLachlin
J. --                                                                          I.  31                              
The plaintiff Arndt sues for costs associated with rearing her daughter,
who was congenitally injured by chickenpox.  The plaintiff contends that had
her physician properly advised her of the risk of injury to her fetus, she
would have aborted the pregnancy and avoided the costs she now incurs.  The
defendant Smith contends that the plaintiff  would not have aborted the
pregnancy even if she had been fully advised, and therefore asserts that the
loss claimed was not caused by the failure to advise of risk.  The issue on
appeal is what legal principles a trial judge, facing an issue such as this,
should apply in determining whether the loss claimed was caused by the failure
to advise of the risk.  32                              
I conclude that the test for causation is what, on a balance of
probabilities,  the particular plaintiff at bar would have done having regard
to all the evidence bearing on the issue, including the medical recommendations
she would have received at the time.                                                                         II.  33                              
It is a fundamental rule of tort law that the plaintiff must prove two
things.  First, the plaintiff must prove that the defendant breached a duty
owed to the plaintiff.  Second, the plaintiff must prove that the breach caused
the loss for which the plaintiff claims damages.  The trial judge found the
plaintiff had satisfied the first requirement  of proving breach, but had
failed to establish that she would have had an abortion had she been properly
advised.  He dismissed her claim on the ground that she had failed to establish
that the breach had caused the loss:  (1994), 93 B.C.L.R. (2d) 220, [1994] 8
W.W.R. 568, 21 C.C.L.T. (2d) 66 (hereinafter cited to B.C.L.R.).  34                              
The trial judge, although alluding to a “reasonable person” test, asked
himself whether, on all the evidence, the plaintiff would have chosen to abort
her pregnancy had she been advised of the risk of injury to her fetus from her
chickenpox.  Evaluating her testimony at trial that she would have had an
abortion against the fact that she desired a child, that she was sceptical of
“mainstream” medical intervention, that an abortion in the second trimester
held increased risks and that an abortion would have required the approval of a
committee on health grounds, the trial judge concluded that the plaintiff would
not, on a balance of probabilities, have aborted the pregnancy.  Also
supportive of the trial judge’s conclusion was evidence that the risk of
serious injury to the fetus was very small and medical advisors would have
recommended against an abortion.  35                              
The Court of Appeal held that the trial judge applied the wrong test and
directed a new trial: (1995), 6 B.C.L.R. (3d) 201, 126 D.L.R. (4th) 705, [1995]
7 W.W.R. 378, 61 B.C.A.C. 57, 100 W.A.C. 57, 25 C.C.L.T. (2d) 262.  Lambert and
Wood JJ.A. held that the law required the judge to determine not what this
plaintiff would have done, but what a hypothetical reasonable person in her
position would have done.  Lambert J.A. went on to suggest that the physician’s
breach should be considered not on the basis of tort, but as a breach of a
fiduciary duty to disclose depriving the plaintiff of a choice.  Hollinrake
J.A. agreed that the test is the reasonable person test, but suggested that the
trial judge could take into account the plaintiff’s state of mind prior to the
breach.  He agreed with Wood J.A. that the trial judge had taken matters not in
evidence into account and ordered a new trial on this ground.                                                                        III.  36                              
It is common ground that the plaintiff bears the burden of establishing,
on a balance of probabilities, that the breach caused the loss.  The question
is what the plaintiff must prove to establish that the breach caused the loss. 
Is the issue what she would have done had she received the required
information?  This is sometimes called the subjective approach.  Or is the
issue what a hypothetical reasonable person would have done?  This is referred
to as the objective approach.  Or can the debate surrounding what would have
happened had the proper advice been given be avoided by holding that the
plaintiff is entitled to sue her physician for depriving her of the right to
choose, as Lambert J.A. suggested?  37                              
I deal first with the suggestion that the debate can be avoided by
treating the loss as the loss of the right to choose whether to have an
abortion or not.  The suggestion that loss of choice is in itself compensable
is related to the suggestion that failure to advise of risk of medical
intervention negatives the patient’s consent, making the physician’s
intervention tortious battery.  This Court unanimously rejected this approach
in Reibl v. Hughes, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 880, per Laskin C.J., at pp.
891-92:  I can appreciate the temptation to say that the genuineness of consent
to medical treatment depends on proper disclosure of the risks which it
entails, but in my view, unless there has been misrepresentation or fraud to
secure consent to the treatment, a failure to disclose the attendant risks,
however serious, should go to negligence rather than to battery.  Although
such a failure relates to an informed choice of submitting to or
refusing recommended and appropriate treatment, it arises as the breach of
an anterior duty of due care, comparable in legal obligation to the duty of
due care in carrying out the particular treatment to which the patient has
consented.  It is not a test of the validity of the consent. [Emphasis added.]   38                              
For the same reasons, I would reject the alternative approach of
fiduciary obligation proposed by the respondent.  As with battery, the effect
would be to replace the factual analysis of standard of care and causation
appropriate to negligence actions with a choice-based analysis that makes
recovery virtually automatic upon proof of failure to provide relevant
information.  I see no reason to depart from the approach which considers the
failure of a physician to advise of medical risks under the law of negligence
relating to duty of care, absent special circumstances like fraudulent
misrepresentation or abuse of power for an unprofessional end:  see Reibl
and  Norberg v. Wynrib, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 226.  Such conduct is neither
alleged nor proven in the case at bar.                                                                        IV. 39                              
Applying the law of negligence, is the proper test what the particular
plaintiff before the court would have done had she been fully informed, or what
a hypothetical reasonable person would have done?  40                              
The fundamental principles of negligence law suggest that the test is
what the particular plaintiff before the court would have done.  Breach
established, the question in a negligence action is whether the breach caused
loss to the plaintiff.  This is a factual, not a hypothetical, inquiry.  In
cases of negligent action or misfeasance, the matter is clear.  If a plaintiff
breaks her leg as a result of being struck by a negligently driven automobile,
the question is not whether a reasonable person so struck would have broken her
leg; it is whether she, the particular plaintiff at bar, in fact broke her
leg.  There is no reason in principle why the inquiry should be different where
the claim is based on the defendant’s failure to act or non-feasance,  raising
the question of what the plaintiff would have done in a hypothetical state of
affairs.  The same principles apply in both cases, although the factual inquiry
in cases of a breach by way of failure to act may raise more difficulties in
application: J. G. Fleming, The Law of Torts (6th ed. 1983), at p. 171.  41                              
The problem has frequently arisen in cases where the issue is whether
failure to comply with a statutory requirement caused the plaintiff’s loss. 
For example, if a plaintiff who is not wearing a helmet receives a head injury
that a helmet would have prevented and sues the defendant for breach of legal
duty to provide a helmet, the question arises whether the plaintiff would have
worn the helmet had it been provided.  The court’s inquiry, as Fleming points
out, remains “factual in the sense of dependent on the evidence available” (p.
172).  Fleming notes that cases of misfeasance or failure to act offer a
“certain latitude” which “may occasionally be exploited by judge or jury to
introduce policy views into what is ordinarily regarded as a purely factual
issue”.  At one time, in England, it was thought that in such a case the burden
of disproving causation should shift to the defendant.  A purely objective
test, based on a hypothetical reasonable plaintiff, provides another example of
the intrusion of policy into the purely factual inquiry of whether the breach
caused the loss.  However, Fleming asserts, such deviations have been
“denounced  in favour of the general rule that, regardless of the type of
action, the ultimate burden always rests on the plaintiff to prove that the particular
precaution would more probably than not have averted the injury.  Even in
considering hypothetical human reactions ... the proper test is not what the
plaintiff as a reasonable man should, but what the evidence  suggests he would,
have done” (p. 172) (emphasis added).  42                              
The physician’s failure to advise constitutes a failure to take an
action required by law.  A finding of breach is a finding that the physician
should have done something which he or she negligently failed to do.  This,
like the case of the employee injured as a result of the absence of a helmet
required by law, raises the hypothetical question of what the plaintiff would
have done had the physician discharged his or her duty.  General tort
principles suggest that this question is a purely factual inquiry to be
answered by reference to all the evidence.  This evidence may include evidence
from the plaintiff at trial as to what she would have done.  But it also
includes relevant evidence of her situation, circumstances and mind-set at the
time the decision would have been made.  The trial judge must look at all the
evidence and determine whether the plaintiff would have taken the suggested
course on a balance of probabilities.  One way of expressing this is to say
that the plaintiff’s hindsight assertion at trial of what she would have done
is tested or evaluated by reference to the evidence as to her circumstances and
beliefs at the time the decision would have been made.  These circumstances
include the medical advice she would have received at the time which might have
influenced her decision.  In this way, the plaintiff’s subjective evidence as
to what she would have done is evaluated by reference to the reasonableness of
the competing courses of action.  As Sopinka J. (dissenting, but not on this
ground) put it in Hollis v. Dow Corning Corp., [1995] 4 S.C.R. 634, at
p. 689: “the most reliable approach in determining what would in fact have
occurred is to test the plaintiff’s assertion by reference to objective
evidence as to what a reasonable person would have done” (emphasis in
original).  43                              
This approach accords with the decision of this Court in Laferrière
v. Lawson, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 541, which held (at p. 609) that causation “must
be established on the balance of probabilities, taking into account all the
evidence: factual, statistical and that which the judge is entitled to
presume”.  It is consistent with the view there expressed that “[s]tatistical
evidence may be helpful as indicative but is not determinative”, and that 
“where statistical evidence does not indicate causation on the balance of
probabilities, causation in law may nonetheless exist where evidence in the
case supports such a finding”.  While Laferrière arose in the context of
the civil law of Quebec, Gonthier J., speaking for a majority of the Court,
made extensive reference to common law  jurisdictions, suggesting that the
principles discussed may be equally applicable in other provinces.  44                              
The approach suggested by the fundamental principles of tort law is
subjective, in that it requires consideration of what the plaintiff at bar
would have done.  However, it incorporates elements of objectivity; the
plaintiff’s subjective belief at trial that she would have followed a certain
course stands to be tested by her circumstances and attitudes at the time the
decision would have been made as well as the medical advice she would have
received at the time.                                                                         V.  45                              
In discharging its task of assessing the best approach to the issue of
causation in cases of medical non-disclosure, it behoves this Court to have
regard to the test used in other common law jurisdictions as well as the views
of scholars who have considered the matter.  I turn first to the law in other
jurisdictions.  46                              
In England, as the extracts from Fleming, supra, suggest, the
factual test of what the plaintiff would have done on a balance of
probabilities applies.  Judges consistently ask what the particular plaintiff
before the court would have done: see, e.g. Chatterton v. Gerson, [1981]
1 Q.B. 432; Hills v. Potter, [1983] 3 All E.R. 716 (Q.B.D.).  The issue
did not so much as elicit mention in the leading decision on informed consent
to medical intervention: Sidaway v. Bethlem Royal Hospital Governors,
[1985] 1 All E.R. 643 (H.L.).  It may be taken as settled that the so-called
subjective approach applies.  47                              
In Australia, too, courts have adopted the subjective approach based on
what the particular plaintiff at bar would have done in all the circumstances. 
In Ellis v. Wallsend District Hospital (1989), 17 N.S.W.L.R. 553 (C.A.),
Samuels J.A., for the majority, discussed the Canadian decision in Reibl
and the American decision in Canterbury v. Spence, 464 F.2d 772 (D.C.
Cir. 1972), and held (at p. 581):  I do not myself find these objections to the
subjective test persuasive.  I respectfully agree with Cox J in Gover
(at 566) when he said: “. . . At any rate the basic causation principle
governing actions in negligence plainly supports, in my opinion, the subjective
test.”. . . .  It is, of course, true that a patient’s evidence
about what he or she would have done if told of certain risks may be coloured
by the fact that the risks did in fact eventuate; but it is open to a court to
disbelieve evidence found to be tainted by hindsight: Manderson, “Following
Doctors’ Orders: Informed Consent in Australia” (1988) 62 ALJ 430 at 434. 
Obviously, in endeavouring to ascertain what the plaintiff’s response would
have been to adequate information had it been conveyed at the appropriate time,
a court will be greatly assisted by evidence of the plaintiff’s temperament,
the course of any prior treatment for the same or a like condition, the  nature
of the relationship between patient and doctor including pre-eminently, so far
as it can be established, the degree of trust reposed in the doctor by the
patient.  The extent to which the procedure was elective or imposed by
circumstantial exigency and the nature and degree of the risk involved will all
be matters of considerable importance: see Robertson, “Informed Consent to
Medical Treatment” (1981), 97 LQR 102 at 122.   See also Young
v. Northern Territory of Australia (1992), 107 F.L.R. 264 (S.C.N.T.).  48                              
In the United States, the issue before us has been much debated. Many
states purport to apply the objective test of the reasonable person.  However,
they may introduce so many subjective factors into the so-called objective test
that it becomes virtually indistinguishable from a subjective test.  For
example, the Supreme Court of Hawaii in Bernard v. Char, 903 P.2d 667
(1995), purports to adopt a purely objective test that views the question of
causation as what a reasonable person in the patient’s position would have done
had risk information been disclosed.  However, the Court goes on to permit
reference to the “individual fears and beliefs . . . of idiosyncratic patients”
(p. 674), casting doubt on how reasonable the hypothetical reasonable person
may in fact be.  In the end, it seems, one looks at the individual before the
court and evaluates what he or she would have done by reference to all the
evidence, including evidence of what a reasonable person would have done as
indicated by the medical advice that he or she would have received at the time.  49                              
Other states expressly apply a subjective test: see Scott v. Bradford,
606 P.2d 554 (Okla. 1979); Smith v. Reisig, 686 P.2d 285 (Okla. 1984);
Arena v. Gingrich, 733 P.2d 75 (Or. Ct. App. 1987).  In the latter case,
the court pointed out (at pp. 78-79) that the approach of looking at what the
particular plaintiff would have done is most consistent with the aims of the
fact-finding process and does not preclude evaluation of the plaintiff’s subjective
testimony for reasonability by objective factors, since those factors would
have a bearing on what the plaintiff would have decided:  Stated succinctly, the objective causation test
espoused by defendant and the courts on whose decisions he relies makes no
sense to us.  The only rationale the court offered for the test in Cobbs
was that a plaintiff’s testimony about the subjective fact is likely to be
colored by the events that occurred after he consented and will, ipso facto,
be highly adverse to the defendant.  Although that is true, it is not unique. 
Many kinds of information relevant to the determination of liability in tort
cases are peculiarly within the plaintiff’s knowledge.  Juries are aware that a
party’s testimony which favors his own cause must be weighed carefully and that
credibility determinations must be made.  We do not think that it is necessary
to present the jury with a hypothetical question rather than the real one in
order to protect the factfinding process, nor do we think that presenting
hypothetical questions is consistent with what the factfinding process exists
to achieve.  ....Evidence and arguments about whether other patients-- hypothetical
or real-- would have consented under similar circumstances can assist the
factfinder in evaluating the plaintiff’s credibility and in exercising its
common sense.  The question that the jury must answer is whether the plaintiff
would in fact have withheld consent if apprised of the undisclosed
information, but the jury may consider, in deciding that question and in
weighing the plaintiff’s credibility, the likelihood that a competent and
prudent person would make the decision which the plaintiff claims that he would
have made.  Although a patient’s decision to give or refuse consent need not be
an objectively reasonable one, the trier of fact is entitled to consider its
perception of the reasonableness of a decision as one of the factors bearing on
what the plaintiff in the given case would have decided.  [Emphasis in
original.]   50                              
Canadian academic commentary largely supports the so-called subjective
approach to causation in medical negligence cases.  51                              
P. H. Osborne, Annotation to Arndt v. Smith (1995), 25 C.C.L.T.
(2d) 264, argues that the concern that a subjective test depends too much on
the testimony of the plaintiff may be overstated if not illusory.  He states
(at p. 267):  Causation is not proved solely by the plaintiff’s testimony.  The court
must make an assessment of credibility which would appear not to be easier nor
more difficult than in other contexts.  There may also be relevant evidence
from third parties to assist the trier of fact.   Osborne
suggests that a doctrine that protects only reasonable “choosers” is too harsh
and may fail to protect individual plaintiffs.  In “Causation and the Emerging
Canadian Doctrine of Informed Consent to Medical Treatment” (1985), 33 C.C.L.T.
131, Osborne strongly advocates the subjective approach.  He indicates that
since Reibl, there has been diversity in the manner in which the test
has been applied.  The diversity is found in the range of personal factors and
circumstances to be incorporated into the reasonable person test.  In some
cases, the courts examine little more than the available medical data.  In
others, a limited number of personal factors are considered.  In still others,
the courts have taken into account a wide range of subjective factors in
applying the modified objective approach.  Finally, some courts have applied
both a subjective and a modified objective test.  52                              
Osborne argues that if any concern is to be shown for a patient’s self
determination, a subjective test is mandated.  Under the objective approach,
the patient’s right to self determination may be denied because the reasonable
person’s decision may be different from that of the individual patient.  He
adds that under a subjective test, the plaintiff’s testimony is not
conclusive.  “The question is not what the plaintiff says he would have done
but what the Judge or jury on the basis of all the evidence believes that the
plaintiff would have done” (p. 141).  53                              
G. Robertson, “Informed Consent Ten Years Later: The Impact of Reibl v.
Hughes” (1991), 70 Can. Bar Rev. 423, suggests that “[i]n principle this
causal link should be assessed subjectively, by considering whether this
particular patient (that is, the plaintiff) would have declined the
treatment if the risks had been disclosed” (p. 426) (emphasis in original). He
notes that since Reibl, which many courts have interpreted as imposing a
strict objective test, causation has proved to be a formidable obstacle for
plaintiffs.  54                              
N. Fontigny, “When Yes Really Means Yes: The Law of Informed Consent in
Canada Revisited”(1996), 4 Health L. Rev. 17, although opining
that framing the duty of disclosure in fiduciary terms is simple and logical,
suggests that consideration be given to a subjective test such as that here
proposed.  She states at p. 22:  ... the Supreme Court could consider returning to a subjective test of
causation.  Authors, such as P. H. Osborne, have argued that there is nothing
inherently unworkable or unfair in a subjective test, since the question is not
what the patient would have done, but what the Judge or jury, on the basis of
all the evidence, believes that the plaintiff would have done.  The evidence of
the plaintiff would be important, but it would be evaluated.  The ultimate
determination would only be made after a careful consideration of the
plaintiff’s credibility; in the light of the plaintiff’s personal circumstances
and personality, the nature of the illness, the nature of the proposed
treatment, the relationship between the plaintiff and his doctor, and other
relevant evidence.  It is therefore possible to argue that the Supreme Court
should change the modified subjective test, and adopt a subjective test, and
then frame this test in such a way so as to not be unfairly prejudicial to the
health care providers.  55                              
I conclude that while views diverge, the preponderance of authority in
other common law jurisdictions as well as academic commentary support a test
which asks what the particular plaintiff would have done in all the
circumstances, but accepts that the reasonableness of the one choice over another,
as reflected in the medical advice the plaintiff would have received, is an
important factor bearing on that decision.                                                                        VI.  56                              
This brings us to the arguments against the position that the trial
judge’s task is to determine what the particular plaintiff at bar would have
done had she been properly advised of the risk.  The most formidable is the
submission that this Court rejected such an approach in Reibl, supra.  57                              
Reibl concerned a patient who had suffered a stroke and paralysis
as a result of an endarterectomy performed to reduce the risk of stroke in the
future.  His physician had failed to advise him of a risk of stroke or death
during or in the aftermath of surgery.  He told him only that his risk of
having a stroke was greater without the surgery than with it.  The patient
argued that had he been informed of the risk of stroke consequent on surgery,
he would have postponed the surgery for a year and one-half until a lifetime
retirement pension from his employment vested.  He also asserted that he would
have opted for a shorter, normal life rather than a longer life as a cripple. 
The issue before the Court was how to assess whether the patient would in fact
have foregone the surgery had he been properly informed.  58                              
The Court, per Laskin C.J., began by rejecting the argument that
the real wrong was being deprived of the right of choice or consent, giving
rise to the tort of battery.  Laskin C.J. stated at pp. 891-92:  I can appreciate the temptation to say that the genuineness of consent
to medical treatment depends on proper disclosure of the risks which it
entails, but in my view, unless there has been misrepresentation or fraud to
secure consent to the treatment, a failure to disclose the attendant risks, however
serious, should go to negligence rather than to battery.  Although such a
failure relates to an informed choice of submitting to or refusing recommended
and appropriate treatment, it arises as the breach of an anterior duty of due
care, comparable in legal obligation to the duty of due care in carrying out
the particular treatment to which the patient has consented.  It is not a test
of the validity of the consent.  [Emphasis added.]  59                              
The Court went on to approach the problem on the assumption that a plaintiff
suing for negligent non-disclosure will always assert that he or she would have
acted differently had he or she been fully informed.  Laskin C.J. wrote (at p.
898):  It could hardly be expected that the patient who is suing would admit
that he would have agreed to have the surgery, even knowing all the
accompanying risks.  His suit would indicate that, having suffered serious
disablement because of the surgery, he is convinced that he would not have
permitted it if there had been proper disclosure of the risks, balanced by the
risks of refusing the surgery.   60                              
Laskin C.J. dismissed a purely subjective approach on the ground that
“it depends on the plaintiff’s testimony as to his state of mind, thereby
exposing the physician to the patient’s hindsight and bitterness” (quoting at
p. 898 from “Informed Consent -- A Proposed Standard for Medical Disclosure”
(1973), 48 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 548, at p. 550).  Laskin C.J. observed that
“the issue of causation would be in the patient’s hands on a subjective test,
and would, if his evidence was accepted, result inevitably in liability unless,
of course, there was a finding that there was no breach of the duty of
disclosure” (p. 899).  For this reason, Laskin C.J. rejected a purely
subjective approach based on what the plaintiff at trial asserted he would have
done.  61                              
At the same time, Laskin C.J. was alive to the problems presented by a
purely objective approach based on what a hypothetical reasonable person would
have done.  He noted (at p. 898):  ... a vexing problem raised by the objective standard is whether
causation could ever be established if the surgeon has recommended surgery
which is warranted by the patient’s condition.  Can it be said that a
reasonable person in the patient’s position, to whom proper disclosure of
attendant risks has been made, would decide against the surgery, that is,
against the surgeon’s recommendation that it be undergone?  The objective
standard of what a reasonable person in the patient’s position would do would
seem to put a premium on the surgeon’s assessment of the relative need for the
surgery and on supporting medical evidence of that need.  Could it be
reasonably refused?   62                              
Having rejected both a purely subjective and a purely objective
approach, Laskin, C.J. crafted a test that fell between the two, the “modified
objective” test.  While approaching the issue of what the patient would have
done objectively, the judge should take into account “special considerations
affecting the particular patient” (p. 898).  This would, in his view, avoid the
problem of leaving the matter of causation entirely in the surgeon’s hands: 
“The patient’s particular situation and the degree to which the risks of
surgery or no surgery are balanced would reduce the force, on an objective
appraisal, of the surgeon’s recommendation” (p. 899).  At the same time,
consideration of all factors that might have “reasonably” affected the decision
avoids exclusive reliance on the plaintiff’s assertion at trial.  63                              
While “the patient’s particular concerns” at the time should be
considered (pp. 899-900) (for example, the judge might consider specific
questions which the patient may have asked, evincing specific concerns (p.
899)), they must be “reasonably based” to avoid excessive subjectivity.  Thus
“fears which are not related to the [undisclosed] material risks . . . would
not be causative factors”.  Summing up, Laskin C.J. stated (at p. 900):  In short, although account must be taken of a patient’s particular
position, a position which will vary with the patient, it must be objectively
assessed in terms of reasonableness.   64                              
There is little profit in debating whether the test Laskin C.J. had in
mind  should be labelled objective or subjective.  Suffice it to say it
contains elements of both the subjective and objective and has been read in
different ways.  Two assertions can, however, be ventured.  First, the Court
was concerned to ensure that the plaintiff’s particular concerns and
circumstances be considered.  To hold otherwise would be to virtually place the
outcome of the causation inquiry in the hands of the physician.  Second, the
Court was concerned to ensure that the plaintiff’s subjective assertion of what
she would have done had she been properly advised be tested “in terms of
reasonableness”.  To hold otherwise would give undue weight to the plaintiff’s
hindsight assertion that she would have acted in a way that supports her claim
for damages.  The approach suggested above -- that causation is a question of
fact for the trial judge to determine on all the evidence including the
plaintiff’s assertion at trial examined in the light of her circumstances,
mind-set and the medical advice she would have received at the time --
satisfies both these concerns.  65                              
This brings us to the ultimate objection to the proposed test: that it
treats the plaintiff unfairly by diminishing her right to choose.  As noted
earlier, absent extraordinary conduct such as fraud or abuse of power, the
inquiry into the damages that flow from failure to advise of medical risks is
governed by the law of negligence.  The issue is not the plaintiff’s right to
choose, as it would be for the tort of battery or an action for fraud, but
whether as a factual matter the negligent act caused the loss.  66                              
Applying the standard appropriate to the law of negligence, the
question  is whether the proposed test is fair to both plaintiff and
defendant.  In my view, it is.  It avoids the trap of determining the issue of
causation either solely by the physician’s opinion of what a reasonable person
would have done or solely by the plaintiff’s unilateral assertion at trial that
he or she would have acted differently.  Instead, it places the issue in the
hands of the trial judge for determination on all the evidence.  It takes into
account the plaintiff’s right of choice, rather than presuming that choice on
the basis of a hypothetical reasonable person.  And it permits serious
consideration of the plaintiff’s evidence as to what that choice would have
been.  As the California Supreme Court  stated in Cobbs v. Grant, 502
P.2d 1 (1972), at pp. 11-12, cited by Sopinka J. in Hollis, supra,
at p. 689, “[t]he patient-plaintiff may testify on this subject but the issue
extends beyond his credibility”.  At the same time, it is fair to the
physician, who may introduce evidence of what the reasonable patient would have
done as it bears on the choice the particular patient at bar would have made.  67                              
The proposed test also meets the need, eloquently voiced by Wood J.A. in
the British Columbia Court of Appeal, for a test which accommodates cases where
the decision involves a “delicate balancing of overlapping personal, ethical,
and medical considerations which can lead to more than one ‘reasonable’ choice”
(p. 225 B.C.L.R.).  The objective test, based on the hypothetical reasonable
person, depreciates the plaintiff’s personal choice in such situations and
deprives her testimony of any weight.  The test of what the particular
plaintiff at bar would have done, determined in the light of all the
circumstances and his or her own values and attitudes, avoids these problems. 
Nor does the fact that there was more than one reasonable choice present a
problem.  The question is what choice this plaintiff would have made on all the
evidence and on a balance of probabilities.                                                                        VII.  68                              
In my view, the trial judge applied the right test and did not err in
dismissing the action on the ground that the plaintiff failed to establish that
the physician’s failure to advise her of the risk to her fetus from chickenpox
caused the loss associated with the rearing of her disabled daughter.  69                              
Although the trial judge paid lip service to the reasonable person test,
he resolved the issue of causation by asking what the plaintiff herself would
have done in all the circumstances.  My colleagues Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ.
suggest that the trial judge did not apply the subjective test because he did
not evaluate the plaintiff’s evidence.  I respectfully disagree.  The trial
judge considered the plaintiff’s evidence in its entirety but concluded that
“Ms. Arndt’s testimony [was] coloured, probably not by an intent to mislead the
court, but rather by the tremendous stress that her daughter’s wretched health
[had] inflicted upon her” (p. 233).  Because her evidence was coloured, the
trial judge tested the plaintiff’s assertion that she would have had an
abortion had she been told of “any risk of abnormalities at all” (p. 235)
against other circumstances existing at the time that the choice would have
been made.  He considered the fact that an abortion in the second trimester
would have been riskier than an earlier abortion and the need to obtain the
approval of a committee for any abortion.  He went on to consider factors going
to the plaintiff’s state of mind, including the fact that she very much wanted
to have a child, that she had a natural skepticism of mainstream medicine and
had so informed Dr. Smith, and that she stated she did not want an ultrasound
scan of the developing fetus.  For all these reasons he concluded “that Ms.
Arndt would have chosen in foresight to carry Miranda to full term had she been
fully apprised of the nature and probability of risks her fetus faced” (p.
236).  70                              
The trial judge’s approach conforms to the test proposed in these
reasons.  He asked the right question: what would this plaintiff have decided
in all the circumstances?  He then evaluated her assertion at trial that she
would have had an abortion by reference to her external circumstances and her
values and state of mind as evidenced by her conduct and words at the time the
decision fell to be made.  In short, he proceeded correctly and made no error
of principle.  Although he did not expressly cite it as a reason for his
decision, the fact that the medical profession would not have recommended an
abortion in these circumstances also supports the trial judge’s conclusion that
Ms. Arndt would not have chosen an abortion had she been advised of the very
small increased risk to the fetus posed by varicella.  As she admitted, she
would not have opted for abortion “without significant convincing”.  On the
evidence, that convincing would not have occurred.  71                              
It is argued, however, that the trial judge erred in considering the
increased risk of a second trimester abortion and the need for approval for an
abortion on the ground that these matters were not in evidence.  In fact, there
was evidence of increased risk of second trimester abortions (although this
appears not to have been pointed out to the Court of Appeal).  The need to
obtain committee approval for an abortion was a matter of law of which the trial
judge could take judicial notice:  Laferrière, supra. 
Consequently, I find no error on these counts.  72                              
I find no legal basis for interference with the trial judge’s conclusion
that the plaintiff failed to establish on a balance of probabilities that had
she been given the required information concerning risk, she would have ended
her pregnancy.                                                                       VIII.  73                              
Finding, as I do, that the trial judge did not err in concluding that
the plaintiff had failed to establish Dr. Smith’s negligence caused her loss,
it is unnecessary to consider whether the action would in any event have been
statute-barred.  However, since the matter has been fully argued before us, it
may be useful to offer guidance on the point for future cases.  74                              
The Limitation Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 236, s. 3(1)(a),
provides a limitation period of two years in actions for “damages in respect of
injury to person or property, including economic loss arising from the
injury”.  The majority of the Court of Appeal concluded that this provision
barred the plaintiff’s claim for emotional trauma, stress and loss of enjoyment
of life, because these claims relate to “injuries” to Ms. Arndt, but did not
bar her claims for loss and expense relating to the care of Miranda because
these were not claims in relation to “damages in respect of injury to person or
property”.  75                              
In my view, Ms. Arndt’s claims for economic loss are not statute-barred
because they do not relate to personal injury either to Ms. Arndt or to
Miranda.  In Martin v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia (1979), 13
B.C.L.R. 163 (S.C.), the court held that injury to person means physical,
emotional or mental injury to the body or mind of the individual.  Unlike her
claim for emotional trauma, stress and loss of enjoyment of life, Ms. Arndt’s
claims for economic loss do not relate to physical, emotional or mental injury
to her body.  Nor do the injuries represent physical, emotional or mental
injury to Miranda because Dr. Smith did not cause the child's injuries.  The
action for economic loss is for the expenses incurred in raising Miranda.  Dr.
Smith’s negligent failure to fully inform the plaintiff could have caused loss
only in the sense that it was a factor leading to Miranda’s birth.  It is
therefore not caught by the wording of s. 3(1)(a) of the Limitation
Act.                                                                        IX.  76                              
I would allow the appeal and restore the trial judge’s order dismissing
the action.  The defendant is entitled to costs on a party and party basis here
and in the British Columbia courts. Appeal allowed with costs, Sopinka
and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Harper Grey Easton,
Vancouver.  Solicitors for the respondents:  MacLeod Smith, Vancouver.   