Mochinski v. Trendline Industries Ltd.,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. 1176  Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia, as represented by the Minister of Transportation and Highways                                                           Appellant  v.  Anthony Dale Mochinski                                                                  Respondent  Indexed as:  Mochinski v. Trendline Industries Ltd.  File No.:  25474.  1997:  October 7; 1997:  December 11.  Present:  Sopinka,* Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci
and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia   The respondent was forced to veer off the highway he
was travelling on into the ditch when a large block of ice fell on or in front
of his truck.  As a result of the accident, he suffered serious injuries which
will permanently restrict the movement and use of his right knee and hand.  The
provincial Ministry of Transportation and Highways had engaged an independent
contractor to perform road maintenance work in the area encompassing the
accident site.  The contractor was required to control roadside ice and snow,
to remove overhanging ice from rock faces or tunnel walls, and to clear debris
from the ditches along the side of the highway.  It was also its responsibility
to warn highway travellers of hazards including ice falls.  The trial judge
held that the contractor was negligent and had breached its duty of care to
users of the highway by failing to remove the overhanging ice block or by
failing to clear the ditch.  He also held that the Ministry was originally
and jointly liable for the contractor’s negligence because it owed a statutory
duty to maintain the highways reasonably which, because of its nature, could
not be delegated.  The Court of Appeal dismissed the appellant Crown’s appeal.  Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.  For the reasons set out in Lewis, the Ministry
must remain liable for its contractor’s negligence.  The applicable statutory
provisions, sound policy considerations and the reasonable expectations of
highway users all lead to the conclusion that the appellant cannot escape
liability for negligence in maintaining and repairing the roads by delegating
that work to an independent contractor.  Cases Cited  Followed:  Lewis
(Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1145, rev’g
(1995), 12 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1.  APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (1996), 23 B.C.L.R. (3d) 291, [1996] 10 W.W.R. 445, 76 B.C.A.C. 174,
125 W.A.C. 174, 29 C.C.L.T. (2d) 1, 22 M.V.R. (3d) 44, [1996] B.C.J. No. 1071
(QL), dismissing the provincial Crown’s appeal from a decision of the British
Columbia Supreme Court (1994), 5 M.V.R. (3d) 140, [1994] B.C.J. No. 1220 (QL),
finding it liable for the plaintiff driver’s injuries.  Appeal dismissed.  Thomas H. MacLachlan
and William A. Pearce, Q.C., for the appellant.  David O. Marley, for
the respondent.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1         
Cory J. -- This appeal was
heard at the same time as Lewis (Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. 1145, and raises the same issue.  As in Lewis, the
question to be resolved is whether by engaging an independent contractor to
perform road maintenance work, the appellant is absolved from liability for the
contractor’s negligence.  Factual
Background   3         
On October 20, 1988, the Ministry of Transportation and Highways placed
highway operations in the area encompassing the accident site in the private
sector by contracting with Trendline Industries Ltd. for maintenance services. 
The contract required Trendline to control roadside ice and snow, to remove
overhanging ice from rock faces or tunnel walls, and to clear debris from the
ditches along the side of the highway.  It was also Trendline’s responsibility
to warn highway travellers of hazards including ice falls.    6         
The Ministry was responsible for the installation of permanent warning
signs, while Trendline was responsible for emergency warning signs.  The
Ministry installed a permanent warning sign alerting westbound traffic that the
area was prone to falling rock.  Trendline did not install an emergency sign
for eastbound traffic.  Decisions Below  The Supreme Court of British Columbia (1994), 5 M.V.R. (3d) 140  7         
McKinnon J. held that Trendline owed a duty of care to Mr. Mochinski
based on its contractual obligation to remove overhanging ice or snow from the
rock face and tunnel walls.  He held that the block of ice fell on the highway
either because it was overhanging or because the roadside ditch had not been
cleared of rock and debris and as a result it could no longer fulfil its
designed purpose of catching and retaining the ice.  He held that Trendline was
negligent and had breached its duty of care to users of the highway by failing
to remove the overhanging ice block or by failing to clear the ditch.  McKinnon
J. dismissed the plaintiff’s claim based on a failure to warn of the danger on
the highway.  He found that the Ministry’s failure to post a permanent warning
sign for eastbound traffic was not a proximate cause of the accident, since Mr.
Mochinski testified that he believed such a sign existed.  8         
The trial judge held that the Ministry had imposed a reasonable standard
of care on Trendline with its contract and had taken reasonable steps to ensure
that Trendline was fulfilling its contractual obligations.  He also found that
the Ministry was not vicariously liable for Trendline’s negligence because
Trendline was an independent contractor.  However, McKinnon J. held that the
Ministry was originally and jointly liable for Trendline’s negligence because
the Ministry owed a statutory duty to reasonably maintain the highways which,
because of its nature, could not be delegated.  The Court of Appeal of British Columbia (1996), 23 B.C.L.R. (3d)
291  9         
Legg J.A. dismissed Trendline’s appeal from the trial judge’s finding of
negligence. He found that the contract between Trendline and the Ministry
showed that Trendline had agreed to control traffic on the highway, to maintain
safe conditions and to warn highway users of impending hazards.  He noted that
Trendline had failed to position traffic control devices, had not posted
temporary emergency signs and had not broadcast advisories after it had cleared
the debris from the earlier ice fall on the day of the accident, and thus knew
of the potential for a serious slide. Legg J.A. held that the accident would
not have occurred if Trendline had restricted the flow of traffic to the
eastbound lane.  He therefore concluded that Trendline had breached its duty of
care to users of the highway.   Analysis  11     
The trial judge found that Trendline negligently failed either to remove
overhanging ice or to clear debris from roadside ditches, as it was required to
do under its contract with the Ministry.  The Court of Appeal dismissed
Trendline’s appeal from this finding of negligence.  The only question to be
resolved on this appeal is whether the appellant is absolved from liability to
the respondent as a result of engaging an independent contractor to perform the
road maintenance work.  12     
For the reasons set out in Lewis, the Ministry must remain liable
for its contractor’s negligence.  In accordance with these reasons it can be
stated that the applicable statutory provisions, sound policy considerations
and the reasonable expectations of highway users all lead to the conclusion
that the appellant cannot escape liability for negligence in maintaining and
repairing the roads by delegating that work to an independent contractor.  Disposition  13     
In the result, the appeal is dismissed with costs to the respondent
throughout.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellant:  The Ministry of Attorney
General, Victoria.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Hean, Wylie, Peach, De
Stefanis, Burnaby.   * Sopinka J. took no part in the judgment.  