Edgeworth Construction Ltd. v.
N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd., [1993] 3 S.C.R. 206  Edgeworth Construction Ltd.                                                            Appellant  v.  N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd.                                                             Respondent  and  Pacific Coast Energy Corp., Westcoast
Energy Inc. and Intec Engineering Inc.                                                                Interveners  and between  Edgeworth Construction Ltd.                                                            Appellant  v.  N. N. Walji, Graham A. Fary,
Warren Reid and persons whose names are unknown to
the Plaintiff                  Respondents   Indexed as:  Edgeworth
Construction Ltd. v. N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd.  File No.:  22429.  1993:  June 14;
1993:  September 30.  Present:  La Forest,
Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                      Appellant
successfully bid on a road building contract and entered into a contract with
the province for the work.  It alleged that it lost money on the project due to
errors in the specifications and construction drawings and commenced
proceedings for negligent misrepresentation against both respondent engineering
firm which prepared those drawings and the individual engineers who affixed
their seals to the drawings.                      Held:  The appeal should be
allowed against N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd. and should be
dismissed against the individual engineers.                     Per Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin,
Iacobucci and Major JJ.:  Liability for negligent misrepresentation arises
where a person makes a representation knowing that another may rely on it, and
the plaintiff in fact relies on the representation to its detriment.  The facts
here established a prima facie cause of action against the engineering
firm and the contract between the contractor and the province did not negate
the duty of care.                     The province did
not assume the risks said to be previously held by the engineers.  The
engineers' work did not cease to be representations of the engineers even
though it became a representation of the province when it was incorporated in
the tender package and the contract.  The contractor was relying on the
accuracy of the engineers' design just as much after it entered into the
contract as before.  Neither the Ministry nor the contractor ever assumed the
risk of errors in the engineer's work.                     The contract
stipulated that any representations in the tender documents were for the
general information of bidders and were not in anyway warranted or guaranteed
by or on behalf of the Minister.  This absolved the province from any liability
for the plans.  The exemption expressly extended only to warranties by or on
behalf of the Minister.  It did not purport to protect the engineers against
liability for their representations.                     The engineers, who
were not parties to the contract, could not claim the benefit of the contract's
exclusion of liability for the representations in the tender documents.  While
the doctrine of privity of contract does not preclude contractual exclusions
for negligence being extended to provide protection for the employees actually
charged with doing the work, the contract clause, which provides protection
expressly or by implication, must be established to be for the benefit of the
persons who claim its protection.  This was not done here and the facts did not
give rise to an inference that the exemption was intended to include the
engineers.  The exemption clause was entirely consistent with the conclusion
that the protection was intended for the benefit of the province alone. 
Moreover, the engineering firm could have taken measures to protect itself from
the liability in question by placing a disclaimer on the design, by requiring a
supervisory role for itself or by acquiring insurance.                     The presence of a
contract does not bar the right to sue except where the parties to the contract
have themselves defined their obligations by contract so that the contract must
prevail over a different duty which tort law might impose.  People are free to
determine their own civil rights and responsibilities.  In this case, the
contract was not between the plaintiff and the defendant and did not purport to
limit the tort duty which is owed by the defendant engineering firm to the
contractor.                     The claim at bar
was for negligent misrepresentation and did not import considerations of
sufficient proximity and economic loss.  Claims for pure economic loss may be
brought for negligent misrepresentation.                     Policy
considerations did not negate the imposition of tort liability.  If the
conditions for liability stipulated in Hedley Byrne are met, it is
difficult to conceive a valid policy reason why a duty of care should not be
held to arise.  Permitting the engineering firm to be sued in tort does not
circumvent any contractual promise.  The responsibility of the engineering firm
arises from its own misrepresentation, coupled with the knowledge that
contractors will be relying on it and acting on it without practical
opportunity for independent inquiry, in the absence of any disclaimer of
responsibility.                     Plaintiffs may sue
concurrently in tort and in contract, provided the contract does not negate the
imposition of the duty of care.  Here, if the only recourse for a claim for
design defects were a suit against the owner in contract, no claim for design
defects would be possible because of the clause excluding responsibility for
design defects.                     The short tendering
term indicated that the contractor was expected to rely on the design and
documents prepared by the engineering firm.  There was no time for a contractor
to conduct a thorough professional review of the accuracy of the engineering
firm's work and the duplication of this work would be costly.  As a matter of
policy, good practical and economic sense required that the responsibility for
the adequacy of the design be placed on the shoulders of the designing
engineering firm, assuming reasonable reliance and barring disclaimers.  The
risk of liability to compensate third parties for design error will be
reflected in the cost of the engineers' services to the owner inviting tenders.                     The position of the
individual engineers was different.  The only basis upon which they were sued
was the fact that each of them affixed his seal to the design documents.  This
was insufficient to establish a duty of care between the individual engineers
and appellant.  The seal attests that a qualified engineer prepared the
drawing.  It is not a guarantee of accuracy.                     Per La Forest J.:  While general
agreement was expressed with McLachlin J.'s reasons and her disposition of the
appeal, some comments about the claim against the individual engineers as it
related to London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd.
were added.  The difference between the professional engineers here and the
ordinary workers who were not absolved from liability flowing from their
negligence in the course of their employment was not apparent at the level of
principle and the fact that one case dealt with economic loss and the other
with physical damage was irrelevant absent an issue of indeterminacy.  Several
technical distinctions exist between the ordinary tort of negligence and
negligent misrepresentation.  In particular, under negligent misrepresentation
the representee must have relied, in a reasonable manner, on the negligent
representation.  The individual engineers can be absolved from liability on
this basis because, on balance, there are sound policy reasons why they should
not be subjected to a duty to the appellant.  The appellant here was quite
reasonably relying on the skills of the engineering firm and the firm in turn
must be taken to have recognized that persons in the respondents' position
would rely on their work and act accordingly.  The relationship can be
described both in terms of reliance and of voluntary assumption of risk.  The
individual engineers, however,  notwithstanding appellant's reliance on their
work, would expect that the appellant would place reliance on their firm's
pocketbook and not theirs for indemnification.  The appellant could not
reasonably rely for indemnification on the individual engineers because it
would have to show that it was relying on the particular expertise of an
individual engineer without regard to the corporate character of the
engineering firm.  The mere presence of an individual engineer's seal was not
sufficient indication of personal reliance or voluntary assumption of risk.  Cases Cited  By McLachlin J.                     Considered:  London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne
& Nagel International Ltd., [1992] 3  S.C.R. 299; referred to:  Hedley
Byrne & Co v. Heller & Partners Ltd., [1964] A.C. 465; Haig v.
Bamford, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 466;  BG Checo International Ltd. v.
British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12; Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021; Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Central Trust Co. v.
Rafuse, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 147.  By La Forest J.                     Distinguished:  London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne
& Nagel International Ltd., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299.    Authors Cited  Fleming, John G.  The Law of Torts,
8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (1991), 53 B.C.L.R. (2d) 180,
[1991] 4 W.W.R. 251, 7 C.C.L.T. (2d) 177, 44 C.L.R. 88, 1 B.L.R. (2d) 188,
dismissing an appeal from a judgment of Meredith J. (1989), 37 C.L.R. 152,
dismissing the action.  Appeal allowed against N. D. Lea &
Associates Ltd. and dismissed against the individual engineers.                     James P. Taylor, Q.C., and Joanne R.
Lysyk, for the appellant.                     Glenn A.
Urquhart and Nathan H.
Smith, for the respondent N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd.                     G. K. MacIntosh, Q.C., and J. Kenneth
McEwan, for the interveners.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     La
Forest J. -- I have had
the advantage of reading the reasons of my colleague, Justice McLachlin.  I am
in general agreement with her and would dispose of the appeal as she proposes. 
However, I wish to add some comments about the claim against the individual
engineers.                     This case comes hot
on the heels of London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd.,
[1992] 3 S.C.R. 299, where the majority was unwilling to absolve ordinary
workers from liability flowing from their negligence in the course of their
employment except to the extent that a contractual exemption from liability had
been entered into by their employer, whereas in this case the professional
employees who, one would have thought, were in a better position to take steps
to protect themselves, are absolved from liability resulting from their
negligence in the absence of any exonerating contract.  It will be evident from
my dissent in London Drugs that such a distinction, in so far as it
favours professional employees, is, at the level of principle, lost on me.  And
it does not matter that in one case one is dealing with economic loss and in
the other with physical damage; as my colleague notes, no issue of
indeterminacy arises here.                     There are, however,
technical distinctions between the ordinary tort of negligence and negligent
misrepresentation, in particular that under the latter the representee must
have relied, in a reasonable manner, on the negligent representation.  I am
quite happy to rely on this technical distinction to absolve the individual
engineers from liability because, on balance, it seems to me, there are sound
reasons of policy why they should not be subjected to a duty to the appellant. 
The appellant here was quite reasonably relying on the skills of the
engineering firm and the firm in turn must be taken to have recognized that
persons in the position of the respondents would rely on their work and act
accordingly.  I have cast the relationship in terms of reliance but it may also
be seen as a matter of voluntary assumption of risk.  As Professor Fleming put
it in The Law of Torts (8th ed. 1992), at p. 641, "the recipient
must have had reasonable grounds for believing that the speaker expected to be
trusted".                     The situation of
the individual engineers is quite different.  While they may, in one sense,
have expected that persons in the position of the appellant would rely on their
work, they would expect that the appellant would place reliance on their firm's
pocketbook and not theirs for indemnification; see London Drugs, supra,
at pp. 386-87.  Looked at the other way, the appellant could not reasonably
rely for indemnification on the individual engineers.  It would have to show
that it was relying on the particular expertise of an individual engineer
without regard to the corporate character of the engineering firm.  It would
seem quite unrealistic, as my colleague observes, to hold that the mere presence
of an individual engineer's seal was sufficient indication of personal reliance
(or for that matter voluntary assumption of risk).  In considering the matter,
other more general policy issues should be considered.  As I noted in London
Drugs, supra, at p. 387, the case raises "with particular
acuity the question of whether in effect requiring double insurance by both the
firm and the employee makes sense in that context".                     The judgment of
Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ. was delivered by                     McLachlin
J. -- The appellant,
Edgeworth Construction Ltd. (hereinafter Edgeworth), is engaged in the business
of building roads in the Province of British Columbia.  In 1977, it bid on a
contract to build a section of highway in the Revelstoke area.  Its bid was
successful, and Edgeworth entered into a contract with the province for the
work.  Edgeworth alleges that it lost money on the project due to errors in the
specifications and construction drawings.  It commenced proceedings for negligent
misrepresentation against the engineering firm which prepared those drawings,
N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd. (hereinafter N. D. Lea) as well as the
individual engineers who affixed their seals to the drawings.  Reasons Below                     On a pre-trial
motion, the chambers judge ruled that Edgeworth was not entitled to pursue its
action against the engineers.  In his view, Edgeworth's only recourse was
against the province under its contract with the province.  The Court of Appeal
((1991), 53 B.C.L.R. (2d) 180) upheld this decision, holding that the engineers
did not owe a duty of care to Edgeworth.  Lambert J.A., speaking for the court,
stated at p. 187:                     In
this case Edgeworth Construction made a construction contract with the Crown,
represented by the Ministry of Highways.  The design of the project and the
plans and specifications prepared by N.D. Lea were incorporated in the
contract.  They were adopted by the Ministry of Highways as the design, plans
and specifications of the Ministry of Highways.  They became representations of
the Ministry of Highways to prospective bidders.  When they were adopted an
promulgated by the Ministry of Highways as the Ministry of Highways'
representations they ceased to be the representations of N.D. Lea, at least
insofar as proximity for the purposes of a duty of care with respect to
economic loss is concerned.  Proximity for the purposes of personal safety is a
different matter, governed by different considerations.  It is not in issue in
this appeal.  And, in my opinion, the individual seals of individual engineers
make no difference in the context of this case to the question of proximity for
the purposes of economic loss.  Points in Issue  [1.]  Whether
the British Columbia Court of Appeal erred in holding that the Respondent N.D.
Lea owed no duty of care in law to the Appellant, and, in particular, whether
the British Columbia Court of Appeal erred in finding that there was not a
sufficient degree of proximity existing between the Appellant and N.D. Lea in
order to found a duty of care.  [2.]  Whether
the Individual Respondents owed a duty of care in law to the Appellant.  Analysis                     Liability for
negligent misrepresentation arises where a person makes a representation
knowing that another may rely on it, and the plaintiff in fact relies on the
representation to its detriment:  Hedley Byrne & Co. v. Heller &
Partners Ltd., [1964] A.C. 465 and Haig v. Bamford, [1977] 1 S.C.R.
466.                     The facts alleged
in this case meet this test, leaving the contract between the contractor and
the province to one side. The engineers undertook to provide information (the
tender package) for use by a definable group of persons with whom it did not
have any contractual relationship.  The purpose of supplying the information
was to allow tenderers to prepare a price to be submitted.  The engineers knew
this.  The plaintiff contractor was one of the tenderers.  It relied on the
information prepared by the engineers in preparing its bid.  Its reliance upon
the engineers' work was reasonable.  It alleges it suffered loss as a
consequence.  These facts establish a prima facie cause of action
against the engineering firm.                     The only question
which remains is whether the contract between the contractor and the province
negated the duty of care which would otherwise have arisen on the facts
pleaded.                     The argument that
the contract between Edgeworth and the province negated or subsumed the duty of
care owed by the engineers to Edgeworth is put in a number of ways.  It is said
that the contract converted the representation from one made by the engineering
firm to one made by the province.  It is argued that the contract destroyed the
proximity which would otherwise have lain between the contractor and the
engineers.  And it is said that the proper course of the law and policy
precludes reliance on tort principles when a contract such as this has been
made.                     The essence of the
position adopted below is that the Ministry assumed all risks previously held
by the engineers.  The material provided to prospective bidders, which
incorporated the impugned work of the engineers, was "adopted and
promulgated by [the Ministry] as [the Ministry's] representations."  Thus,
it is argued, the Ministry assumed all risks, and the duty between the
engineers and contractor is negated.                     I cannot accede to
this argument.  It is true that the engineers' work was incorporated in the
tender package and thereafter in the contract.  This establishes that the
representations in the design became the representations of the province.  But
it does not, without more, and with great respect to the differing views below,
establish the further proposition that when the representations became the
representations of the province they ceased to be the representations of the
engineers.  The contractor was relying on the accuracy of the engineers' design
just as much after it entered into the contract as before.  Neither the
Ministry nor the contractor ever assumed the risk of errors in the engineers'
work.  Throughout, Edgeworth, if its contentions are born out at trial, was
relying on the expertise of the engineers and not of the province with respect
to the accuracy of the design.                     The contract, by
clause 42, stipulated that any representations in the tender documents were
"furnished merely for the general information of bidders and [were] not in
anywise warranted or guaranteed by or on behalf of the Minister . . . ." 
This arguably absolved the province from any liability for the plans.  The
exemption extends, on its express words, only to warranties "by or on behalf
of the Minister".  It does not purport to protect the engineers against
liability for their representations.                     There is a further
problem of whether the engineers, not parties to the contract, could claim the
benefit of its exclusion of liability for the representations in the tender
documents.  This Court in London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel
International Ltd., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299, held that the doctrine of privity
of contract did not preclude contractual exclusions for negligence being
extended to provide protection for the employees actually charged with doing
the work.  But before such an argument can succeed, it must be established that
the contract clause provides protection, or should by implication be held to
provide protection, for the persons who, although not parties to the contract,
are claiming the benefit of the exclusion.  In the case at bar this has not
been done.  In London Drugs the fact that the work for which the
exemption was given could only be done by the employees, taken together with
other circumstances including the powerlessness of the employees to protect
themselves otherwise, suggested that a term should be implied that the clause
was intended to benefit them, or alternatively, that the intention of the
parties manifested in the contract must be taken to limit the duty of care owed
in tort.  The facts in this case do not give rise to such an inference; rather,
clause 42 is entirely consistent with the conclusion that the protection was
intended for the benefit of the province alone.  Moreover, the engineering
firm, unlike the employees in London Drugs, could have taken measures to
protect itself from the liability in question.  It could have placed a
disclaimer of responsibility on the design documents.  Alternatively, it could
have refused to agree to provide the design without ongoing supervision duties
which would have permitted it to make alterations as the contract was being
performed; I raise this point in the context of the engineers' argument that
much of the loss might have been avoided had it had ongoing supervisory
duties.  Finally, the engineering firm might have decided to accept the risk
that tenderers would rely on its design to their detriment, and have insured
itself accordingly.  In short, the circumstances of the case, combined with the
wording of the exclusion clause, negate any inference that the contractor
should be taken as having excluded its right to sue the engineers for design
deficiencies by its contract with the province.  For these reasons, I conclude
that clause 42 of the contract between the contractor and the province does not
assist the engineering firm.                     Another way of
putting the argument that the contract terminates the duty of care between the
contractor and the engineers, is to say that once the contractor enters into a
contract with the Province which deals with the matter of design, the contract
ousts all tort duties.  Where the parties to the contract have themselves
defined their obligations by contract, it may be argued that the contract must
prevail over a different duty which tort law might impose, on the principle
that people are free to determine their own civil rights and responsibilities. 
Subject to this limitation, however, the presence of a contract does not bar
the right to sue in tort:  BG Checo International Ltd. v. British Columbia
Hydro and Power Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12.  In this case, the contract
is not between the plaintiff and the defendant.  Moreover, for the reasons
given above, it does not purport to limit the tort duty which is owed by the
defendant engineering firm to the contractor.  Accordingly, the argument that
the parties have defined their obligations by the contract, thereby ousting
tort obligations, cannot succeed.                     In support of its
contention that the factual matrix alleged on the pleadings does not support a
relationship of sufficient proximity to found a duty of care, the engineering
firm emphasizes that the loss claimed is purely economic, a fact also noted by
the Court of Appeal.  This argument seems, in my opinion, to overlook the fact
that this is a claim for negligent misrepresentation under Hedley Byrne,
supra.  It has long been settled that claims for pure economic loss may
be brought for negligent misrepresentation.  The case at bar accordingly does
not raise the issue discussed in Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk
Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021, of when new categories of pure
economic loss may be recoverable in tort.                     Finally, it is
suggested that policy considerations negate the imposition of tort liability. 
The engineering firm urges that the applicable test for a duty of care in tort
is that set out in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C.
728, which is said to permit a court to deny on grounds of policy a duty of
care which might otherwise arise.  There is a preliminary question whether the
conditions specified in Hedley Byrne for the imposition of liability for
negligent misrepresentation leave much scope for further policy assessment
under the second branch of Anns.  To put it another way, it can be
argued that if the conditions for liability stipulated in Hedley Byrne
are met, it is difficult to conceive a valid policy reason why a duty of care
should not be held to arise.                     Leaving that
question aside, however, I am not persuaded that good policy reasons exist for
denying a duty of care owed by the engineering firm to the contractor in this
case.  The engineers argue that to allow the claim in tort to proceed would be
to permit the contractor to circumvent its contractual promise not to rely on
the tender documents by claiming from a third party.  This, it says, would
negate contractual limitations on liability.  It would allow the contracting
parties to foist their responsibilities on a third party, the engineering
firm.  And it would prevent or inhibit engineers and other design professionals
from accepting limited retainers.  The proper approach for compensation for
design error, according to the engineers, is for the contractor to sue the
owner, in this case the province, on the contract.  If the owner is found
liable, the owner may then claim over against the design professional which it
employed to prepare the tender documents.                     I cannot see how
permitting the engineering firm to be sued in tort circumvents any contractual
promise.  As discussed above, there is no contractual promise which says the
firm is not responsible for its negligent misrepresentations in the design.  So
nothing is circumvented.  For the same reason, no contractual limitations are negated. 
The contracting parties cannot be said to be foisting their responsibilities on
a design professional. They determine their own rights and responsibilities. 
The responsibility of the engineering firm arises from its own
misrepresentation, coupled with the knowledge that contractors will be relying
on it and acting on it without practical opportunity for independent inquiry,
in  the absence of any disclaimer of responsibility.  While the possibility of
being sued in tort may inhibit the willingness of design professionals to enter
into limited retainers, it does not follow that by assuming duties toward third
parties the engineering firm would be performing work for which it is not
paid.  Many professionals in a wide variety of callings and circumstances
assume duties toward persons other than those with whom they have contracted,
and are held liable in tort for their proper discharge:  see, for example, Haig
v. Bamford, supra.  Typically, the additional risks are reflected in the
price of the contract.  Alternatively, disclaimers of responsibility to third
parties may be issued.                     The proposition
that the only correct way to bring a claim for design defects is by suing the
owner in contract, who then may claim over against the design professional, is
similarly suspect.  The result, in a case such as this, would be that the
contractor would not be able to claim against anyone for design defects.  Since
the province as owner has excluded its responsibility for design defects under
the contract, the contractor could not recover against it.  So there would be
no claim over.  Moreover, the notion that there is only one right way to
proceed -- in contract -- undercuts the philosophy expressed by this Court in
cases such as Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 147, and BG
Checo International Ltd. v. British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority, supra,
that plaintiffs may sue concurrently in contract and tort, provided the
contract does not negate the imposition of a duty of care in tort.                     One important policy
consideration weighs against the engineering firm.  If the engineering firm is
correct, then contractors bidding on construction contracts will be obliged to
do their own engineering.  In the typically short period allowed for the filing
of tenders -- in this case about two weeks -- the contractor would be obliged,
at the very least, to conduct a thorough professional review of the accuracy of
the engineering design and information, work which in this case took over two
years.  The task would be difficult, if not impossible.  Moreover, each
tendering contractor would be obliged to hire its own engineers and repeat a
process already undertaken by the owner.  The result would be that the
engineering for the job would be done not just once, by the engineers hired by
the owner, but a number of times.  This duplication of effort would doubtless
be reflected in higher bid prices, and ultimately, a greater cost to the public
which ultimately bears the cost of road construction.  From an economic point
of view, it makes more sense for one engineering firm to do the engineering
work, which the contractors in turn are entitled to rely on, absent disclaimers
or limitations on the part of the firm.  In fact, the short tender period
suggests that in reality this is the way the process works; contractors who
wish to bid have no choice but to rely on the design and documents prepared by
the engineering firm.  It is on this basis that they submit their bids and on
this basis that the successful bidder enters into the contract.  The fact that
the contractor may agree to exempt the party inviting tenders from liability
for the design process does not suggest that it thereby should be taken to have
exempted the engineering firm.  In the scheme of things, it makes good practical
and economic sense to place the responsibility for the adequacy of the design
on the shoulders of the designing engineering firm, assuming reasonable
reliance and barring disclaimers.  The risk of liability to compensate third
parties for design error will be reflected in the cost of the engineers'
services to the owner inviting tenders.  But that is a much better result than
requiring the owner to pay not only the engineering firm which it retains, but
indirectly, the additional engineers which all tendering parties would
otherwise be required to retain.                     For these reasons,
I conclude that the courts below erred in holding that the facts pleaded by
Edgeworth do not disclose a cause of action against the engineering firm, 
N. D. Lea.                     The position of the
individual engineers is different.  The only basis upon which they are sued is
the fact that each of them affixed his seal to the design documents.  In my
view, this is insufficient to establish a duty of care between the individual
engineers and Edgeworth.  The seal attests that a qualified engineer prepared
the drawing.  It is not a guarantee of accuracy.  The affixation of a seal,
without more, is insufficient to found liability for negligent
misrepresentation.  I agree with the courts below that the action against the
individual defendants should be struck.  Conclusion                     I would allow the
appeal against N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd.  I would dismiss the appeal
against the individual engineers.  Costs will follow the event, here and below.                     Appeal allowed with
costs against N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd. and appeal dismissed
against the individual engineers.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Blake, Cassels & Graydon, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
respondent N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd.:  Singleton, Urquhart,
MacDonald, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
interveners:  Farris, Vaughan, Wills & Murphy, Vancouver.  