SCC Case Information: 34863   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: 
  A.I. Enterprises Ltd. v. Bram Enterprises Ltd., 2014 SCC 12,
  [2014] 1 S.C.R. 177 Date:
  20140131 Docket:
  34863  Between: A.I.
Enterprises Ltd. and Alan Schelew Appellants and Bram
Enterprises Ltd. and Jamb Enterprises Ltd. Respondents -
and - Attorney
General of British Columbia Intervener    Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 106) Cromwell J. (McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Rothstein,
  Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. concurring)    A.I.
Enterprises Ltd. v. Bram Enterprises Ltd., 2014 SCC 12, [2014] 1 S.C.R.
177 A.I. Enterprises Ltd. and Alan Schelew                                                                                                 Appellants v. Bram Enterprises Ltd. and Jamb Enterprises Ltd.                                                                               Respondents and Attorney General of British
Columbia                                                        Intervener Indexed
as:  A.I. Enterprises Ltd. v. Bram Enterprises Ltd. 2014 SCC 12 File No.:  34863. 2013:  May 22; 2014:  January 31. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for new brunswick                     Torts
— Intentional torts — Unlawful interference with economic relations — Scope of liability
— Minority owner of apartment building and its director interfering with
attempts by majority owners to sell building to third parties — Whether
minority owner and its director liable in tort for unlawful interference with
economic relations.                     Fiduciary duty — Breach by director — Minority
owner of apartment building and its director interfering with attempts by
majority owners to sell building to third parties — Whether director liable for
breach of fiduciary duty.                     Joyce,
a corporation, owned an apartment building in Moncton, New Brunswick.  Corporate
entities Bram and Jamb together owned a majority of Joyce while a minority
interest was held by corporation A.I., whose owner and sole director was A.  A
syndication agreement between Joyce, Bram, Jamb and A.I. contained a sale
mechanism giving a majority of investors the right to sell the building subject
to a right of first refusal of any dissenting investor to purchase it at a
professionally appraised value.  In 2000, Bram and Jamb wanted to sell the
property but A.I. and A did not.  Notice was given to A.I. under the
syndication agreement and the building was appraised at $2.2 million.  A.I. did
not purchase the property and thus it was listed for sale.  While the property
was listed, A.I. and A attempted to invoke the arbitration process under the
syndication agreement, filed encumbrances against the property, and denied
entry to the property to prospective buyers.  Potential sales to third party
purchasers failed, and A.I. ultimately bought the building for the appraised
value of $2.2 million.                     Subsequently,
Bram and Jamb brought an action against A.I. and A claiming that, as a result
of A.I. and A’s wrongful conduct, the sale had been substantially delayed and
was for less money than they could have obtained from a third party purchaser. 
The trial judge found that A.I. and A’s conduct amounted to interference by
unlawful means and awarded damages reflecting the difference between the sale
price paid by A.I. and the price that could have been obtained from a third
party.  The Court of Appeal dismissed A.I. and A’s appeal.  Although the court
found that the acts of A.I. and A did not meet the requirements for liability
under the unlawful means tort, it held that liability could be imposed on the
basis of a principled exception.                     Held:
 The appeal should be dismissed.                     The
tort of unlawful interference with economic relations has also been referred to
as “interference with a trade or business by unlawful means”, “intentional
interference with economic relations”, “causing loss by unlawful means” or
simply as the “unlawful means” tort.  The unlawful means tort is an intentional
tort which creates a type of “parasitic” liability in a three-party situation:
it allows a plaintiff to sue a defendant for economic loss resulting from the
defendant’s unlawful act against a third party.  Liability to the plaintiff is
based on (or parasitic upon) the defendant’s unlawful act against the third
party.  The two core components of the unlawful means tort are that the
defendant must use unlawful means and that the defendant must intend to harm
the plaintiff through the use of the unlawful means.                     In
order for conduct to constitute “unlawful means” for this tort, the conduct
must give rise to a civil cause of action by the third party or would do so if
the third party had suffered loss as a result of that conduct.  The unlawful
means tort should be kept within narrow bounds.  Its scope should be understood
in the context of the broad outlines of tort law’s approach to regulating
economic and competitive activity.  Several aspects of that approach support
adopting a narrow scope: the common law accords less protection to purely
economic interests; it is reluctant to develop rules to enforce fair
competition; it is concerned not to undermine certainty in commercial affairs;
and the history of the common law shows that tort liability, if unduly
expanded, may undermine fundamental rights.  The rationale underlying the
unlawful means tort is the “liability stretching” rationale, which focuses on
extending an existing right to sue from the immediate victim of the unlawful
act to another party whom the defendant intended to target with the unlawful
conduct.  It extends civil liability without creating new actionable wrongs,
thereby closing a perceived liability gap where the wrongdoer’s acts in
relation to a third party, which are in breach of established legal obligations
to that third party, intentionally target the injured plaintiff.  This
rationale of the tort supports a narrow definition of “unlawful means”:  the
tort does not seek to create new actionable wrongs but simply to expand the
range of persons who may sue for harm intentionally caused by existing
actionable wrongs to a third party.  Thus, criminal offences and breaches of
statute will not be per se actionable under the unlawful means tort, but
the tort will be available if, under common law principles, those acts also
give rise to a civil action by the third party and interfered with the
plaintiff’s economic activity.  This approach avoids “tortifying” the criminal
and regulatory law by imposing civil liability where there would otherwise not
be any.                     The
unlawfulness requirement is not subject to principled exceptions.  Providing
trial judges with room to deal with cases that do not fall within the scope of
the tort’s liability simply confers an unstructured judicial discretion to do
what appears to the particular judge to be just in the particular circumstances. 
Allowing for exceptions without clearly outlining the principles to guide the
development of the law invites the danger of ad hoc decisions tailored
to achieve a vision of commercial morality — precisely the danger which the
“unlawful means” requirement is meant to avoid.                     Mere
foreseeability of economic harm does not meet the requirement for intention in
the unlawful means tort.  The defendant must have the intention to cause
economic harm to the plaintiff as an end in itself or the intention to cause
economic harm to the plaintiff because it is a necessary means of achieving an
end that serves some ulterior motive.  It is the intentional targeting of the
plaintiff by the defendant that justifies stretching the defendant’s liability
so as to afford the plaintiff a cause of action.  It is not sufficient that the
harm to the plaintiff be an incidental consequence of the defendant’s conduct,
even where the defendant realizes that it is extremely likely that harm to the plaintiff
may result.  Such incidental economic harm is an accepted part of market
competition.                     The
existence of a valid business relationship between the plaintiff and the third
party and the defendant’s knowledge of that relationship are not elements of
the unlawful means tort.  The focus of this tort is unlawful conduct that
intentionally harms the plaintiff’s economic interests.  There need be no
contract or even other formal dealings between the plaintiff and the third
party so long as the defendant’s conduct is unlawful and it intentionally harms
the plaintiff’s economic interests.                     The
tort of unlawful means is available even if there is another cause of action
available to the plaintiff against the defendant in relation to the alleged
misconduct.  The gist of the tort is the targeting of the plaintiff by the
defendant through the instrumentality of unlawful acts against a third party.  It
is that conduct by the defendant which gives rise to liability quite apart from
conduct that may be otherwise actionable by the plaintiff.  General principles
of tort liability accept concurrent liability and overlapping causes of action
for distinct wrongs suffered by the plaintiff in respect of the same incident.                     In
this case, the Court of Appeal concluded that there was no wrong that would be
actionable by the third party (the prospective purchasers) against A.I. and A. 
Accordingly, A.I. and A cannot be found liable to Bram and Jamb on the basis of
the unlawful means tort; however, the trial judge made strong findings that A
breached his fiduciary obligations as a director of the family companies and
the trial judge’s award should be upheld on that basis.  While A.I. was not a
fiduciary, A was its sole director and shareholder and it is therefore liable
for knowing assistance in the breach of fiduciary duty and knowing receipt of
proceeds of the breach. Cases Cited Statutes and Regulations Cited Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991,
c. 64, arts. 6, 7. Trade Disputes Act, 1906 (U.K.), 6 Edw.
7, c. 47. Authors Cited Adams, George W.  Canadian Labour Law, 2nd ed.  Toronto: 
Canada Law Book, 1993 (loose-leaf updated September 2013, release 47). Adell, Bernard.  “Secondary Picketing after Pepsi-Cola:  What’s
Clear, and What Isn’t?” (2003), 10 C.L.E.L.J. 135. American Law Institute.  Restatement of the Law, Second:  Torts
2d.  St. Paul, Minn.:  American Law Institute Publishers, 1989. Barker, Kit, et al. The Law of Torts in Australia, 5th ed.  South
Melbourne:  Oxford University Press, 2012. Burns, Peter.  “Tort Injury to Economic Interests:  Some Facets of
Legal Response” (1980), 58 Can. Bar Rev. 103. Burns, Peter T., and Joost Blom.  Economic Interests in
Canadian Tort Law.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2009. Carty, Hazel.  An Analysis of the Economic Torts.  Oxford:  Oxford
University Press, 2001. Carty, Hazel.  An Analysis of the Economic Torts, 2nd ed.  Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2010. Carty, Hazel.  “Intentional Violation of Economic Interests:  The
Limits of Common Law Liability” (1988), 104 Law Q. Rev. 250. Carty, Hazel.  “The Economic Torts in the 21st Century” (2008), 124 Law
Q. Rev. 641. Deakin, Simon, and John Randall.  “Rethinking the Economic Torts”
(2009), 72 Mod. L. Rev. 519. Eekelaar, John.  “The Conspiracy Tangle” (1990), 106 Law Q. Rev.
223. Elias, Patrick, and Keith Ewing.  “Economic Torts and Labour Law:  Old
Principles and New Liabilities” (1982), 41 Cambridge L.J. 321. Estes, Jerry C.  “Expanding Horizons in the Law of Torts —
Tortious Interference” (1974), 23 Drake L. Rev. 341. Fleming’s The Law of Torts, 10th ed. by Carolyn
Sappideen and Prue Vines, eds.  Pyrmont, N.S.W.:  Lawbook Co., 2011. Fridman, G. H. L.  The Law of Torts in Canada, 3rd
ed. by G. H. L. Fridman et al. Toronto:  Carswell, 2010. Kain, Brandon, and Anthony Alexander.  “The ‘Unlawful Means’ Element
of the Economic Torts:  Does a Coherent Approach Lie Beyond Reach?”, in Todd L.
Archibald and Randall Scott Echlin, eds., Annual Review of Civil Litigation,
2010.  Toronto:  Carswell, 2010, 33. Lee, Pey Woan.  “Causing Loss by Unlawful Means”, [2011] S.J.L.S.
330. Linden, Allen M., and Bruce Feldthusen.  Canadian Tort Law,
9th ed.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2011. Markesinis and Deakin’s Tort Law, 7th
ed. by Simon Deakin, Angus Johnston and Basil Markesinis.  Oxford:  Clarendon
Press, 2013. Osborne, Philip H.  The Law of Torts, 4th ed.  Toronto: 
Irwin Law, 2011. Perlman, Harvey S.  “Interference with Contract and Other
Economic Expectancies:  A Clash of Tort and Contract Doctrine” (1982), 49 U.
Chicago L. Rev. 61. Podolny, Ronald.  “The Tort of Intentional Interference with
Economic Relations:  Is Clarity Out of Reach?” (2012), 52 Can. Bus.
L.J. 63. Sales, Philip, and Daniel Stilitz.  “Intentional Infliction of Harm
by Unlawful Means” (1999), 115 Law Q. Rev. 411. Stevens, Lyn L.  “Interference With Economic Relations — Some
Aspects of the Turmoil in the Intentional Torts” (1974), 12 Osgoode Hall
L.J. 595. Stevens, Robert.  Torts and Rights.  Oxford:  Oxford University
Press, 2007. Waters’ Law of Trusts in Canada, 4th ed.
by Donovan W. M. Waters, Mark R. Gillen and Lionel D. Smith,
eds.  Toronto:  Carswell, 2012. Watkins, Larry.  “Tort Law — Tortious Interference with Business
Expectancy — A Trap for the Wary and Unwary Alike” (2012), 34 U. Ark. Little
Rock L. Rev. 619. Weir, Tony.  Economic Torts.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1997. Winfield and Jolowicz on Tort, 18th ed. by
W. V. H. Rogers.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 2010.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the New Brunswick Court of Appeal (Robertson, Bell and Green
JJ.A.), 2012 NBCA 33, 387 N.B.R. (2d) 215, 350 D.L.R. (4th) 601, 96 C.C.L.T.
(3d) 1, 2 B.L.R. (5th) 171, [2012] N.B.J. No. 116 (QL), 2012 CarswellNB 194,
affirming a decision of Dionne J., 2010 NBQB 245, July 22, 2010.  Appeal dismissed.                     Richard J. Scott, Q.C., for the appellants.                     J. Gareth Morley and Christina Drake, for the intervener.                     The judgment of the Court was
delivered by                     Cromwell J. — I.         
Overview [1]                             
A group of family members, through their
companies, owned an apartment building. The majority of them wanted to sell it,
but one of them did not. He took a series of actions to thwart the sale. The
result was that the ultimate sale price was nearly $400,000 less than it
otherwise might have been. When the majority sued to recover this loss, the
main question was whether the dissenting family member and his company were
liable for what the trial judge referred to as the tort of unlawful
interference with economic relations. [2]                             
While this tort is far from new, its scope is
unsettled and needs clarification.  There is not even any generally accepted
nomenclature for the tort. It is variously referred to as “unlawful
interference with economic relations”, “interference with a trade or business
by unlawful means”, “intentional interference with economic relations”, or
simply “causing loss by unlawful means”. I will refer to it by either the
latter name or simply as the “unlawful means” tort. [3]                             
The uncertainty surrounding the unlawful means
tort is reflected in the different approaches taken by the trial judge and the
Court of Appeal in this case. The trial judge found the dissenting family
member and his company liable. They had, he concluded, unlawfully and
intentionally interfered with the economic relations between the majority
owners and the prospective purchasers. Their conduct qualified as unlawful
because it lacked any legal justification. The New Brunswick Court of Appeal
upheld this result, although for significantly different reasons. The acts of
the dissenting family member and his company did not meet the general
requirement that they be unlawful because they did not provide any basis for a
civil suit by the prospective purchasers.  However, liability could be imposed
on the basis of a “principled exception” to this requirement. [4]                             
Before us, the main issue concerns the scope of
liability for this tort and, in particular, what the unlawfulness requirement
means. If the tort does not apply to these facts, we must also decide whether
liability may be imposed on the basis of the breach of fiduciary duty of the
dissenting family member as a director of the majority corporations. [5]                             
In summary, the issues and my conclusions are
these: A.        What
is the scope of liability for the tort of causing loss by unlawful means? (1)        What sorts of
conduct are considered “unlawful” for the purposes of this tort? Conduct is unlawful if it
would be actionable by the third party or would have been actionable if the
third party had suffered loss as a result of it. The alleged misconduct of the
defendants in this case was not unlawful in this sense and therefore they
cannot be held liable on the basis of the unlawful means tort. (2)        Is
the tort available only if there is no other cause of action available to the
plaintiff against the defendant in relation to the alleged misconduct? In my view the answer to
this question is no. (3)        Should the
“unlawfulness” requirement be subject to principled exceptions? The answer to this question
is also no in my view. (4)        Application
to this case The appellants cannot be
found liable to the respondents on the basis of the unlawful means tort. (5)        Did the Court
of Appeal err in finding that the defendants had the required knowledge for the
unlawful means tort? My answer to this
question is also no. B.        If the unlawful
means tort is not available, are the appellants otherwise liable? The trial judge made
strong findings that the dissenting family member breached his fiduciary
obligations as a director of the family companies and the trial judge’s award
should be upheld on that basis. [6]                             
I would therefore dismiss the appeal with costs. [7]                             
In order to sort out the scope of liability for
causing loss by unlawful means, we must delve deeply into the rationale of the
tort and its place in the larger scheme of tort liability for causing economic
harm.  But first, I will briefly summarize the facts and judicial history
giving rise to the appeal. II.      
Facts and Judicial History A.       Facts [8]                             
Joyce Avenue Apartments Ltd. owned an apartment
building in Moncton, New Brunswick. Joyce was owned by Lillian Schelew and her
four sons, Jeffrey, Michael, Bernard and Alan, through corporate entities.  The
respondents, Bram Enterprises Ltd. and Jamb Enterprises Ltd., each owned 40 percent
of Joyce. The four Schelew brothers owned equal numbers of common shares and
were directors of both corporations while Lillian held voting preferred shares
in Bram. The remaining 20 percent interest in Joyce was held by the appellant
A.I. Enterprises Ltd., whose owner and sole director was the appellant Alan
Schelew. A.I. (effectively Alan) managed the building for a fee. [9]                             
Joyce, as owner of the building, and Bram, Jamb
and A.I., as the investors, entered into a syndication agreement. The agreement
contained a sale mechanism which gave a majority of the investors the right to
sell the building subject to a right of first refusal of any dissenting
investor to purchase it at a professionally appraised value. Once the appraisal
was obtained, the investors wishing to sell were deemed to have made an
irrevocable offer of sale in that amount to the dissenting investor. The offer
would remain open for 15 days: Syndication Agreement, s. 9.02. [10]                         
The trouble started in the year 2000. The
respondents, Bram and Jamb (in effect all of the family members except Alan
Schelew), wanted to sell the property but the appellants, A.I. and Alan
Schelew, did not. The respondents gave notice to A.I. under s. 9.02 of the
Syndication Agreement and the building was appraised at $2.2 million. A.I. did
not accept the deemed offer within the prescribed time and the property was
listed for sale.  Over the next 16 months, the respondents dealt with four
potential purchasers but no sale was completed. The respondents allege that the
sale was thwarted by a series of intentional actions by the appellants, which
form the basis of the claim against them for causing loss by unlawful means.
Ultimately, about two years after the first attempts to sell, A.I. bought the
building for the appraised value of $2.2 million. [11]                         
The respondents then sued the appellants. They
claimed that, as a result of the appellants’ wrongful conduct, the sale had
been substantially delayed and was for less money than they could have obtained
from a third party purchaser. While the respondents’ statement of claim did not
spell out the legal bases for the claim, the pre- and post-trial briefs alleged
that the appellants breached their obligations arising under the Syndication
Agreement, that Alan Schelew had breached his fiduciary duty as a director of
Bram and Jamb by putting his interests ahead of those of the companies and that
the appellants had unlawfully interfered with economic relations. B.       Judicial History and the Parties’
Positions on Appeal (1)      Court of Queen’s Bench of New Brunswick, 2010 NBQB 245,
July 22, 2010 (Dionne J.) [12]                         
Dionne J. at trial found that the appellants’
conduct amounted to interference by unlawful means and awarded damages
reflecting the difference between what A.I. paid and what could have been
obtained but for the appellants’ obstruction. [13]                         
The trial judge focused on four of the
appellants’ acts: they misused the arbitration provisions of the Syndication
Agreement as a means of stalling the sale of the Joyce property; they advanced
legally groundless defences for a “Notice of its first
right of refusal” which they had filed against the Joyce property; they
subsequently filed an equally baseless certificate of pending litigation
against the property; finally, they denied entry to the Joyce property to
prospective buyers. These acts had the effect of “complicating, delaying,
impeding and ultimately and for all intents and purposes completely obstructing
and preventing” the respondents’ efforts to sell the property to third parties:
para. 282. [14]                         
All of this conduct was unlawful in the trial
judge’s view because it lacked any legal basis or justification. He found that
Alan Schelew’s conduct in obstructing the sale also breached his fiduciary
obligations as director of Bram and Jamb and that A.I. had breached its obligations
towards Bram and Jamb under the Syndication Agreement. [15]                         
The trial judge rejected the appellants’
submission that the harm to Bram and Jamb was merely an incidental effect of
the pursuit of their legitimate business interests. Rather, he found that the
appellants “possessed actual intent to do whatever they could to pursue the
interest of A I Enterprises and that they were well aware that their
actions would cause harm to Jam[b] & Bram”: para. 287. He concluded
that but for the actions of the appellants, the respondents would have sold the
Joyce property in 2001 for $2.58 million, an amount which was $380,000 more
than the respondents received on the sale to A.I. in 2002.  Factoring in the
real estate commission and pre-judgment interest, he fixed total damages at
$183,061 for each plaintiff, plus costs. (2)     
New Brunswick Court of Appeal, 2012 NBCA 33, 387
N.B.R. (2d) 215 (Robertson J.A., Bell and Green JJ.A. Concurring) [16]                         
At trial, neither party drew the attention of
the court to the decision of the House of Lords in OBG Ltd. v. Allan,
[2007] UKHL 21, [2008] 1 A.C. 1, a decision which extensively examined the
proper scope of the economic torts in general and of the unlawful means tort in
particular. The decision was, however, placed before the Court of Appeal and,
speaking through Robertson J.A., the court carefully and fully examined the law
in light of it and subsequent developments. While the court took a considerably
different view of the unlawful means tort than had the trial judge, it
nonetheless dismissed the appeal. [17]                         
The Court of Appeal noted that the unlawful
means tort has been “in a state of flux” (para. 18) and that two opposing views
on the proper scope of the unlawful means component have stemmed from the OBG
decision. Lord Hoffmann, who was in the majority on this point, adopted a
narrow definition of “unlawful means” whereby only breaches of the civil law
such as a tort or breach of contract would suffice. The unlawful conduct would
need to be actionable by the party against which it was directed in order to
give rise to liability: see OBG, at para. 49. Lord Nicholls of
Birkenhead advocated a broader view, according to which “unlawful means”
included “common law torts, statutory torts, crimes, breaches of contract,
breaches of trust and equitable obligations, breaches of confidence, and so
on”: OBG, at paras. 150 and 155. [18]                         
The Court of Appeal preferred Lord Hoffmann’s
narrow definition. The conduct of the appellants, while lacking any legal
justification, did not amount to a wrong actionable by the prospective
purchasers. However, the Court of Appeal allowed for principled exceptions to
mitigate the rigidity of the narrow rule. The court crafted an exception, which
covered this case, in the following terms:      In my view, the intentional
erection of self-help legal barriers, some of which are enforceable through
statutory processes not subject to prior judicial authorization, in
circumstances where those barriers rest on rights fabricated with arguments of
sand, warrants redress under the tort of unlawful means (akin to the tort of
abuse of legal process). [para. 9] [19]                         
A.I. and Alan Schelew appeal from that decision. (3)     
Parties’ Positions [20]                         
Before this Court, the parties take
diametrically opposed views of the scope of the unlawful means tort. [21]                         
The appellants urge us to adopt the position
taken by a majority of the House of Lords, speaking through Lord Hoffmann in OBG,
at para. 49: “unlawful” means actionable by the third party (or that the
act would be actionable but for the fact that it did not cause the third party
any loss). This approach may be described as the narrow view: it is premised on
the tort having a limited sphere of operation so that only actionable civil
wrongs against the third party provide a basis for allowing the intended victim
to sue.  The appellants also urge us to hold that the tort is only available to
the plaintiff if the defendant’s conduct causing the injury does not give rise
to another cause of action by the plaintiff against the defendant. [22]                         
The respondents, on the other hand, urge us to
adopt one of two alternative positions, both of which stake out a broader role
for the tort. The primary submission is that “unlawful means” is defined by a
“broad bright-line rule” that an act is unlawful if there exists a legal
proceeding through which its legitimacy can be successfully challenged.
Alternatively, the respondents submit that we should adopt Lord Hoffmann’s
narrow formulation but hold, as did the Court of Appeal, that it is subject to
principled exceptions. III.    Analysis A.      
What Is the Scope of Liability for the Tort of
Causing Loss by Unlawful Means? (1)      What Sorts of Conduct Are Considered “Unlawful” for the Purposes of
This Tort? [23]                         
The unlawful means tort creates a type of
“parasitic” liability in a three-party situation: it allows a plaintiff to sue
a defendant for economic loss resulting from the defendant’s unlawful act
against a third party. Liability to the plaintiff is based on (or parasitic
upon) the defendant’s unlawful act against the third party. While the elements
of the tort have been described in a number of ways, its core captures the
intentional infliction of economic injury on C (the plaintiff) by A (the
defendant)’s use of unlawful means against B (the third party): see
H. Carty, An Analysis of the Economic Torts (2001), at p. 103;
J. W. Neyers, “Rights-based justifications for the tort of unlawful
interference with economic relations” (2008), 28 L.S. 215; G. H. L.
Fridman, The Law of Torts in Canada (3rd ed. 2010), at pp. 773-75;
P. H. Osborne, The Law of Torts (4th ed. 2011), at pp. 336-38;
P. T. Burns and J. Blom, Economic Interests in Canadian Tort Law
(2009), at p. 186.  There is no dispute here that this is an intentional
tort; the focus of the dispute in this case is on the unlawful means element. [24]                         
An old case will serve as an example. The
defendant, the master of a trading ship, fired its cannons at a canoe that was
attempting to trade with its competitor, the plaintiffs’ trading ship, in order
to prevent it from doing so. The defendant was held liable, Lord Kenyon being
of the opinion that these facts supported an action:  Tarleton v. M’Gawley
(1793), Peake 270, 170 E.R. 153. The plaintiffs were able to recover damages
for the economic injury resulting from the defendant’s wrongful conduct toward
third parties (the occupants of the canoe) which had been committed with the
intention of inflicting economic injury on the plaintiffs. [25]                         
The question of what sort of conduct constitutes
the necessary unlawful means is important. It has been described as the most
important question concerning this tort:  OBG, at para. 45, per
Lord Hoffmann; H. Carty, An Analysis of the Economic Torts (2nd ed.
2010), at p. 84. Giving the concept of “unlawful means” a “sound,
economically relevant and judicially supported interpretation” is “[t]he key to
keeping the economic torts in harmony with contemporary legal values”: No. 1
Collision Repair & Painting (1982) Ltd. v. Insurance Corp. of British
Columbia, 2000 BCCA 463, 80 B.C.L.R. (3d) 62, at para. 19, per
Lambert J.A., dissenting, leave to appeal refused, [2001] 1 S.C.R. xv. [26]                         
The scope of the unlawful means tort depends on
the answers to three questions. First, does the unlawful conduct have to be
actionable by the person at whom it is immediately directed? In my view, the
conduct must be an actionable civil wrong or conduct that would be actionable
if it had caused loss to the person at whom it was directed. Second, is there a
requirement that the unlawful means not be otherwise actionable by the
plaintiff? I propose to answer this question “no”. Third, should the definition
of “unlawful means” be subject to principled exceptions? I would also answer
this question in the negative. While the approach outlined by these answers
leaves only a narrow scope for liability, my view is that it is most consistent
with the history and rationale of the tort as well as with its place in the
modern scheme of liability for causing economic harm. [27]                         
I will turn first to my understanding of these
broader concerns and a review of the relevant law before returning to the
reasons for my conclusions. (a)       The Economic Torts and the Common Law [28]                         
I will not dwell on the unfortunate state of the
common law in relation to the unlawful means tort.  As I noted earlier, there
is not even consensus about what it ought to be called. One leading scholar
simply observed that “[t]he economic torts [of which the unlawful means tort is
one] are in a mess”: H. Carty, “Intentional Violation of Economic
Interests: The Limits of Common Law Liability” (1988), 104 Law Q. Rev.
250, at p. 278.  Careful review of the development of the unlawful means
tort reveals confusion, overlap and inconsistency: see, e.g., Carty, An
Analysis of the Economic Torts (2nd ed.), at pp. 73-78;
P. Burns, “Tort Injury to Economic Interests: Some Facets of Legal Response”
(1980), 58 Can. Bar Rev. 103, at pp. 145-48; T. Weir, Economic
Torts (1997), at pp. 36-43; L. L. Stevens, “Interference With
Economic Relations — Some Aspects of the Turmoil in the Intentional Torts”
(1974), 12 Osgoode Hall L.J. 595, at pp. 617-19. At its core,
however, the tort has two key ingredients: intention and unlawfulness. The gist
of the tort is the intentional infliction of economic harm by unlawful means. [29]                         
The scope of the unlawful means tort should be
understood in the context of the broad outlines of tort law’s approach to
regulating economic and competitive activity. Several aspects of that approach
support adopting a narrow scope for the unlawful means tort: the common law
accords less protection to purely economic interests; it is reluctant to
develop rules to enforce fair competition; it is concerned not to undermine
certainty in commercial affairs; and the history of the common law shows that
tort liability, if unduly expanded, may undermine fundamental rights. [30]                         
Potential liability for the unlawful means tort
often arises when there are contingent economic interests at stake, such as
legitimate business expectations. Such interests, however, are at the margins
of the traditional concerns of tort law. The first point, therefore, is that
tort law has traditionally accorded less protection to purely economic interests
than to physical integrity and property rights. As this Court stated in R.W.D.S.U.,
Local 558 v. Pepsi-Cola Canada Beverages (West) Ltd., 2002 SCC 8, [2002] 1
S.C.R. 156, “[t]he law has never recognized a sweeping right to protection from
economic harm”: para. 72. The unlawful means tort should not be viewed
as providing that sort of “sweeping protection”:  see, e.g., S. Deakin,
A. Johnston and B. Markesinis, Markesinis and Deakin’s Tort Law
(7th ed. 2013), at p. 471; H. Carty, “The Economic Torts and English Law:
An Uncertain Future” (2006-2007), 95 Ky. L.J. 845, at p. 845; A. M.
Linden and B. Feldthusen, Canadian Tort Law (9th ed. 2011), at pp.
447-50; W. V. H. Rogers, Winfield and Jolowicz on Tort (18th ed. 2010),
at pp. 859-60. [31]                         
Second, the common law has traditionally been
reluctant to develop rules about fair competition: OBG, at para. 56, per
Lord Hoffmann.  The common law in general, and tort law in particular, have
been astute to assure “some elbow-room [many would say much elbow-room] for the
aggressive pursuit of self-interest”: C. Sappideen and P. Vines, eds., Fleming’s
The Law of Torts (10th ed. 2011), at para. 30.120. As Bowen L.J. put it in Mogul
Steamship Company v. McGregor, Gow, & Co. (1889), 23 Q.B.D. 598 (C.A.),
at p. 614, aff’d [1892] A.C. 25 (H.L.), there can be no liability for a
person who has “done nothing more against the plaintiffs than pursue to the
bitter end a war of competition waged in the interest of their own trade”. The
same sentiment comes through in Lord Davey’s speech in Allen v. Flood,
[1898] A.C. 1, at p. 173: “The right which a man has to pursue his trade
or calling is qualified by the equal right of others to do the same and compete
with him, though to his damage.” More recently, Lord Nicholls acknowledged the
common law’s respect for competition in OBG where he wrote: Competition between businesses
regularly involves each business taking steps to promote itself at the expense
of the other. . . . Far from prohibiting such conduct, the
common law seeks to encourage and protect it. The common law recognises the
economic advantages of competition. [para. 142] [32]                         
This reluctance is directly relevant in this
case. The trial judge found that the appellants intended to do “whatever they
could to pursue the interest of A I Enterprises and . . . were
well aware that their actions would cause harm to Jam[b] & Bram”: trial
reasons, at para. 287. Although he went on to find that the harm caused was not
incidental to the pursuit by the defendants of their legitimate self-interest,
this same conclusion could apply to a great deal of legitimate competitive
activity in the marketplace. That, it seems to me, suggests the need for a
limited role for the unlawful means tort. [33]                         
A third point also favours a limited role for
this tort. The common law in the Anglo-Canadian tradition has generally
promoted legal certainty for commercial affairs. That certainty is easily put
in jeopardy by adopting vague legal standards based on “commercial morality” or
by imposing liability for malicious conduct alone: see Deakin, Johnston and
Markesinis, at pp. 472-73. The majority in Allen, for example,
rejected the view that “malice” was a sufficient basis for liability on the
basis that it was too vague a notion to be applied by the courts: pp. 118-19, per
Lord Herschell, and pp. 152-53, per Lord Macnaghten; see also
Deakin, Johnston and Markesinis, at p. 472; OBG, at para. 14, per Lord
Hoffmann. Regulating commercial activity should not, it has been said, depend
on the “idiosyncrasies of individual judges”: Mogul Steamship (H.L.), at
p. 51, per Lord Morris. [34]                         
A final consideration supports a limited scope
for this tort: the risk inherent in the economic torts generally that they will
undermine legislated schemes favouring collective action in, for example,
labour relations and interfere with fundamental rights of association and
expression. At one time, the common law of tort was ready — and many would say
overready — to intervene to prevent economic coercion in the context of
industrial disputes.  The common law’s approach in this area led to legislative
intervention to grant greater freedom to labour unions by enacting immunities
to specific economic torts, in legislation modelled on the U.K. Trade
Disputes Act, 1906, 6 Edw. 7, c. 47, and successor legislation:
Deakin, Johnston and Markesinis, at p. 474; G. W. Adams, Canadian Labour Law
(2nd ed. (loose-leaf)), at para. 11.340. Writing about the experience in
England, Deakin, Johnston and Markesinis observe that despite the intention
underlying the creation of these immunities, the courts at times expanded
economic tort liability which had the effect of “‘outflanking’ the immunities
provided by statute . . . .  At times it has seemed that
the courts . . . were engaged in a battle of wits with the
parliamentary draftsman, to see which side could develop the optimal formula
for widening or for narrowing liability respectively”: p. 474. This history
draws attention to the risk that expanded liability for the economic torts may
be used to undermine legislative choices and perhaps even constitutionally
protected rights of expression and association: see, e.g., P. Elias and K.
Ewing, “Economic Torts and Labour Law: Old Principles and New Liabilities”
(1982), 41 Cambridge L.J. 321; B. Adell, “Secondary Picketing after
Pepsi-Cola: What’s Clear, and What Isn’t?” (2003), 10 C.L.E.L.J.
135.  A narrow and clear definition of the scope of liability reduces this
risk. [35]                         
All of these factors, in my view, point to the
wisdom of viewing the unlawful means tort as one of narrow scope. (b)      Rationale of the Unlawful Means Tort [36]                         
As Hazel Carty wisely said, “the scope of this
tort can only be established by clarifying its rationale so that there is a
principled definition of unlawful means”: An Analysis of the Economic
Torts (2nd ed.), at p. 102. Unfortunately, there is no consensus about
what that rationale is or should be. Scholars have remarked that there is no
single unifying principle underlying the economic torts generally and that the
unlawful means tort in particular is “radically under-theorized”:  see, e.g.,
Deakin, Johnston and Markesinis, at p. 473; Neyers, at p. 233; B.
Kain and A. Alexander, “The ‘Unlawful Means’ Element of the Economic Torts:
Does a Coherent Approach Lie Beyond Reach?”, in T. L. Archibald and
R. S. Echlin, eds., Annual Review of Civil Litigation, 2010
(2010), 33, at p. 162.  Identifying the tort’s rationale is therefore far
from a straightforward task. But, although there may be no clear rationale as a
matter of historical fact, we can consider what rationale best reflects the
modern role that the tort should play in the broader scheme of civil liability. [37]                         
There are several possible rationales for the
tort but they are mostly variations on two themes: see, e.g., Neyers, at pp.
220-33, and Kain and Alexander, at pp. 162-74. The first — what I will
call the “intentional harm” rationale — focuses on the fact that harm has been
intentionally inflicted. This rationale supports the creation of new tort
liabilities in order to reach clearly excessive and unacceptable intentional
conduct: see, e.g., Carty, An Analysis of the Economic Torts (2nd
ed.), at p. 104.  The second, and in my view the preferred rationale,
focuses on extending an existing right to sue from the immediate victim of the
unlawful act to another party whom the defendant intended to target with the
unlawful conduct. I will call this the “liability stretching” rationale. The
focus of the tort on this understanding is not on enlarging the basis of civil
liability, but on allowing those intentionally targeted by already actionable
wrongs to sue for the resulting harm.  On either rationale, the tort is, at its
core, a tort of intention. The main difference is that on the “intentional
harm” rationale, the intention requirement is seen as the main limitation on
the potential scope of liability, whereas in the “liability stretching”
rationale, the potential scope of liability is limited by both the intention
requirement and the more restrictive definition of the conduct which will
support liability. [38]                         
I will explain why I would not accept the first
rationale and then turn to my reasons for preferring the second. [39]                         
There are two versions of the “intentional harm”
rationale, one bolder and the other more modest. The bolder version sees the
unlawful means tort as part of a broader pattern of liability for all
intentionally inflicted harm: see, e.g., OBG, at para. 153, per
Lord Nicholls; P. Sales and D. Stilitz, “Intentional Infliction of Harm by
Unlawful Means” (1999), 115 Law Q. Rev. 411. By contrast, the modest
version envisions a more limited role for the tort: it is not meant to sanction
all intentional infliction of economic harm but only conduct that is a flagrant
abuse of the competitive process. On this view, the tort seeks to maintain the
integrity of the competitive process by curbing conduct that deserves to be
called “cheating”: Kain and Alexander, at p. 171; S. Deakin and J.
Randall, “Rethinking the Economic Torts” (2009), 72 Mod. L. Rev. 519, at
p. 520. [40]                         
The intentional harm rationale supports a
broader understanding of the unlawful means requirement. Under this rationale,
the tortfeasor’s conduct must rise to a level of wrongfulness that amounts to
cheating or upsetting the fundamental rules of market competition. Such conduct
clearly encompasses torts and crimes but not conduct that is simply ultra
vires or morally objectionable. So, for example, Kain and Alexander, who
would adopt a version of the fair competition rationale, propose that “unlawful
means” should extend to all conduct (both acts and omissions) that is forbidden
by law whatever its source, regardless of whether it is actionable:
p. 178. The unlawfulness requirement exists mainly to provide some broad
outer limit for the judicial discretion to impose liability: see Carty, An
Analysis of the Economic Torts (2nd ed.), at p. 104. [41]                         
This understanding of the tort is attractive
because it provides a principled explanation for why liability should be
imposed and one that accords with widely held views of commercial morality.
While no person has a common law right to trade per se, a person does
have a general freedom to participate in the commercial and labour market and a
legitimate expectation that the basic rules of the game will be respected. To
the extent that the defendant intentionally inflicts economic loss on the
plaintiff through unlawful means which are clearly off-side those basic rules,
the defendant gains an illegitimate advantage and causes the plaintiff to
suffer an unfair disadvantage. [42]                         
However, for several reasons, I do not accept
either the more modest or the bolder version of the intentional harm rationale.
Accepting either version would lead to an unwieldy concept of “unlawful means”
and thus to undue uncertainty in commercial affairs. Furthermore, the modest
version of this rationale fails to account for a central feature of the
unlawful means tort, namely that it is a tort of intention. If the primary
purpose of the tort were to uphold the institution of market competition, it
would be irrelevant whether the interference was intentional or negligent: see
Neyers, at pp. 229-30. The more ambitious rationale for the tort is
inconsistent with two broad policies of the common law. As I outlined earlier,
the common law generally prefers a limited role for the economic torts in the
modern marketplace. The more ambitious rationale is also inconsistent with the
unfailing refusal over many years of the courts in England and in common law
Canada to adopt a prima facie tort which makes actionable intentional
and unjustifiable interference with economic interests even in the absence of
unlawful means: see, e.g., Allen, at p. 121, per Lord
Herschell; Canada Cement LaFarge Ltd. v. British Columbia Lightweight
Aggregate Ltd., [1983] 1 S.C.R. 452, at p. 469; OBG, at
para. 145, per Lord Nicholls. [43]                         
This brings me to the rationale I prefer. The
liability stretching rationale sees the tort as extending civil liability
without creating new actionable wrongs. It thereby closes a perceived liability
gap where the wrongdoer’s acts in relation to a third party, which are in
breach of established legal obligations to that third party, intentionally
target the injured plaintiff: Quinn v. Leathem, [1901] A.C. 495, at
pp. 534-35, per Lord Lindley; J. Eekelaar, “The Conspiracy Tangle”
(1990), 106 Law Q. Rev. 223, at pp. 225-26; Carty, An Analysis
of the Economic Torts (2nd ed.), at pp. 103-4.  The liability
stretching rationale underlies Lord Hoffmann’s speech on behalf of the majority
in OBG: see paras. 46-48. It also commands considerable (although far
from unanimous) support among commentators: see, e.g., R. Podolny, “The
Tort of Intentional Interference with Economic Relations: Is Clarity Out of Reach?”
(2012), 52 Can. Bus. L.J. 63, at pp. 77-78; H. Carty, “The Economic
Torts in the 21st Century” (2008), 124 Law Q. Rev. 641, at p. 672;
Neyers, at pp. 231-33. [44]                         
Why do I favour the liability stretching
rationale? It provides a rational explanation for the expansion of tort
liability which rests on pre-existing causes of action. This type of expansion
provides certainty because it establishes a clear “control mechanism” on
liability in this area of the law, consistent with tort law’s reticence to
intrude too far into the realm of competitive economic activity: OBG, at
para. 266, per Lord Walker of Gestingthorpe.  In the words of Baroness
Hale of Richmond in OBG, it is “consistent with legal policy to limit
rather than to encourage the expansion of liability in this area”: para. 306. I
agree in general terms with Hazel Carty that “a narrow remit . . .
based on existing civil liability is the best policy”: An Analysis of the
Economic Torts (2nd ed.), at p. 301. [45]                         
This rationale of the tort supports a narrow
definition of “unlawful means”: the tort does not seek to create new actionable
wrongs but simply to expand the range of persons who may sue for harm
intentionally caused by existing actionable wrongs to a third party. Thus,
criminal offences and breaches of statute would not be per se actionable
under the unlawful means tort, but the tort would be available if, under common
law principles, those acts also give rise to a civil action by the third party
and interfered with the plaintiff’s economic activity. For example, crimes such
as assault and theft would be actionable by a third party in the torts of
trespass to the person and conversion.  But other breaches of criminal or
regulatory law will not give rise to a civil action and there will be therefore
no potential liability under the unlawful means tort.  This approach avoids
“tortifying” the criminal and regulatory law by imposing civil liability where
there would not otherwise be any: see OBG, at paras. 57 and 266.
The two core components of the unlawful means tort are thus that the defendant
must use unlawful means, in the narrow sense, and that the defendant must
intend to harm the plaintiff through the use of the unlawful means. [46]                         
There are at least two objections to the
liability stretching rationale, but I do not find either persuasive. [47]                         
One objection is that this rationale cannot
explain imposing liability in situations where the third party also suffers a
loss: see Neyers, at p. 232.  This objection sees a gap in liability as
arising only if A commits a wrong against B but the harm is suffered only by C;
the “gap” arises because neither B nor C has a claim. If filling that gap is
the purpose of the unlawful means tort, then it would be difficult to justify
imposing liability in classic cases of the unlawful means tort, such as Tarleton,
where the third party also suffers harm and has a valid claim. My view,
however, is that this objection is predicated on an unduly narrow understanding
of the “gap” in liability. It is desirable to stretch liability even if other
forms of action may be available. Take Tarleton as an example. Both the
occupants of the canoe and the competitor trading ship suffered harm, but they suffered
different and distinct harms.  The occupants of the canoe suffered physical
harm while the ship owners suffered economic harm distinct from those physical
injuries. Allowing recovery for only one type of loss would leave the other
loss uncompensated for no obvious reason. The liability stretching rationale,
as I see it, justifies imposing liability in these circumstances. [48]                         
The second potential objection to the liability
stretching rationale is that it provides a cause of action even though no right
of the plaintiff has been engaged by the defendant’s conduct: see Neyers, at p.
232. But the question is whether there ought to be a right of recovery.  The
affirmative answer rests on the notion that a modest expansion of the range of
persons who can sue is justified where the breach of an existing duty to one
party is intended to, and does, economically harm another. [49]                         
I conclude that the best rationale for the
unlawful means tort is “liability stretching”, a rationale that favours a
narrow approach to the unlawful means requirement. (c)      
Review of the Jurisprudence [50]                         
The case law does not form a tidy package of
consistent approaches.  But on balance it favours a narrow approach to the
unlawful means requirement. (i)       
England and Wales [51]                         
The leading case on the unlawful means tort in
England is the decision of the House of Lords in OBG. Lord Hoffmann, for
the majority, adopted a narrow definition of “unlawful means”. The plaintiff
will have a claim only where the wrong to the third party would have been
actionable at the instance of that third party: OBG, at para. 49. The
only exception identified by Lord Hoffmann to this narrow view was that the
defendant would still be liable if the third party would have had an action but
for the fact that he or she had suffered no loss. This exception is tailored to
capture facts where the loss is suffered by the plaintiff rather than the third
party, as where, for example, the defendant intimidates the third party into
acting to the detriment of the plaintiff. Lord Hoffmann added a further
requirement to his definition of “unlawful means”: the unlawful means must
interfere with the third party’s “freedom to deal with the claimant”: para. 51.
The plaintiff must therefore have an economic interest at stake in the
interference by the defendant with the third party. [52]                         
The majority in OBG rejected the much
broader view of unlawful means adopted by Lord Nicholls. On that wider view,
“unlawful means” comprise “all acts which a person is not permitted to do. The
distinction is between ‘doing what you have a legal right to do and doing what
you have no legal right to do’”: para. 150, citing Lord Reid in Rookes v.
Barnard, [1964] A.C. 1129, at pp. 1168-69. “Unlawful means” include
common law torts, statutory torts, crimes, breaches of contract, breaches of
trust and equitable obligations, breaches of confidence, and so on:
para. 150. To this broad definition of “unlawful means”, Lord Nicholls
added the requirement that the plaintiff must be harmed through the “instrumentality”
of the third party: paras. 159-60. [53]                         
Less than a year after OBG, the House of
Lords reconsidered the scope of “unlawful means”, but this time in the context
of unlawful means conspiracy: Revenue and Customs Commissioners v. Total
Network SL, [2008] UKHL 19, [2008] 1 A.C. 1174. The House of Lords
distinguished the conspiracy tort from the unlawful means tort and held that a
more flexible definition of “unlawful means” was needed in the conspiracy
context: paras. 44, 76-77 and 94. Their Lordships echoed the views of Lord
Nicholls in OBG in noting that criminal conduct is “at the top end” of
“the scale of blameworthy conduct”: see para. 91, per Lord Walker of
Gestingthorpe. (ii)      Australia [54]                         
While the position in Australia is not entirely
settled, it is clear that the unlawful means tort will have at most a modest
role to play in that country. In its most recent case on the unlawful means
tort, the High Court left open the question of whether or not the independent
tort of causing loss by unlawful means was even part of Australian law:  Sanders
v. Snell, [1998] HCA 64, 196 C.L.R. 329. Lower court decisions suggest that
if the tort does exist, it exists in a narrow form similar to that articulated
in OBG: Canberra Data Centres Pty Ltd. v. Vibe Constructions (ACT) Pty
Ltd., [2010] ACTSC 20, 173 A.C.T.R. 33, at para. 141; Hardie Finance
Corporation Pty Ltd. v. Ahern (No. 3), [2010] WASC 403 (AustLII); see also
K. Barker et al., The Law of Torts in Australia (5th ed. 2012), at
pp. 291 ff. (iii)    New Zealand [55]                         
The unlawful means tort is more firmly
established in New Zealand and a narrow approach is taken to the unlawful means
requirement: Van Camp Chocolates Ltd. v. Aulsebrooks Ltd., [1984] 1
N.Z.L.R. 354 (C.A.).  More recently, in Diver v. Loktronic Industries Ltd.,
[2012] NZCA 131 (NZLII), the New Zealand Court of Appeal adopted Lord
Hoffmann’s analysis of the unlawful means tort in OBG, although this may
not be the final word on the subject, as the analysis is brief and it is not
clear that the point was argued: see para. 100. (iv)    United States [56]                         
The approach in several states of the United States
departs markedly from the Commonwealth jurisprudence.  In many states,
liability is imposed where the defendant’s conduct is “improper”. In the
several states that follow the Restatement of the Law, Second: Torts 2d (1989),
this is determined by reference to a combination of factors including the
defendant’s motive, the nature of the plaintiff’s interest, and the social
value of the defendant’s conduct: see § 767. The lack of an “unlawful means”
requirement in most U.S. states has been criticized as creating commercial
uncertainty, although this approach also has its defenders:
H. S. Perlman, “Interference with Contract and Other Economic
Expectancies: A Clash of Tort and Contract Doctrine” (1982), 49 U. Chicago
L. Rev. 61; compare J. C. Estes, “Expanding Horizons in the Law
of Torts — Tortious Interference” (1974), 23 Drake L. Rev. 341; see
also L. Watkins, “Tort Law — Tortious Interference with Business Expectancy — A
Trap for the Wary and Unwary Alike” (2012), 34 U. Ark. Little Rock L. Rev.
619. Given the fundamentally different paths which Anglo-Canadian and American
tort law have taken on this subject, there is no need to examine the American
jurisprudence in greater detail here. It is sufficient to note that the feared
dangers associated with a broad approach to this tort appear to have
materialized. (v)      Canada [57]                         
The position in the common law jurisdictions, as
I read it, favours a narrow understanding of the unlawful means requirement. I
will examine first the previous decisions of this Court and then turn to the
jurisprudence from Canadian appellate courts. [58]                         
There is only one decision of this Court dealing
with the unlawful means tort, although the Court has also addressed the
unlawful means requirement in the context of unlawful means conspiracy and
intimidation. I read this jurisprudence as being consistent with a narrow
approach to unlawful means in the unlawful means tort context. [59]                         
The case addressing the unlawful means tort is International
Brotherhood of Teamsters v. Therien, [1960] S.C.R. 265. Mr. Therien owned a
small trucking business which loaned trucks and drivers to a construction
company in British Columbia. After the employees of the construction company
unionized, Mr. Therien was told that he needed to join the union, which he
did not do. The union threatened to picket the construction company, which then
decided to cease doing business with Mr. Therien. Mr. Therien brought
an action against the union for interference with business by illegal means.
Locke J. held that the union’s threat to picket the employer was a breach of
its obligation under the collective agreement to submit disputes relating to
the agreement to arbitration and of s. 21 of the Labour Relations Act,
S.B.C. 1954, c. 17, which made it an offence for any person to violate an
obligation arising under a collective agreement. Locke J. held that “to
ascertain whether the means employed were illegal inquiry may be made both at
common law and of the statute law” and concluded that both the union’s breach
of contract and breach of statute constituted unlawful means: p. 280. [60]                         
The intervener, the Attorney General of British
Columbia, argues that the inclusion of statutory offences within the scope of
the unlawful means tort in Therien precludes the adoption of the narrow
view of the tort. I do not think this is the case for two reasons. [61]                         
First, it was not necessary to rely on the
breach of statute in Therien: the conduct giving rise to the claim was
also a breach of the collective agreement between the union and the company
employing Mr. Therien’s firm: see pp. 283-84, per Cartwright J. In
any case, there was no analysis of the question whether unlawful means may
include all breaches of statute. [62]                         
Second, the comments in Therien about
civil liability for breach of statute must be read in light of this Court’s
subsequent jurisprudence about the interplay between statutory duties and civil
causes of action: see, e.g., The Queen in Right of Canada v. Saskatchewan
Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205; Edwards v. Law Society of Upper Canada,
2001 SCC 80, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 562; Odhavji Estate v. Woodhouse, 2003 SCC
69, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 263; Hill v. Hamilton-Wentworth Regional Police Services
Board, 2007 SCC 41, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 129.  The law in this regard has
evolved significantly since Therien and the brief reference to breach of
statute must be read in light of those developments. The position that I
propose in relation to the scope of unlawful means is consistent with this
approach.  A breach of statute will constitute unlawful means if it would be
otherwise actionable under the principles developed in these later cases. While
this Court has held that the unlawful means conspiracy tort continues to impose
liability for breaches of statute, as I explain below, there is no need for
consistency in the unlawful means component of unlawful means conspiracy and of
the tort of causing loss by unlawful means. [63]                         
The Court has also considered the unlawful means
requirement in the context of unlawful means conspiracy. In Gagnon v.
Foundation Maritime Ltd., [1961] S.C.R. 435, a shipbuilder refused to
negotiate with an uncertified union. The union responded by picketing which
resulted in a work stoppage which was found to have been an unlawful strike.
The shipbuilder sued the union members responsible. A majority of the Court
found them liable on the basis of unlawful means conspiracy, reasoning that the
means employed by the union were prohibited by statute: 
“. . . this of itself supplies the ingredient necessary to
change a lawful agreement which would not give rise to a cause of action into a
tortious conspiracy, the carrying out of which exposes the conspirators to an
action for damages if any ensue therefrom”: Gagnon, at p. 446, per
Ritchie J. [64]                         
This approach was also adopted in LaFarge.
The case involved a conspiracy to prevent or unduly lessen competition in the
production of cement contrary to s. 32(1)(c) of the Combines
Investigation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-23. The plaintiff successfully brought
an action against the conspirators claiming damages for conspiracy to injure.
The Court allowed the appeal of the conspirators on the basis that they did not
intend to injure the plaintiff but rather to advance their business interests.
However, Estey J. stated for the Court that “the conduct of the appellants, although
not directed towards the plaintiff, was unlawful. They have been convicted of
offences in contravention of a federal statute and have been fined in company
with their fellow accused in the total sum of $432,000”: LaFarge, at p.
472. The Court confirmed the LaFarge understanding of unlawful means
conspiracy in Hunt v. Carey Canada Inc., [1990] 2 S.C.R. 959, at
pp. 984-90. [65]                         
The scope of unlawful means has also arisen in
the context of the tort of intimidation. Intimidation is committed when the
defendant threatens to commit an unlawful act and in so doing causes loss to
the person threatened (two-party intimidation) or to a third party (three-party
intimidation). The tort of intimidation was recognized before the unlawful
means tort fully in its present form was well established: Fridman, at p. 765. [66]                         
In Roman Corporation Ltd. v. Hudson’s Bay Oil
and Gas Co. Ltd., [1973] S.C.R. 820, the Court recognized the tort of
intimidation, though held that it was not available in that case as there had
been no threat to use unlawful means:  pp. 829-30. The tort of
intimidation reached this Court again in the case of Central Canada Potash
Co. v. Government of Saskatchewan, [1979] 1 S.C.R. 42. The Minister of
Mineral Resources threatened to cancel the plaintiff’s mineral leases if it did
not lower its potash production under regulations which on separate grounds
were held to be ultra vires. Martland J. rejected the plaintiff’s claim
in intimidation on the grounds that the Minister lacked the necessary intention
for the tort. The Minister had not acted unreasonably, let alone intentionally.
Martland J. also distinguished between two-party and three-party intimidation.
He held that, unlike the three-party scenario, in a two-party intimidation case
a mere threat to breach a contract could not ground liability because the
plaintiff should be left to the remedies available under the contract: Central
Canada Potash, at p. 87. This Court reiterated the application of the
intimidation tort to both two-party and three-party situations in Pepsi-Cola,
at para. 113. [67]                         
The Court has clearly taken a different approach
to “unlawful means” in the context of unlawful means conspiracy and
intimidation than I propose to adopt in the context of the unlawful means
tort.  For example, liability based on all breaches of statute is more clearly
established in the context of the unlawful means conspiracy tort. Not only Gagnon
but also LaFarge involved liability in the unlawful means conspiracy
tort for breaches of statute. Does this suggest that a broader approach should
also be followed in the unlawful means tort?  In my view, it does not. [68]                         
While the economic torts may sometimes develop
along parallel lines, they have distinct historical roots and roles to play in
the regulation of the modern marketplace. So, for example, this Court in Central
Canada Potash accepted the proposition that a narrower definition of
“unlawful means” applies in the two-party intimidation tort than in the
three-party intimidation tort. This suggests that there is no general requirement
of consistency in the elements of the economic torts. Similarly, the House of
Lords accepted the need for different definitions of “unlawful means” for the
unlawful means and conspiracy torts in Total Network.  As Lord
Mance put it, “[t]he two torts are different in their nature, and the interests
of justice may require their development on somewhat different bases”: 
para. 123. This same point was made recently by Goudge J.A. on behalf of
the Ontario Court of Appeal, who stated that “these two economic torts [i.e.
the unlawful means and conspiracy torts] have evolved separately, and thus each
ha[s] developed [its] own concept of unlawful conduct”: Agribrands Purina
Canada Inc. v. Kasamekas, 2011 ONCA 460, 106 O.R. (3d) 427, at para.
34; see also R. Stevens, Torts and Rights (2007), at p. 297.
Moreover, it may well be that the presence of an agreement in the tort of
conspiracy justifies a different and broader definition of “unlawful means” for
the tort of “unlawful means” conspiracy than is appropriate for the unlawful
means tort.  This is illustrated by the Court’s retention, although as an
anomaly, of the so-called predominant purpose conspiracy tort on the basis that
the fact of agreement between conspirators (or “combination”) could itself justify
imposing liability: see, e.g., LaFarge, at pp. 471-72, per
Estey J. [69]                         
I conclude that it is not necessary to seek
identical treatment of the unlawful means component for all of the torts of
which it is a requirement. The Court has not insisted on this uniformity in the
past and there are reasons of principle that support different approaches in
different contexts. Of course, my reasons in this case are confined to the
unlawful means tort and nothing I have said should be taken as opining on the
elements of other torts which are not before us for decision in this case. [70]                         
To conclude the review of this Court’s
jurisprudence, it does not settle the point before us for decision and the
Court has not addressed the unlawful means requirement in this context since Therien. [72]                         
I conclude my review by noting the fundamentally
different approach which the civil law of Quebec takes to this problem. It
offers what is perhaps a more straightforward analysis under the doctrine of
“abuse of rights”: see St. Lawrence Cement Inc. v. Barrette, 2008 SCC
64, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 392, at para. 24. This doctrine is rooted in the Civil
Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, which provides in art. 6 that “[e]very
person is bound to exercise his civil rights in good faith” and in art. 7 that
“[n]o right may be exercised with the intent of injuring another”. (d)      Conclusion Regarding the Unlawfulness Requirement [74]                         
In light of the examination of the jurisprudence
in this country and comparable common law jurisdictions, the trend of authority
is towards a narrow definition of “unlawful means”. In addition to being
consistent with precedent, this approach is also in my view desirable in
principle. Restricting unlawful means to acts that would give rise to civil
liability to the third party (or would do so if the third party suffered loss
from them) provides a coherent and rational basis for the development of the
unlawful means tort. The limitation of unlawful means to actionable civil
wrongs provides certainty and predictability in this area of the law, since it
does not expand the types of conduct for which a defendant may be held liable
but merely adds another plaintiff who may recover if intentionally harmed as a
result of that conduct. While details relating to the scope of what is
“actionable” may need to be worked out in the future, the basic contours of
liability would be clear: see Alleslev-Krofchak, at para. 63. This
approach does not risk “tortifying” conduct rendered illegal by statute for
reasons remote from civil liability: see OBG, at paras. 57 and 152.
The narrow definition of “unlawful means”, in short, keeps tort law within its
proper bounds. [75]                         
There are of course arguments to the contrary. I
concede that it may in some cases be artificial to limit the plaintiff’s
recovery by reference exclusively to factors that relate to the defendant’s
liability to the third party. For example, a statutory immunity might be
intended to shield the defendant from liability to the third party for reasons
which have nothing to do with the plaintiff: see Deakin and Randall, at
p. 545. Looked at from another perspective, however, it is unjust to
impose liability on the defendant in such a scenario, since he or she would
have not committed a legal wrong. The narrow definition of “unlawful means” may
also be criticized as unduly narrow for excluding crimes: see OBG, at
para. 152, per Lord Nicholls; Total Network, at
paras. 90-94, per Lord Walker. This exclusion, however, is much
less sweeping than it may at first appear, given that many crimes, such as
assault or theft, are also tortious. Other crimes, such as bribery, may still
be actionable under the tort of unlawful means conspiracy: see P. W. Lee,
“Causing Loss by Unlawful Means”, [2011] S.J.L.S. 330, at p. 349 (fn.
115). The possibility that immoral or malicious conduct may not be remediable
through the economic torts in some cases is simply a consequence of the
Anglo-Canadian conception of the limited role of the common law and is a price
worth paying for certainty in this area. [76]                         
I conclude that in order for conduct to
constitute “unlawful means” for this tort, the conduct must give rise to a
civil cause of action by the third party or would do so if the third party had
suffered loss as a result of that conduct. (2)     
Is the Tort Available Only if There Is No Other
Cause of Action Available to the Plaintiff Against the Defendant in Relation to
the Alleged Misconduct? [77]                         
The appellants urge us to hold that the unlawful
means tort, because it has a gap-filling function, should only be available where
the defendant’s conduct does not provide the plaintiff with any other cause of
action against the defendant. This was the view of the Court of Appeal in this
case and this view has also been adopted by the Ontario Court of Appeal and
followed by other Canadian courts. For example, in Correia, the unlawful
means alleged by the plaintiff were directly actionable in negligence against
one of the defendants and in Alleslev-Krofchak, the unlawful means were
directly actionable in defamation and for this reason, the plaintiffs’ claims
for causing loss by unlawful means failed: see also Westcoast Landfill
Diversion Corp. v. Cowichan Valley (Regional District), 2009 BCSC 53, 55
M.P.L.R. (4th) 208, at paras. 379-87; 0856464 B.C. Ltd. v. TimberWest Forest
Corp., 2012 BCSC 597, 89 C.B.R. (5th) 235, at para. 47; Canuck Security
Services Ltd. v. Gill, 2013 BCSC 893 (CanLII), at paras. 188-89. On
this view, the tort exists “to fill a gap where no action could otherwise be
brought for intentional conduct that caused harm through the instrumentality of
a third party”: Correia, at para. 107. The question is whether we should
accept this limitation on the scope of the unlawful means tort. My view is
that, for several reasons, we should not. [78]                         
This limitation seems to me to be wrong in
principle. The gist of the tort is the targeting of the plaintiff by the
defendant through the instrumentality of unlawful acts against a third party.
It is that conduct by the defendant which gives rise to liability quite apart
from conduct that may be otherwise actionable by the plaintiff.  Moreover,
general principles of tort liability accept concurrent liability and
overlapping causes of action for distinct wrongs suffered by the plaintiff in
respect of the same incident: see, e.g., Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 147. Finally, and as I explained earlier, this limitation is
premised on an unduly narrow understanding of the “gap-filling” function of the
tort. A gap need not be a void. [80]                         
The “not otherwise actionable” requirement is
not consistent with the majority view in OBG and can be awkward to apply
in practice. In OBG, Lord Hoffmann accepted that it would be possible
for there to be concurrent liability for inducing breach of contract and
causing loss by unlawful means, as where the defendant threatens to break his
or her contract with the third party in order to convince the third party to
breach a separate contract with the plaintiff. Such a scenario might trigger
liability both for the tort of inducing a breach of contract and the unlawful
means tort, a result which is inconsistent with the “not otherwise actionable”
requirement: see OBG, at para. 21. In addition, the “not otherwise
actionable” requirement could give rise to some nice questions about whether
some other cause of action that might be available to the plaintiff provides an
adequate remedy for the loss. [81]                         
Finally, this limitation is not necessary to
ensure that the unlawful means tort is kept within its proper bounds. The
restrictions on the “unlawful means” and intention components of the unlawful
means tort that I propose mean that it will rarely, if ever, be more
advantageous to a plaintiff to plead the unlawful means tort rather than
another available cause of action. [82]                         
I would therefore not limit liability for the
unlawful means tort to situations in which the defendant’s conduct is not
otherwise actionable by the plaintiff. (3)     
Should the “Unlawfulness” Requirement Be Subject
to Principled Exceptions? [83]                         
The Court of Appeal, while adopting a narrow
view of the unlawful means requirement, held that it must be subject to
principled exceptions.  The court found that this case falls within such an
exception because the appellants’ conduct was akin to the tort of abuse of
process. As Robertson J.A. put it for the court, “the intentional erection of
legal barriers, some of which are enforceable through statutory processes not
subject to prior judicial authorization, in circumstances where those barriers
rest on rights fabricated with arguments of sand” falls within the ambit of the
unlawful means tort: para. 82.  This approach was intended to provide judges
with some “wiggle room” to respond “adequately” to unanticipated factual
scenarios or changing circumstances: para. 81. [84]                         
I respectfully disagree with this approach and
would hold that there are no exceptions to the scope of liability which I
propose for the unlawful means tort. [85]                         
My difficulty with the “principled exception”
approach is that I cannot, with respect, find any principle on which it is
based. Providing trial judges with “wiggle room” to deal “adequately” with
cases that do not fall within the scope of the tort’s liability simply confers
an unstructured judicial discretion to do what appears to the particular judge
to be just in the particular circumstances. This to me is the antithesis of a
principled approach and, if adopted, it would largely undercut the efforts to
give a certain and narrow ambit to the tort.  Allowing for exceptions without
clearly outlining the principles to guide the development of the law invites
the danger of ad hoc decisions tailored to achieve a vision of
commercial morality — precisely the danger which the unlawful means requirement
is meant to avoid. [86]                         
I conclude that for the purposes of the unlawful
means tort, the defendant’s means are “unlawful” if they support a civil action
for damages or compensation by the third party, or would do so except for the
fact that the third party did not suffer any loss as a result of the
defendant’s acts. There is no requirement that these acts not be otherwise
actionable by the plaintiff against the defendant and there are no exceptions
to the scope of the liability imposed by this approach. [87]                         
In Lord Hoffmann’s reasons in OBG, he
added a further requirement to the unlawful means tort, namely that the unlawful
means employed must interfere with the third party’s freedom to deal with the
plaintiff: paras. 51-54. Lord Hoffmann held that without such a limitation,
“there is a danger that it will provide a cause of action based on acts which
are wrongful only in the irrelevant sense that a third party has a right to
complain if he chooses to do so”: para. 56. This additional requirement has not
been included in the formulation of the tort adopted by Canadian appellate
decisions that otherwise approve of Lord Hoffmann’s approach to the unlawful
means tort, although the point was not specifically at issue in those cases:
see Correia, O’Dwyer, and Alleslev-Krofchak. It has also
been roundly criticized by commentators: see Carty, An Analysis of
the Economic Torts (2nd ed.), at pp. 97-98; Kain and Alexander, at
pp. 181-82; Deakin and Randall, at pp. 548-49. Respectfully, I do not
find this additional requirement helpful in outlining the proper bounds of the
unlawful means tort. This requirement is not supported either by the
authorities or by the rationale for imposing liability. Whether the unlawful
means interfere with the plaintiff’s right to deal with the injured third party
or with some other party, the fact that the defendant aims at the plaintiff
provides a sufficient nexus between the unlawful means and the interests of the
plaintiff to justify imposing liability. Rather than resort to this additional
“freedom to deal” qualification, I prefer to limit the scope of the unlawful
means tort through a narrow approach to both the unlawful means component, as
discussed above, and the intention component, as discussed below. (4)      Application to This Case [88]                         
The Court of Appeal concluded that there was no
wrong that would be actionable by the third party (the prospective purchasers)
against the appellants, and the respondents do not point to one:  paras. 79 and
83. [89]                         
Accordingly, I conclude that the appellants
cannot be found liable to the respondents on the basis of the unlawful means
tort. (5)      Did the Court of Appeal Err in Finding That the Defendants Had the
Required Knowledge for the Unlawful Means Tort? [90]                         
The trial judge found that the appellants had
unlawfully interfered with the sale of the property in various ways. The
appellants contend, however, that none of this activity can sustain liability
because there was no proof that they had appropriate knowledge of the existence
of any business relationship between the respondents and prospective
purchasers. The appellants submit that they must be shown to have had actual
knowledge of the relationship between prospective purchasers, such as Greenarm
Developments Ltd., and the respondents and that the record does not support
such a finding. [91]                         
Given my conclusion that the unlawful means tort
was not available to the respondents in this case, it is not strictly speaking
necessary to address this issue.  However, it will be helpful to do so. [92]                         
In my opinion, the appellants’ submission is
premised on a faulty view of the elements of the unlawful means tort. [93]                         
I do not agree with the Court of Appeal that the
existence of a valid business relationship between the plaintiff and the third
party and the defendant’s knowledge of that relationship are essential elements
of the unlawful means tort. The inclusion of these elements in my view flows
from confusion between the unlawful means tort and the tort of inducing breach
of contract. It is now commonly accepted that for the latter, the plaintiff
must prove that the defendant actually understood that he or she was procuring
a breach of contract: see, e.g., OBG, at para. 39, per Lord
Hoffmann. The position is different, however, in the unlawful means tort, the
focus of which is unlawful conduct that intentionally harms the plaintiff’s
economic interests. There need be no contract or even other formal dealings
between the plaintiff and the third party so long as the defendant’s conduct is
unlawful and it intentionally harms the plaintiff’s economic interests.  In
this case, it was more than sufficient that the appellants were shown to know
that “various persons were negotiating with the majority of investors” (C.A.
reasons, at para. 75) for the purchase of the premises and that the
allegedly unlawful acts were committed with the intention to cause economic
harm to the respondents. [94]                         
It may be helpful to add a few words about the
intention requirement for the unlawful means tort, given that there is some
confusion about it: see Carty, “The Economic Torts in the 21st Century”, at pp.
658-59; Podolny, at pp. 79-80; Kain and Alexander, at p. 135; Osborne, at
pp. 336-37. [96]                         
Goudge J.A. put this point aptly in Alleslev-Krofchak,
where he summarized the House of Lords’ discussion in OBG: . . . intentional interference with
economic relations requires that the defendant intend to cause loss to the
plaintiff, either as an end in itself or as a means of, for example, enriching
himself. If the loss suffered by the plaintiff is merely a foreseeable
consequence of the defendant’s actions, that is not enough. [para. 50] [97]                         
In my view, this narrow approach to intention is
consistent both with the policy concerns relevant to this area of law as well
as the underlying “liability stretching” rationale for the tort. It is an
important safeguard against attaching liability to vigorous but lawful
competitive behaviour. Economic harm to a competitor is often a foreseeable
consequence of such behaviour. Mere foreseeability of such harm does not meet
the requirement for intention in the unlawful means tort. B.       If the Unlawful Means Tort Is Not Available, Are the Appellants
Otherwise Liable? [98]                         
Given the conclusion I have reached on the
question of liability for the unlawful means tort, I have to confront the final
issue: Did the respondents establish liability for breach of fiduciary duty and
is that issue properly before us? [99]                         
In my view, they did and it is.  Alan Schelew
was a director of both of the respondent corporations. The record is clear that
he breached his fiduciary duty to the respondent corporations to act in good
faith in the interests of the corporations and the point was argued before us. [100]                     
As the Court of Appeal noted, the respondents
did not plead breach of fiduciary duty in their statement of claim: para. 10. 
However, the same may be said about all other causes of action. The pleading
was purely factual and did not set out any legal basis for the claim for
relief. However, the alleged breaches of fiduciary duty were clearly live
issues at the trial as is apparent from the respondents’ pre- and post-trial
briefs. [101]                     
Contrary to the conclusion of the Court of
Appeal, the trial judge made numerous clear and specific findings with respect
to Alan Schelew’s breach of his fiduciary obligations to the respondent
companies of which he was a director. Examples include: •                                
At paras. 233-34, the trial judge found that by
attempting to invoke the arbitration process, Alan Schelew had acted in a way
that violated his obligations as a director of Bram and Jamb;  •                                
At paras. 243 and 247-48, the trial judge found
that the appellants’ defence, long after there was any legal basis to do so, of
a “Notice of its first right of refusal” which they had registered against the
property was a tactic that had no lawful basis and which was a “blatant breach
of [Alan Schelew’s] fiduciary obligations as director in Jamb and Bram”;  •                                
At para. 254, the trial judge concluded that the
appellants’ filing of a “second encumbrance” against the property, this time a
certificate of pending litigation, based on the “bogus” arbitration process was
another “illegitimate and unjustified measure” that constituted a further
breach of Alan Schelew’s fiduciary duty to Bram and Jamb;  •                                
At paras. 262-65, the trial judge found that
Alan Schelew’s role in impeding access to the building by a potential purchaser
was in breach of fiduciary duties to Bram and Jamb;  •                                
At paras. 270-71, the trial judge found that
“Alan [Schelew] . . . would in fact take whatever steps were
necessary to prevent the sale of 99 Joyce to anyone other than himself” and
that he “was resolved in not letting his director’s fiduciary duties in Bram
and Jamb interfere in his plan”. [102]                     
The fiduciary duty point was argued in this
Court. The appellants submitted, in my view correctly, that the trial judge
made numerous specific findings with respect to Alan Schelew’s breach of his
fiduciary obligations to the respondents. These submissions were in support of
their position that this excluded their liability for the unlawful means tort
because the wrong was otherwise actionable by the respondents: A.F., at para.
87. The respondents submitted that if Alan Schelew breached his fiduciary duty
and these breaches were sufficient for the trial judge to have issued judgment
on that basis, then it is open to this Court to affirm the judgment against
Alan Schelew on that basis.  As the respondents put it, “[t]he Appellants
cannot assert the findings of the trial judge were sufficient to ground
liability for breach of fiduciary duty, while at the same time trying to escape
liability from same”: R.F., at para. 125. [103]                     
I agree with the respondents on this point. [104]                     
No one disputes that Alan Schelew had a
fiduciary duty as a director of Bram and Jamb.  Although there was a certain
conflict of interest inherent between that role and his role, through his
company A.I., as building manager, it cannot be suggested that this permitted
him to take groundless legal steps to obstruct the sale in order to further his
personal interests. [105]                     
The trial judge’s assessment of damages is not
challenged on appeal. The breaches of fiduciary duty are precisely the same
acts which the trial judge found to constitute the unlawful means for the
purposes of the unlawful means tort. The breaches of fiduciary duty resulted in
Alan Schelew’s company, A.I., acquiring Bram and Jamb’s units under the
Syndication Agreement as well their shares in Joyce.  The trial judge found as
a fact that but for Alan Schelew’s conduct, the building would have been sold
to a third party for $2.58 million: para. 327. Whether the compensation is
viewed as being aimed at restoring the respondents’ loss or requiring the
appellants to disgorge the gain obtained by Alan Schelew’s breach of fiduciary
duty, the assessment of compensation remains the same. While the appellant,
A.I., was not a fiduciary, Alan Schelew was its sole director and shareholder
and it is therefore liable for knowing assistance in the breach of fiduciary
duty and knowing receipt of the proceeds of the breach: see D. W. M.
Waters, M. R. Gillen and L. D. Smith, eds., Waters’ Law of Trusts
in Canada (4th ed. 2012), at pp. 516-23. IV.   
Disposition [106]                     
I would dismiss the appeal with costs.                     Appeal
dismissed with costs.                     Solicitors
for the appellants:  McInnes Cooper, Fredericton.                     Solicitors
for the respondents:  Stewart McKelvey, Moncton; Supreme Advocacy,
Ottawa.                     Solicitor for the
intervener:  Attorney General of British Columbia, Victoria.   