Entreprises Sibeca Inc. v. Frelighsburg (Municipality),
[2004] 3 S.C.R. 304, 2004 SCC 61  Les Entreprises Sibeca Inc.                                                                             Appellant  v.  Municipality of Frelighsburg                                                                        Respondent  Indexed as:  Entreprises Sibeca
Inc. v. Frelighsburg (Municipality)  Neutral citation:  2004 SCC 61.  File No.:  29600.  2004:  March 23; 2004:  October 1.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Iacobucci*,
Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps and Fish JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec      Held:  The
appeal should be dismissed.    Per LeBel and
Fish JJ.:  There is agreement with the analysis of the
principles governing the municipality’s civil liability, and with the
disposition.  It is unnecessary to apply the principles to the facts, or to
pass judgment on the motives, intentions or conduct of the municipality.  Even
had the municipality been found to be at fault, the developer, by allowing the
building permits to expire, had broken any causal connection.  Cases Cited  By Deschamps J.  Applied:  Prud’homme
v. Prud’homme, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 663, 2002 SCC 85; Welbridge
Holdings Ltd. v. Greater Winnipeg, [1971] S.C.R. 957; distinguished: 
City of Ottawa v. Boyd Builders Ltd., [1965] S.C.R. 408; referred
to:  Laurentide Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989]
1 S.C.R. 705; Roncarelli v. Duplessis, [1959] S.C.R. 121;
Brown v. British Columbia (Minister of Transportation and Highways),
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 420; Finney v. Barreau du Québec, [2004] 2
S.C.R. 17, 2004 SCC 36.  Statutes and Regulations Cited    Civil Code of Lower Canada.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, arts. 1376, 1457.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal
(2002), 40 M.P.L.R. (3d) 157, [2002] Q.J. No. 5093 (QL),
reversing a decision of the Superior Court, [2000] Q.J. No. 5908 (QL). 
Appeal dismissed.  Jacques Jeansonne
and Pierre Luc Blain, for the appellant.  Guy Pepin and Pierre Le Page,
for the respondent.  English version of the judgment of McLachlin C.J. and
Bastarache, Binnie and Deschamps JJ. delivered by    I.  Facts      7                                  
Sibeca’s project had been on shaky ground since 1991 because of the
economic situation.  The recreational development project was put on hold. 
According to Sibeca’s representative, it was pointless to develop a ski resort
during a recession.  Sibeca instead made plans for a residential development,
the Domaine de l’Aigle, on the south side of the mountain.  It consisted of 50
lots of about 5 acres each.  In 1992, Sibeca obtained subdivision permits and
permits to cut down trees and build roads for the Domaine de l’Aigle
development.  As well, the municipality issued three building permits for three
model homes on April 1, 1993.  Sibeca started work on the project,
but encountered a number of snags.  As a result of administrative challenges
relating to the designation as agricultural land, and of bad weather, vandalism
and subcontracting problems, marketing of the Domaine de l’Aigle had not yet
begun by the fall of 1993.    10                              
Sibeca was facing a tight deadline.  Its creditors had given it an
extension until December 31, 1994.  However, it believed that the new
requirements meant it would be unable to find common ground with the
municipality.  Sibeca subdivided its land and sold it off piece by piece.  It
sued for loss of the profits it would have realized by selling the lots in the
Domaine de l’Aigle individually.  11                              
Two opposing theories were argued in the Superior Court:  Sibeca
contended that the municipality had blocked its project, while the municipality
argued that it had made legitimate use of tools provided to it by the
legislature to regulate development within its boundaries.     II.  Analysis    1457.  Every person has a duty to abide by
the rules of conduct which lie upon him, according to the circumstances, usage
or law, so as not to cause injury to another.  Where he is endowed with reason and fails in this
duty, he is responsible for any injury he causes to another person by such
fault and is liable to reparation for the injury, whether it be bodily, moral
or material in nature.  He is also liable, in certain cases, to reparation
for injury caused to another by the act or fault of another person or by the
act of things in his custody.  17                              
Under the Civil Code of Lower Canada, a municipality’s civil
liability was governed by the rules this Court laid down in Laurentide
Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 705.  Those rules
were reviewed in Prud’homme v. Prud’homme, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 663,
2002 SCC 85, after art. 1376 of the Civil Code of Québec had come
into force in 1994.  Article 1376 reads as follows:  1376.  The rules set forth in this Book
apply to the State and its bodies, and to all other legal persons established
in the public interest, subject to any other rules of law which may be
applicable to them.  18                              
In Prud’homme the Court concluded that under art. 1376 of
the Civil Code of Québec, the general rules of civil law are applicable
unless the public body establishes that public law principles prevail over the
civil law rules (at para. 31):  In short, when the new provisions of the Civil
Code of Québec, and more particularly art. 1376, came into force, they
no longer allowed the use of the method laid down by Laurentide Motels, supra,
insofar as that decision imposed an obligation on the individual to identify a
public common law rule that made the private law applicable to his or her
action in liability against the governmental body.  The civil law principles of
civil liability now apply, as a rule, to wrongful acts by such bodies.  It
therefore belongs to the party which intends to rely on the public law in order
to avoid or to limit the application of the general rules of civil liability to
establish, where the need arises, that there are relevant public law principles
that prevail over the civil law rules.  When a public
law rule is identified and determined to be applicable, it must be incorporated
into the law of civil liability.  It is therefore necessary to identify the
public law rules applicable to municipalities, determine whether they prevail
over the civil law rules and, if so, incorporate them into the civil law.  19                              
In this case, the Civil Code of Québec does not specify a
particular standard for determining when a public body is liable for acts
performed in a general policy context.  On the other hand, public bodies enjoy
immunity in public law for acts performed in the exercise of their legislative
or regulatory power.                                                                       . . .                                                                      . . .    In public regulation of this sort there is no such
thing as absolute and untrammelled “discretion”, that is that action can be
taken on any ground or for any reason that can be suggested to the mind of the
administrator; no legislative Act can, without express language, be taken to
contemplate an unlimited arbitrary power exercisable for any purpose, however
capricious or irrelevant, regardless of the nature or purpose of the statute.
Fraud and corruption in the Commission may not be mentioned in such statutes
but they are always implied as exceptions.  “Discretion” necessarily implies
good faith in discharging public duty; there is always a perspective within
which a statute is intended to operate; and any clear departure from its lines
or objects is just as objectionable as fraud or corruption. [Emphasis
added.]  22                              
That standard was reiterated in, inter alia, Brown v. British
Columbia (Minister of Transportation and Highways), [1994]
1 S.C.R. 420, at p. 442:  Such a policy decision cannot be reviewed on a private law standard of
reasonableness.  Since no allegation was made that the decision was not bona
fide or was so irrational that it could not constitute a proper
exercise of discretion, it cannot be attacked.  [Emphasis added.]   24                              
To answer that question, I would refer to what Laskin J. said in Welbridge,
supra, which, in my view, transcends the common law.  Municipalities
perform functions that require them to take multiple and sometimes conflicting
interests into consideration.  To ensure that political disputes are resolved
democratically to the extent possible, elected public bodies must have
considerable latitude.  Where no constitutional issues are in play, it would be
inconceivable for the courts to interfere in this process and set themselves up
as arbitrators to dictate that any particular interest be taken into
consideration.  They may intervene only if there is evidence of bad faith.  The
onerous and complex nature of the functions that are inherent in the exercise
of a regulatory power justify incorporating a form of protection both in civil
law and at common law.  Such protection was recognized under the Civil Code
of Lower Canada, as evidenced in Laurentide Motels, supra,
although the process followed to recognize it was different.  The
considerations behind the formulation of the public law immunity recognized by
the civil law, as governed by the Civil Code of Lower Canada, remain
applicable after the coming into force of the Civil Code of Québec.  It
must therefore be determined how that relative immunity can be incorporated
into the civil law.  25                              
No problem arises when the bad faith test is applied in civil law.  That
concept is not unique to public law.  In fact, it applies to a wide range of
fields of law.  The concept of bad faith is flexible, and its content will vary
from one area of law to another.  As LeBel J. noted in Finney v. Barreau du
Québec, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 17, 2004 SCC 36, the content of the
concept of bad faith may go beyond intentional fault (at para. 39):  Bad faith certainly includes intentional fault, a classic example of
which is found in the conduct of the Attorney General of Quebec that was
examined in Roncarelli v. Duplessis, [1959] S.C.R. 121.  Such conduct is
an abuse of power for which the State, or sometimes a public servant, may be
held liable. However, recklessness implies a fundamental breakdown of the
orderly exercise of authority, to the point that absence of good faith can be
deduced and bad faith presumed. The act, in terms of how it is performed, is
then inexplicable and incomprehensible, to the point that it can be regarded as
an actual abuse of power, having regard to the purposes for which it is meant
to be exercised . . . .  26                              
Based on this interpretation, the concept of bad faith can encompass not
only acts committed deliberately with intent to harm, which corresponds to the
classical concept of bad faith, but also acts that are so markedly inconsistent
with the relevant legislative context that a court cannot reasonably conclude
that they were performed in good faith.  What appears to be an extension of bad
faith is, in a way, no more than the admission in evidence of facts that amount
to circumstantial evidence of bad faith where a victim is unable to present
direct evidence of it.  27                              
From this analysis, it may be concluded that the public law immunity
that attaches to an exercise of legislative and regulatory power can be
incorporated into the rules of liability applicable to public bodies.  In light
of the wording of art. 1457 of the Civil Code of Québec, an
applicant can be required to establish that the public body acted in bad faith,
or in circumstances leading to a conclusion that it acted in bad faith.  III.  Application of the Law to the Facts  28                              
The trial judge’s analysis properly begins with comments concerning the
duty of the courts to show deference to a municipality’s exercise of its
regulatory power.  Normally, he said, the liability of elected representatives
is determined at the ballot box.  However, he relied on Boyd Builders, supra,
in shifting the burden of proof of bad faith ([2000] Q.J. No. 5908 (QL), at
para. 125):  [translation] 
The notice of motion of April 4, 1994, as regards the Domaine de
l’Aigle, created a legal situation more or less identical to the situation in
Boyd Builders, and the dissimilarities in this case produce in practice the
same effect in terms of the burden of proof.     31                              
The principles developed in Boyd Builders, supra, have no
bearing on the instant case.  The setbacks that led to the interruption of the
project to develop the summit of Mount Pinacle were unrelated to the
municipality’s actions.  In fact, the ski resort and golf course project was
put on hold at a time when a municipal council favourable to the development
was in office.  As for the Domaine de l’Aigle, a year had passed since building
permits had been issued for the houses, and the roads had not been completed. 
The trial judge misinterpreted Boyd Builders, supra, and
incorrectly shifted the burden of proof.  Unfortunately, that false premise
guided his entire analysis.    [translation]
The evidence shows that Mount Pinacle has always been a matter of concern to
the municipal council — to both the present council and its predecessor.  It
will be recalled that when the former council passed the resolution approving
the Sibeca project in principle, it imposed the following condition:  (8)  That the municipality also be able to regulate uses and
density in the areas contiguous with the project in order to protect the natural
environment.  It was entirely appropriate to adopt a CDP in the
circumstances.  Preserving the natural environment of Mount Pinacle called for
more than merely checking the aesthetics of the architecture.  The municipal
council had to get a comprehensive picture of the project before approving it
and allowing the appropriate zoning change.  It should not be forgotten that
there had been no agreement in principle regarding the Domaine de l’Aigle
project as there had been for the downhill ski run on the north face of the
mountain.   34                              
The Court of Appeal also pointed out that the trial judge had
inexplicably found that the municipality had acted in bad faith, although he
had stated that the councillors themselves had exhibited no malice.   [translation] 
In short, while it may have been apparent that the new municipal council was
not in favour of the respondent’s project, there is still no conclusive
evidence of bad faith on the part of the municipal council, particularly given
that the trial judge declined to award any damages against the councillors
personally because they themselves had acted in good faith, while citing the
entity made up of the councillors for bad faith.  It should be noted that a
large portion of the declaration [paras. 55 to 101] and of the evidence
dealt with the liability of the defendants arising out of their alleged bad
faith, which the judge rejected.  How can the council be held liable if its members
acted in good faith on its behalf?  How can it be that a decision made separately
by each voting member is devoid of bad faith, but is said to have been made in
bad faith once the votes are counted?  Given that the municipality cannot be
held liable for the consequences of the exercise of its discretion absent bad
faith, the award against the municipal council is without basis in the case at
bar.  36                              
In fact, the trial judge observed on several occasions that the desire [translation] “to conserve Mount Pinacle
in its natural state to the extent possible, to regulate the Mount Pinacle site
more strictly in terms of future development projects affecting the mountain,
cannot — by itself, certainly — be a ground for criticizing anyone”
(para. 50).  The judge also stated that “[b]ecause this was a political
choice, albeit a debatable one, [I] cannot . . . criticize the new
council for wanting to further regulate the ski resort and golf course project
when the time came, although [a site planning and architectural integration
programme] could have served the same purpose” (para. 56).  His only criticism
of the municipality related to the area around the Domaine de l’Aigle (at
para. 57):     IV.  Conclusion   40                              
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal with costs.  English version of the reasons of LeBel and Fish JJ. delivered by  41                           
LeBel J. — I have
read the reasons of my colleague Deschamps J.  I agree with her analysis
of the principles governing the civil liability of the municipality of
Frelighsburg in this case, and with the disposition she proposes.  However, I
do not believe that it is necessary to state an opinion regarding the
application of those principles to the facts of this appeal or to pass judgment
on the motives, intentions or conduct of the municipality in the instant case.  42                           
Although this was only raised in passing at the hearing in this Court,
there was a fundamental flaw in the appellant’s position in this matter.  As
counsel for the respondent
pointed out, the appellant is in a sense the author of its own misfortune. 
Even had the municipality been found to have committed a fault for which it
could be held civilly liable, any causal connection that may have existed was
apparently broken as a result of the appellant’s own decisions.   44                           
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Deslauriers Jeansonne,
Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Bélanger Sauvé, Montréal.   * Iacobucci J. did not take part in the judgment.  