Brown v. British Columbia
(Minister of Transportation and Highways), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 420  Montague Brown         Appellant  v.  Her Majesty The Queen in right of the province of British Columbia as represented by the Minister of Transportation and Highways                                                           Respondent  and  The Attorney General of Canada                                                     Intervener  Indexed as:  Brown v.
British Columbia (Minister of Transportation and Highways)  File No.:  22946.  1993:  November 8;
1994:  March 17.  Present:  La Forest,
Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                       Held:  The appeal should be
dismissed.                      Per La Forest and
McLachlin JJ.:  Subject to the comments expressed in Swinamer,
Cory J.'s reasons were agreed with.                     Per Sopinka J.:  The province has
the power to maintain its highways but is under no duty to do so. The manner
and extent to which the power is exercised is a matter of statutory
discretion.  The conduct complained of in this case, with the exception of the
matters referred to by Cory J. as operational, were within the exercise of
the province's statutory discretion.  Provided that a public authority
exercises its discretion in accordance with the power conferred on it, its
actions are not reviewable by the courts under the aegis of a private law duty
of care.  With respect to the matters referred to as operational, for the
reasons given by Cory J., no liability for negligence arises.  It would be
preferable, however, not to use the "policy/operational" test as the
touchstone of liability.  Cases Cited  By Cory J.                     Applied:  Just v. British Columbia,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; referred to:  Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Portland (Town of) v. Griffiths (1885), 11 S.C.R.
333; Laurentide Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 705; Barratt
v. District of North Vancouver, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 418.  By McLachlin J.                     Referred to:  Swinamer v. Nova Scotia (Attorney
General), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 445.  By Sopinka J.                     Referred to: Barratt v. District of North
Vancouver, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 418; Anns v. Merton London Borough Council,
[1978] A.C. 728; United States v. Gaubert, 111 S.Ct. 1267 (1991); Rowling
v. Takaro Properties Ltd., [1988] A.C. 473; Sutherland Shire Council v.
Heyman (1985), 157 C.L.R. 424.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Crown
Proceeding Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 86, s. 3(2)(f).  Highway
Act, R.S.B.C. 1979,
c. 167.  Occupiers
Liability Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 303, s. 8.   Authors Cited   Cohen,
David., and J. C. Smith.  "Entitlement and the Body Politic: 
Rethinking Negligence in Public Law" (1986), 64 Can. Bar Rev. 1.  Klar,
Lewis N.  "The Supreme Court of Canada:  Extending the Tort Liability
of Public Authorities" (1990), 28 Alta. L. Rev. 648.  Perell,
Paul M.  "Negligence Claims Against Public Authorities" (1994),
16 Advocates' Q. 48.  Smillie,
J. A.  "Liability of Public Authorities for Negligence" (1985),
23 U.W.O. L. Rev. 213.  Woodall, M. Kevin. 
"Private Law Liability of Public Authorities for Negligent Inspection and
Regulation" (1992), 37 McGill L.J. 83.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (1992), 65 B.C.L.R. (2d) 232,
10 C.C.L.T. (2d) 188, 37 M.V.R. (2d) 70, 10 B.C.A.C. 303, 21 W.A.C. 303, [1992]
3 W.W.R. 629, dismissing appellant's appeal from a judgment of
Drake L.J.S.C. (1989), 17 M.V.R. (2d) 69, dismissing an action for damages
for negligence.  Appeal dismissed.                     John N. Laxton, Q.C., and Robert D.
Gibbens, for the appellant.                     William A.
Pearce, Q.C.,
and Thomas H. MacLachlan, for the respondent.                     Ivan G.
Whitehall, Q.C.,
and Donald J. Rennie, for the intervener.                     The reasons of La
Forest and McLachlin JJ. were delivered by                     McLachlin
J. -- Subject to my
comments in the companion case  Swinamer v. Nova Scotia (Attorney General),
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 445, on the source of a private law duty of care on public
authorities, I agree with Cory J.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     Sopinka
J. -- I have read the
reasons of my colleague Cory J. and agree with the conclusion that he reaches. 
I would, however, adopt a somewhat different approach in arriving at this
conclusion.  The respondent does not have a statutory duty to maintain its
highways.  It has the power to do so, and the manner and extent to which the
power is exercised is a matter of statutory discretion.  See Barratt v.
District of North Vancouver, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 418.  Indeed, if a statutory
duty to maintain existed as it does in some provinces, it would be unnecessary
to find a private law duty on the basis of the neighbourhood principle in Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728.  Moreover, it is only
necessary to consider the policy/operational dichotomy in connection with the
search for a private law duty of care.                     The conduct
complained of in this case, with the exception of the matters referred to by
Cory J. as operational, were within the exercise of the respondent's statutory
discretion.  Provided that a public authority exercises its discretion in
accordance with the power conferred on it, its actions are not reviewable by
the courts under the aegis of a private law duty of care.  I agree with
Cory J. that with respect to the matters discussed by him under the
heading The Operational Aspect that no liability for negligence arises
for the reasons that he gives.  I would prefer not to use the
"policy/operational" test as the touchstone of liability.  This
principle, which was formally adopted in Anns, was imported from the
United States.  It has since been rejected by the Supreme Court of the United
States and by the House of Lords as an exclusive test of liability.  (See United
States v. Gaubert, 111 S.Ct. 1267 (1991), and Rowling v. Takaro
Properties Ltd., [1988] A.C. 473.)  There is some doubt as to its status in
Australia.  (See Sutherland Shire Council v. Heyman (1985), 157 C.L.R.
424 (H.C.).)  It has been criticized as ineffective and unreliable by academic
writers Cohen and Smith, Woodall, Smillie, Bailey and Bowman, and Klar.  (See
D. Cohen and J. C. Smith, "Entitlement and the Body Politic: 
Rethinking Negligence in Public Law" (1986), 64 Can. Bar Rev. 1; M.
K. Woodall, "Private Law Liability of Public Authorities for Negligent
Inspection and Regulation" (1992), 37 McGill L.J. 83; J. A.
Smillie, "Liability of Public Authorities for Negligence" (1985), 23 U.W.O.
L. Rev. 213; S. H. Bailey and M. J. Bowman, "The Policy/Operational
Dichotomy -- A Cuckoo in the Nest", [1986] Cambridge L.J. 430; and
L. N. Klar, "The Supreme Court of Canada:  Extending the Tort Liability of
Public Authorities" (1990), 28 Alta. L. Rev. 648, at p. 655.)  In
"Negligence Claims Against Public Authorities" (1994), 16 Advocates'
Q. 48, at p. 57, P. M. Perell states:                     Whatever
the criteria used, the cases show that characterizing the public authority's
activity as a policy decision or operational activity is problematic and often
unpredictable.  In the Just case, of the 11 judges that gave judgments,
six concluded that the province's actions were operational and five that the
actions were a policy decision.                     In view of the
above, the Court may wish to reconsider at some future time the continued
usefulness of this test as an exclusive touchstone of liability.                     I would dispose of
the appeal as proposed by Cory J.                     The
judgment of Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci and Major JJ. was delivered by                     Cory
J. --This appeal raises
again the question of the circumstances which may render a government or
governmental agency liable for negligence.  The questions presented in this appeal
can, I believe, be answered by the application of the principles set out in Just
v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228.  I.Factual Background                     On Friday, November
8, 1985, not long after 8:30 a.m., Montague Brown, who was the plaintiff in
this case, left Gold River to drive to Campbell River in his new pickup truck. 
He described the road conditions at the time of his departure as good, with the
road damp in places.  Sometime later, when he rounded a slight curve he started
having difficulty controlling his truck.  He realized that he had hit black ice
and should not apply his brakes.  He stated that after several hundred feet of
struggling he managed to pull his vehicle to the left and that shortly
thereafter the truck "went like a Zamboni" and then left the road.                     There had been
three other accidents on the same highway that morning.  All of them within a
space of some seven kilometres.                     The road was worn
with cracks in some places and generally in need of maintenance.  However,
there was no evidence that the cracking and wear and tear of the road had
anything to do with the formation of the black ice that caused the accidents.                     Corporal Eglinski
of the RCMP was on duty in the area.  Shortly before 7:00 a.m. that morning, he
received a telephone call at his home concerning an accident which had occurred
near the summit of the  highway between Gold River and Campbell River.  Ice had
caused a vehicle to slide off the road into the  Campbell River.  At 7:25 a.m.
he followed the established procedure and put in a call to RCMP offices in
Courtenay to request a sanding truck because of the icy conditions on the
highway.  Sometime before 8:00 a.m. he was at the scene of the accident. 
Between 8:10 a.m. and 8:20 a.m. he made a second call to the RCMP offices
in Courtenay concerning the need for sanding trucks.                     At about 8:20 a.m.
Corporal Eglinski came upon the scene of a second accident and shortly after
that he came upon the scene of a third accident, all on the same stretch of
highway.  Between 8:20 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. the Corporal made a third call to the
RCMP offices in Courtenay.  At this time, he was told that the Ministry of
Transport and Highways Control Tower at Deas Island had been contacted and that
a sanding truck should be on its way.                     The Highways
Department office in Gold River had a duty employee assigned for any
necessary work that might arise that Friday.  The Deas Tower tried to reach him
at about 8:30 a.m. but did not have his telephone number.  Faced with this
problem, the Deas Tower contacted the Campbell River office of the Department. 
That office sent out a salt and sand truck as soon as it was loaded, some five
minutes after it received the call at 8:30 a.m.                     It will be
remembered that it was sometime shortly after 8:30 a.m. that Mr. Brown
started from Gold River towards Campbell River.  At 9:00 a.m. the Gold River
employee who was on call fortuitously came to the Gold River office.  Shortly
after he arrived, he received a call from the Deas Island Control Tower asking
him to take a salt and sand truck out to the icy parts of the highway.  He
immediately loaded and inspected a truck.  This took about 15 minutes and he
drove out of the yard around 9:15 a.m.  It was about this time that
Mr. Brown lost control and his truck went over the embankment on the
highway.                     The Campbell River
salt and sand truck operator reached the scene of the Brown accident at around
9:23 a.m.  He found Mr. Brown, who had been unconscious for a short period of
time, climbing the embankment.                     The Gold River sand
truck operator said that he met the Campbell River operator 15 to 20 minutes
after he left the Gold River yard.  The meeting took place either some 10 to 15
miles or 10 to 15 kilometres on the Gold River side of the accident scene.  A.The Schedule for the Gold River Highways
Department Crew                      The dates and
conditions of work during the summer and winter schedules were matters of
negotiation between the Department and the members of its union.  Among other
things, the collective bargaining agreement contemplated that the winter
schedule would be posted for a period of two weeks before it came into effect,
and that employees would be given an opportunity to bid on the shifts they
wished to work.  It can be seen that there could not be a quick change from the
summer to the winter schedule simply because of unusual weather conditions. 
The fixing of the date for the winter schedule to come into effect had a very
real significance for the Department of Highways and its personnel.  It was a
decision that had an impact on both the budget and finances of the Department
and the work schedule of its employees.  The decision required a careful
consideration of matters of finance and personnel.  B.Climatic Conditions                     Unlike the
appellant, I find it difficult to find any pattern of deteriorating or
dangerous conditions for the highway based on the reports of the meteorological
stations at Gold River and Upper Campbell Lake for the days preceding the
accident.  At Upper Campbell Lake (the nearest climatic readings to the
accident site) on November 5, a minimum temperature of -1oC was
recorded, with a maximum of 2oC.  The mean temperature was 0.5oC. 
On November 6, the mean temperature rose to 1.3oC.  On November 7,
it rose to 2.5oC with 0.4 centimetres of rain and a trace of
snow.  The Gold River Townsite weather station recorded an estimated 2.2
centimetres of snow on November 5, when the minimum temperature was 0oC
and the maximum temperature was 3oC.  On November 6 and 7, the
maximum temperatures rose to 6oC and 6.5oC respectively
and the minimum rose to 2oC and 3oC.                     These reports give
no warning of dangerous weather conditions.  Rather, the accidents on November 7
appear to have been caused by black ice.  No evidence was led as to what
special conditions give rise to black ice.  However, a number of witnesses
indicated that the condition can arise quickly and disappear quickly. 
William Ball, the District Highways Manager, testified that he had seen
black ice occur in a space of five minutes in situations where, at certain
temperatures, the cloud cover disappears for a few minutes.  In his experience,
it can occur suddenly anywhere in the highway district at any particular moment
and disappear just as quickly.  II.Decisions Below  Trial Division                     At trial two
allegations of negligence were made against the Crown.  First, it was said that
the Crown was negligent in failing to respond in a timely fashion to the reports
of icy conditions and to remedy them.  Second, it was said the Crown was
negligent in failing to maintain the section of the road where the accident
occurred so that ice would not form on it.  With regard to the failure to
respond in a timely fashion, the trial judge found that the Deas Tower did not
know about the need for sanding on the highway until 8:30 a.m.  The trial judge
concluded that once the information as to the need for sanding was received,
the Department's employees acted with dispatch to fulfil their obligations.  He
therefore determined that there was no negligence on the part of the Department
in failing to respond in a timely fashion.  He also considered that the choice
of the system itself was a matter of policy.                     With regard to the
second allegation, that the Crown was negligent in failing to maintain the road
so that ice would not form, the trial judge found that these were policy
matters which excluded any duty of care with respect to the injury received by
Mr. Brown.  On this point, I would add that there does not appear to have been
any evidence before the trial judge that either the state of the road or its
design led to the formation of the black ice which caused the accident.  In the
result, the trial judge dismissed the action:  (1989), 17 M.V.R. (2d) 69.  Court of Appeal                     In the Court of
Appeal the appellant alleged that the summer schedule system of calling up duty
employees in case of emergencies, which was in place in Gold River, failed to
work properly.  First, it was said that this arose because the Deas Tower did
not know how to get in touch with the Department's employee on duty in Gold
River.  It was said that this constituted negligent behaviour on the part of
the Crown.                     Secondly, it was
submitted that the system in place for getting the sanding done was defective. 
It was argued that there should have been someone at work in Gold River on
Friday morning at 7:00 a.m. available at the office to take out a sand truck if
one was required.  In other words, the system in the smaller community of Gold
River should have been the same as that in place in the larger centre of
Campbell River.                     The Court of Appeal
rejected both grounds and dismissed the appeal:  (1992), 65 B.C.L.R. (2d) 232,
10 C.C.L.T. (2d) 188, 37 M.V.R. (2d) 70, 10 B.C.A.C. 303, 21 W.A.C. 303, [1992]
3 W.W.R. 629.  On the issue of the failure of the Deas Tower to have the
telephone number of the employee on call, the Court of Appeal found that this
could not be the basis for a finding of liability.  Its position was put in
this way (at pp. 237-38 B.C.L.R.):  Assuming
that the Gold River operator had been contacted at his home at 8:30 a.m., as
soon as the Deas Tower knew of the need for sanding, it would have taken the
operator some minutes to prepare himself and get to the yard where he was to
load and inspect his truck and leave.  It would have taken him more than the
quarter of an hour it actually took him between 9:00 a.m. and 9:15 a.m. to
accomplish that because he would have been starting from his home instead of
the office.  So, we know that it would have been after 8:45 a.m. before he
left.                     We
also know that the plaintiff had been travelling for 30 or 40 minutes when he
had his accident.  That is what he says himself.  In those circumstances he
must have left Gold River before 8:45 a.m.  The Gold River operator would
therefore have been behind the plaintiff on the highway and could not have done
any sanding which would have prevented this accident.  ...
Nonetheless, it is my conclusion that the plaintiff/appellant did not establish
at trial, and did not establish on this appeal on the balance of probabilities,
that any failure, if there was one, on the part of the Ministry of Highways and
its employees by not having the ability to communicate with the call-out
operator at Gold River before 9:00 a.m. was a contributing cause of the
accident, having regard to the fact that the Deas Tower did not know of the
need for sanding until shortly before 8:30 a.m.                     On the second issue
as to whether there should have been an employee on duty in the office at Gold
River, the Court of Appeal put its position in this way (at p. 240
B.C.L.R.):                     Turning
again to the facts of this case my conclusion is that it has not been
established by the plaintiff, on the balance of probabilities, either that the
decision about staffing at Gold River was not a rational one having regard to
all of the considerations that were facing the Department of Transportation and
Highways, or alternatively, that it was a decision that left the staffing on a
basis that failed to meet the standard of care that the law imposed on the
Crown and its employees with respect to the maintenance of the Gold River and
Campbell River highway in the period that included November 1985.  III.Analysis  A.Central Issue and Basic Principles                     It will be recalled
that the Department's employees at Gold River worked a very long shift from
Monday through Thursday and thereafter were on a "call-out"
arrangement for the balance of the week.  The appellant challenges this
decision of the Department and alleges that, had there been an employee on duty
and available to do sanding at 7:00 a.m., the accident and the resulting
injuries to Mr. Brown would never have occurred.  It therefore must be
determined, first, whether this is a policy decision on the part of the
Department.  If it was, then no liability can be attached to the Department. 
This must follow since there is no suggestion that, if the decision was one of
policy, it was not bona fide or that it was so irrational that it was
not a reasonable exercise of ministerial discretion.   Over
the passage of time the increased government activities gave rise to incidents
that would have led to tortious liability if they had occurred between private
citizens.  The early governmental immunity from tortious liability became
intolerable.  This led to the enactment of legislation which in general imposed
liability on the Crown for its acts as though it were a person.  However, the
Crown is not a person and must be free to govern and make true policy decisions
without becoming subject to tort liability as a result of those decisions.  On
the other hand, complete Crown immunity should not be restored by having every
government decision designated as one of "policy".  Thus the dilemma
giving rise to the continuing judicial struggle to differentiate between
"policy" and "operation".  Particularly difficult decisions
will arise in situations where governmental inspections may be expected.                     The
dividing line between "policy" and "operation" is difficult
to fix, yet it is essential that it be done.                                                                      ...                     The
need for distinguishing between a governmental policy decision and its
operational implementation is thus clear.  True policy decisions should be
exempt from tortious claims so that governments are not restricted in making
decisions based upon social, political or economic factors.  However, the
implementation of those decisions may well be subject to claims in tort.  What
guidelines are there to assist courts in differentiating between policy and
operation?                     Mason J.,
speaking for himself and one other member of the Australian High Court in Sutherland
Shire Council v. Heyman (1985), 60 A.L.R. 1, set out what I find to be
most helpful guidelines.  He wrote:   The
distinction between policy and operational factors is not easy to formulate,
but the dividing line between them will be observed if we recognize that a
public authority is under no duty of care in relation to decisions which
involve or are dictated by financial, economic, social or political factors or
constraints.  Thus budgetary allocations and the constraints which they
entail in terms of allocation of resources cannot be made the subject of a duty
of care.  But it may be otherwise when the courts are called upon to apply a
standard of care to action or inaction that is merely the product of
administrative direction, expert or professional opinion, technical standards
or general standards of reasonableness.  (Emphasis added.)                     The
duty of care should apply to a public authority unless there is a valid basis
for its exclusion.  A true policy decision undertaken by a government agency
constitutes such a valid basis for exclusion.  What constitutes a policy decision
may vary infinitely and may be made at different levels although usually at
high level.                                                                      ...                     It
may be convenient at this stage to summarize what I consider to be the
principles applicable and the manner of proceeding in cases of this kind.  As a
general rule, the traditional tort law duty of care will apply to a government
agency in the same way that it will apply to an individual.  In determining
whether a duty of care exists the first question to be resolved is whether the
parties are in a relationship of sufficient proximity to warrant the imposition
of such a duty.  In the case of a government agency, exemption from this
imposition of duty may occur as a result of an explicit statutory exemption. 
Alternatively, the exemption may arise as a result of the nature of the
decision made by the government agency.  That is, a government agency will be
exempt from the imposition of a duty of care in situations which arise from its
pure policy decisions.                     In
determining what constitutes such a policy decision, it should be borne in mind
that such decisions are generally made by persons of a high level of authority
in the agency, but may also properly be made by persons of a lower level of
authority.  The characterization of such a decision rests on the nature of the
decision and not on the identity of the actors.  As a general rule, decisions
concerning budgetary allotments for departments or government agencies will be
classified as policy decisions.  Further, it must be recalled that a policy
decision is open to challenge on the basis that it is not made in the bona
fide exercise of discretion.  If after due consideration it is found that a
duty of care is owed by the government agency and no exemption by way of
statute or policy decision-making is found to exist, a traditional torts
analysis ensues and the issue of standard of care required of the government
agency must next be considered.                     Before attempting
to apply these principles to this case a preliminary matter should be
considered.  At the outset, the Court of Appeal considered that it had to
determine whether or not the policy was bona fide and reasonable or
rational.  In the vast majority of cases such a consideration will not be
necessary.  It will always be open to a plaintiff to attempt to establish, on a
balance of probabilities, that the policy decision was not bona fide or
was so irrational or unreasonable as to constitute an improper exercise of
governmental discretion.  This is not a new concept. It has long been
recognized that government decisions may be attacked in those relatively rare
instances where the policy decision is shown to have been made in bad faith or
in circumstances where it is so patently unreasonable that it exceeds
governmental discretion.  The test to be applied when a policy decision is
questioned is set out in City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984]
2 S.C.R. 2, at p. 24, by Wilson J. in these words:  In
my view, inaction for no reason or inaction for an improper reason cannot be a
policy decision taken in the bona fide exercise of discretion.  Where
the question whether the requisite action should be taken has not even been
considered by the public authority, or at least has not been considered in good
faith, it seems clear that for that very reason the authority has not acted
with reasonable care.                     Here, no question
was raised that the decision was not made in good faith or that it was patently
unreasonable.  There was therefore no need to consider these questions. 
Rather, the Court was required to struggle with the fundamental question of
whether the decision in question was one of policy or operation.  The importance
of distinguishing between policy decisions and those that are operational was
emphasized in Just, at pp. 1239 and 1243, in the following words:  However,
the Crown is not a person and must be free to govern and make true policy
decisions without becoming subject to tort liability as a result of those
decisions.  On the other hand, complete Crown immunity should not be restored
by having every government decision designated as one of "policy". 
Thus the dilemma giving rise to the continuing judicial struggle to
differentiate between "policy" and "operation". 
Particularly difficult decisions will arise in situations where governmental
inspections may be expected.                     The
dividing line between "policy" and "operation" is difficult
to fix, yet it is essential that it be done.                                                                      ...  Thus
a decision either not to inspect at all or to reduce the number of inspections
may be an unassailable policy decision.  This is so provided it constitutes a
reasonable exercise of bona fide discretion based, for example, upon the
availability of funds.                                                                      ...                     At
a lower level, government aircraft inspectors checking on the quality of
manufactured aircraft parts at a factory may make a policy decision to make a
spot check of manufactured items throughout the day as opposed to checking
every item manufactured in the course of one hour of the day.  Such a choice
as to how the inspection was to be undertaken could well be necessitated by the
lack of both trained personnel and funds to provide such inspection personnel. 
In those circumstances the policy decision that a spot check inspection would
be made could not be attacked.  [Emphasis added.]                     It may now be
appropriate to apply the principles set out in Just to the facts
presented in this case.  We must first determine if a prima facie duty
of care exists, and then determine whether the imposition of this duty is
excluded by statute or because the decision at issue is one of policy.  B.Duty of Care   In
light of that invitation to use both the facilities and the highway leading to
them, it would appear that apart from some specific exemption, arising from a
statutory provision or established common law principle, a duty of care was
owed by the province to those that use its highways.  That duty of care would
extend ordinarily to reasonable maintenance of those roads.  The appellant as a
user of the highway was certainly in sufficient proximity to the respondent to
come within the purview of that duty of care.  In this case it can be said that
it would be eminently reasonable for the appellant as a user of the highway to
expect that it would be reasonably maintained.  For the Department of Highways
it would be a readily foreseeable risk that harm might befall users of a
highway if it were not reasonably maintained....                     Even
with the duty of care established, it is necessary to explore two aspects in
order to determine whether liability may be imposed upon the respondent. 
First, the applicable legislation must be reviewed to see if it imposes any
obligation upon the respondent to maintain its highways or, alternatively, if
it provides an exemption from liability for failure to so maintain them. 
Secondly, it must be determined whether the province is exempted from liability
on the grounds that the system of inspections, including their quantity and quality,
constituted a "policy" decision of a government agency and was thus
exempt from liability.                     The Applicable
Legislation                     The
Highway Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 167, s. 8, provides for construction
and maintenance of highways in these words:                     8.  The minister may ... maintain a
highway across any land taken under the powers conferred by this Act ....  and
the Ministry of Transportation and Highways Act, R.S.B.C. 1979,
c. 280, s. 14, as follows:                      14.  The minister has the
management, charge and direction of all matters relating to the acquisition,
construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, improvement and operation of
. . . highways. . . .   The
liability of the respondent in respect of the exercise of these powers is
limited by ss. 2 and 3 of the Crown Proceeding Act, R.S.B.C. 1979,
c. 86, in this manner:                     2.  Subject to this Act,                                                                     .
. .  (c)the
Crown is subject to all those liabilities to which it would be liable if it
were a person, ...                     3.  . . .  (2)  Nothing
in section 2                                                                     . . .  (f)subjects
the Crown, in its capacity as a highway authority, to any greater liability
than that to which a municipal corporation is subject in that capacity.  On
their face these statutory provisions do not appear to absolve the respondent
from its duty of care to maintain the highways reasonably.  Rather, by
inference they appear to place an obligation on the province to maintain its
highways at least to the same extent that a municipality is obligated to repair
its roads.                     There it was
determined that there was a duty of care resting on the Department to
reasonably maintain the provincial highways.                     That duty to
maintain would extend to the prevention of injury to users of the road by icy
conditions.  However the Department is only responsible for taking reasonable
steps to prevent injury.  Ice is a natural hazard of Canadian winters.  It can
form quickly and unexpectedly.  Although it is an expected hazard it is one
that can never be completely prevented.  Any attempt to do so would be
prohibitively expensive.  It can be expected that a Department of Highways will
develop policies to cope with the hazards of ice.  Before applying the
principles set out in Just to determine what may be the policy
pertaining to ice and what may be the operational aspects of that policy it
should be determined whether, as the respondent contends, there are any
statutory provisions that would exempt the Department from the imposition of a
duty of care in the repair and maintenance of highways.  C.  Statutory
Exemptions                     Once again it is
clear that there is no statutory exemption from tortious liability provided by
the Highway Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 167.  The respondent argued that
s. 8 of the Occupiers Liability Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 303, and s. 3(2)(f)
of the Crown Proceeding Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 86, provided the
requisite statutory exemptions.  Further the Crown submitted that it is under
no obligation to repair the highway.  It contends that Crown liability can only
arise from acts of misfeasance and not of nonfeasance.                     I cannot accept
these submissions.  I will deal first with the suggestion that there is no
obligation to repair highways and that liability cannot arise from a failure to
act but only from an act negligently performed.  It seems to me that any
distinction between negligence founded on misfeasance or nonfeasance will often
be unnecessary or inappropriate.  More importantly, as long ago as 1885, this
Court in Town of Portland v. Griffiths (1885), 11 S.C.R. 333 held that a
statute which placed public streets and highways under the control of a
municipality imposed upon that municipality the duty of keeping them in
repair.  It follows that once the duty to repair or to maintain is assumed by a
government then it must fulfil that obligation in a manner that is not
negligent.  That is the duty that rests upon the respondent in this case.                     Further, the Occupiers
Liability Act simply has no place in a consideration of the obligations of
the Department of Highways for the repair and maintenance of its highways.  The
enactment of occupiers' liability acts in common law provinces resulted from
two legitimate concerns of the legislator.  The first was the desire to do away
with the medieval morass of "pigeon holing" and labelling that governed
cases prior to the passage of the acts.  The other was a concern for the
increasing risk of liability for occupiers of property arising from accidents
occasioned by snowmobilers running into wire fences or wire gates on farm and
rural properties.  I cannot believe that the Occupiers Liability Act of
British Columbia was passed with a view to exempting the Department of Highways
from liability for its negligent acts, whether they be acts of misfeasance or
nonfeasance.  To achieve that result a clear exemption would have to be found
in the Highway Act.  There is no such exemption here.                     Alternatively, if
the Crown Proceeding Act had exempted the Crown from liability for all
tortious acts, there would be a statutory exemption.  However, there is no
statutory exemption in that Act which would exempt the Crown for negligently
failing to maintain its roads.  D.Policy or Operations:  Was the Decision of
the Department to Maintain the Summer Schedule in Effect at the Time of the
Accident a Policy Decision or an Operational Decision?                     In distinguishing
what is policy and what is operations, it may be helpful to review some of the
relevant factors that should be considered in making that determination.  These
factors can be derived from the following decisions of this Court:  Laurentide
Motels Ltd. v. Beauport (City), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 705; Barratt v. District
of North Vancouver, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 418; and Just, supra; and
can be summarized as follows:  True
policy decisions involve social, political and economic factors.  In such
decisions, the authority attempts to strike a balance between efficiency and
thrift, in the context of planning and predetermining the boundaries of its
undertakings and of their actual performance.  True policy decisions will
usually be dictated by financial, economic, social and political factors or
constraints.  The
operational area is concerned with the practical implementation of the
formulated policies, it mainly covers the performance or carrying out of a
policy.  Operational decisions will usually be made on the basis of
administrative direction, expert or professional opinion, technical standards
or general standards of reasonableness.                     In my view, the
decision of the Department to maintain a summer schedule, with all that it
entailed, was a policy decision.  Whether the winter or summer schedule was to
be followed involved a consideration of matters of finance and personnel. 
Clearly the decision required the Department to discuss and negotiate the dates
for the commencement of the summer and winter schedules with its unions.  This
was a policy decision involving classic policy considerations of financial
resources, personnel and, as well, significant negotiations with government
unions.  It was truly a governmental decision involving social, political and
economic factors.                     Nor can I accept
the suggestion that the Gold River area should be operated in the same manner
as Campbell River.  Campbell River is a larger region which requires a larger
work force and a different approach to its operations.  If this is not an
attempt to compare apples and oranges, it is at least seeking to compare
grapefruits to tangerines.  Any difference in the manner of operating between
the Campbell River area and the Gold River area is based upon their size. 
Surely what is appropriate for a larger centre need not be routinely applied to
a smaller unit.                     I should not leave
this issue without addressing the two bases put forward by the appellant for
the interpretation and application of Just.  First, the appellant
contended that policy decisions must be limited to so-called threshold
decisions, that is to say, broad initial decisions as to whether something will
or will not be done.  This would be contrary to the principles set out in Just
referred to earlier.  Therefore, this submission cannot be accepted.  Policy
decisions can be made by persons at all levels of authority.  In determining
whether an impugned decision is one of policy, it is the nature of the decision
itself that must be scrutinized, rather than the position of the person who
makes it.  The appellant next alleges that the system itself was unreasonable. 
As I have already said, this decision was clearly one of policy.  Such a policy
decision cannot be reviewed on a private law standard of reasonableness.  Since
no allegation was made that the decision was not bona fide or was so
irrational that it could not constitute a proper exercise of discretion, it
cannot be attacked.  E.The Operational Aspect                     It remains to be
considered whether the manner in which the sanding was carried out under the
summer schedule was negligent.  If it was, the respondent could be found
liable.  There are two worrisome features of this aspect of the case.                     The first is the
length of time it took for the Deas Tower to respond to the request for
sanding.  Corporal Eglinski put in his first call requesting sanding at 7:25
a.m.  The first time the call was acknowledged at Deas Tower was 8:30 a.m.  The
Deas Tower was apparently not aware of the problem until that time.  There are
a number of speculative reasons which can be put forward for the delay.  It may
have been because the conditions for radio transmission were poor and Deas
Tower could not be reached by the RCMP at Courtenay.  It may be that the RCMP
did not press forward with the attempts to notify Deas Tower.  However, there
is no claim made against the police for negligence.  In any event, the onus is
on the plaintiff to establish, on a balance of probabilities, that the
Department's negligence was responsible for the unexplained delay in responding
to the request for sanding.  That is to say, it is for the plaintiff to
establish that the Crown was negligent in the manner in which it carried out
the operational aspect of the call out system and of the road maintenance.  Mr.
Brown has not met that onus.                     Once the Deas Tower
was notified, things moved expeditiously.  First through the dispatch of the
sand and gravel truck from the Campbell River yard and secondly, through the
fortuitous arrival and dispatching of an employee from the Gold River yard.  It
therefore follows that this delay, which might have given rise to liability,
has not been shown to have occurred as a result of the negligence of the
Department.                     The second
worrisome aspect was the inability of the Deas Tower to reach the Department
employee on call at Gold River.  It would seem to be imperative that the home
telephone numbers of the call-out employees should be provided to the Deas
Tower so that they could be reached quickly in case of an emergency.  However,
this undoubted negligence did not affect the result in this case.  There are
concurrent findings made by the trial judge and the Court of Appeal that even
if the home telephone number of the call-out employee had been available to the
Deas Tower, he could not have been on the road in time to prevent the
accident.  It was observed by the Court of Appeal that, had he been reached at
home at 8:30 a.m., he would have had to take some time to get himself ready,
then to get to the Gold River yard, and after that to load and inspect the
truck and take it out on the road.  His fortuitous presence at the yard at 9:00
a.m. meant that he was on the road as early as he could have been had he been
reached at his home shortly after 8:30 a.m.  In those circumstances, the
undoubted negligence of the Department in failing to have the home telephone
numbers of the employees on file with the Deas Tower could not have had any
effect on the accident.  It follows that in light of these findings the Crown
cannot be found liable for the accident.  IV.Disposition                     In the result, the
appeal must be dismissed with costs if demanded.                     Appeal dismissed
with costs.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Laxton & Company, Vancouver.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  The Ministry of the Attorney General, Victoria.                     Solicitor
for the intervener:  John C. Tait, Ottawa.  