Cunningham v. Wheeler; Cooper v.
Miller; Shanks v. McNee, [1994] 1 S.C.R. 359  John Earl Miller          Appellant  v.  Mariea Cooper            Respondent  and  Confederation Life Insurance Company, and London Life Insurance Company                                               Interveners  and between  Samuel H. Shanks                                                                              Appellant  v.  Thomas Harry McNee and Beverly Ann
McNee                           Respondents  and between  Thomas Harry McNee and Beverly Ann
McNee                           Appellants  v.  Samuel H. Shanks                                                                              Respondent  and  Confederation Life Insurance Company, and London Life Insurance Company                                               Interveners  and between  Bradwell Henry Cunningham                                                            Appellant  v.  Cherylee Lyn Wheeler and Edward Kenneth Wheeler                                                                 Respondents  and  Confederation Life Insurance Company, and London Life Insurance Company                                               Interveners  Indexed as:   Cunningham v.
Wheeler; Cooper v. Miller; Shanks v. McNee  File Nos.:  22860, 22863,
22867.  1993:  November 4;
1994:  March 17.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                      In Cunningham v.
Wheeler the plaintiff was injured when he was struck by a car.  While he
was off work he collected disability benefits pursuant to a collective
agreement with his employer.  No deductions were made from his pay for these
benefits, but the hourly wage package was made up of an hourly rate of pay
together with collateral benefits.  Disability benefits recovered from the
defendants did not have to be paid either to the employer or to the insurance
company managing the plan.  The trial judge held that the payments should not
be deducted in calculating the amount payable by the defendants for the wages
lost by the plaintiff as a result of his injuries, as the plaintiff had
established that the indemnity benefits were paid for by him as part of his
wage package.  The Court of Appeal reversed the judgment.  It determined that
since there was no subrogation right in the employer, and the direct funding
for the disability benefits came from the employer, the plan was not in the
nature of a private insurance policy and the funds received should be deducted
from the damage award.                          The disability
benefits in Cooper v. Miller were also clearly in the nature of an
insurance policy and therefore should not be deducted from the lost wages
recovered from the defendant.  While the plaintiff paid only 30 percent of the
cost of the benefits by means of deductions from her pay, whatever sums the
employer contributed to fringe benefits such as the disability payments were
deducted from the total hourly wage that would otherwise have been paid to the
employee, and the entire cost of the benefits was thus in fact paid by the
employee.      Cases Cited  By Cory J.   By McLachlin J.
(dissenting in part)                     Livingstone v.
Rawyards Coal Co.
(1880), 5 App. Cas. 25; Hodgson v. Trapp, [1988] 3 W.L.R. 1281; Bradburn
v. Great Western Railway Co. (1874), L.R. 10 Ex. 1; Canadian Pacific
Ltd. v. Gill, [1973] S.C.R. 654; Guy v. Trizec Equities Ltd., [1979]
2 S.C.R. 756; Parry v. Cleaver, [1969] 1 All E.R. 555; Ratych v.
Bloomer, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 940; Hussain v. New Taplow Paper Mills Ltd.,
[1988] 1 All E.R. 541; Graham v. Baker (1961), 106 C.L.R. 340; The
Propeller Monticello v. Mollison, 58 U.S. (17 How.) 152 (1854); Andrews
v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, arts. 1608, 2474.  Insurance
Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. I.8, s. 267.  Authors Cited  Brown,
Craig, and Julio Menezes.  Insurance Law in Canada, 2nd ed. 
Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1991.  David,
Hillel.  "Collateral Benefits: Ratych v. Bloomer" (1990), 12 Advocates'
Q. 124.  David,
Hillel.  "An Update on Collateral Benefits:  Ratych v. Bloomer"
(1992), 14 Advocates' Q. 221.  Dougans,
Gillian.  "Collateral Benefits:  Some Further Thoughts" (1991), 49 Advocate
43.  Flaherty,
James M.  "A Purposeful Uniform Collateral Benefits Rule"
(1991), 3 C.I.L.R. 1.  Fleming,
John G.  The Law of Torts, 8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.  Krishna,
Vern.  The Fundamentals of Canadian Income Tax, 4th ed.   Scarborough,
Ont.:  Carswell, 1993.  Ontario. 
Law Reform Commission.  Report on Compensation for Personal Injuries and
Death.  Toronto:  Ministry of the Attorney General, 1987.  Ontario. 
Report of Inquiry into Motor Vehicle Accident Compensation in Ontario,
vol. 1.  Toronto:  Ministry of the Attorney General, 1988.  Québec. 
Code civil du Québec:  Commentaires du ministre de la Justice. 
Montréal:  DACFO Inc., 1993.  Shuman,
Daniel W.  "The Psychology of Deterrence in Tort Law" (1993), 42
Kan. L. Rev. 115.  Taylor,
Christopher A.  "When is a Loss Not a Loss?:  The Deductibility of
Collateral Benefits After Ratych v. Bloomer" (1990), 12 Advocates' Q.
231.                      Mark M. Skorah, Guy Brown and Cheryl
Talbot, for the appellant John Earl Miller, the appellants/respondents
Thomas Harry McNee and Beverly Ann McNee and the respondents Cherylee Lyn
Wheeler and Edward Kenneth Wheeler.                     Kenneth W.
Thompson, for the
respondent Mariea Cooper.                     John F. Carten, for the appellant/respondent
Samuel H. Shanks.                     Richard Sugden and Robin N. McFee, for
the appellant Bradwell Henry Cunningham.                     P. G. Foy and C. A. Arthurs,
for the interveners.                     The reasons of La
Forest, L'Heureux-Dubé and McLachlin JJ. were delivered by                     McLachlin
J. (dissenting in part)
--  Introduction                     Shanks, Cunningham
and Cooper were injured in separate accidents.  As a result of those injuries,
they each missed periods of work.  Each received compensation for wages lost
under a plan established pursuant to the collective agreement between their
employer and their union.  Shanks made no contribution to one of the plans
under which his lost earnings were paid, but contributed 50 percent of the cost
to a second plan.  Cunningham made no contributions; his benefit was entirely
underwritten by his employer, although it was administered by Aetna Insurance. 
Cooper contributed to both plans through deductions from her pay cheque.                     Shanks, Cunningham
and Cooper each brought an action in tort against the person who had caused the
accident that injured them.  In those actions, each of them made a claim for
the full amount of wages that would have been paid to them in the time they
were unable to work.  They each take the position that they are entitled to
recover from the tortfeasor the full amount of their lost wages without any
deduction for the fact that they had already received compensation under their
employment plan for at least a portion of those wages.                     The defendant
tortfeasors object.  They take the position that the plaintiffs are entitled to
recover only what they have actually lost.  They say the plaintiffs should not
be allowed to recover their lost wages twice and end up in a better financial
position than would have been the case had the accident never occurred.                     These appeals
require this Court to consider the question of whether benefits received as
indemnity for lost wages under wage schemes should be taken into account in
calculating damages in a subsequent tort action.  My colleague, Justice Cory,
concludes that plaintiffs who have been indemnified for a loss should
nevertheless be able to recover for the same loss from the defendant, provided
there is evidence of "some type of consideration given up by the employee
in return for the benefit" (p. 407).  With respect, I cannot agree.  In my
view, a plaintiff who has been indemnified for a loss cannot claim it over
again from the tortfeasor.   Principle, precedent and policy all point to this
conclusion, as I see it.  A.  The Fundamental Principle  Full and Fair Compensation Without
Double Recovery                     The fundamental
principle is that the plaintiff in an action for negligence is entitled to a
sum of damages which will return the plaintiff to the position the plaintiff
would have been in had the accident not occurred, in so far as money is capable
of doing this.  This goal was expressed in the early cases by the maxim restitutio
in integrum.  The plaintiff is entitled to full compensation and is not to
be denied recovery of losses which he has sustained: Livingstone v. Rawyards
Coal Co. (1880), 5 App. Cas. 25 (H.L.), at p. 39, per Lord
Blackburn.  It has been affirmed repeatedly by Canadian courts and once again
in more recent times by the House of Lords: ". . . the basic rule is that
it is the net consequential loss and expense which the court must measure":
Hodgson v. Trapp, [1988] 3 W.L.R. 1281, at p. 1286.  At the same time,
the compensation must be fair to both the plaintiff and the defendant.  In
short, the ideal of the law in negligence cases is fully restorative but
non-punitive damages.  The ideal of compensation which is at the same time full
and fair is met by awarding damages for all the plaintiff's actual losses, and
no more.  The watchword is restoration; what is required to restore the
plaintiff to his or her pre-accident position.  Double recovery is not
permitted.                     Cory J. and I agree
on the basic principle of recovery in a tort action.  As he states, it is
simply to compensate the plaintiff as fully as money may do for the loss
suffered as a result of the tortfeasor's negligence.  The plaintiff is not, we
both agree, generally entitled to double recovery (Cory J., at p. 396). 
However, Cory J. suggests that the case is governed by an exception to the
general principles called the private insurance exception.                     My colleague and I
part company on the issue of whether the present case falls within the private
insurance exception.  Cory J. seems to assume that the benefits in question
fall within the private insurance exception; the issue as he sees it is rather
whether the private insurance exception should be maintained (at p. 400).  I,
on the other hand, do not question that the insurance exception (if indeed it
is an exception) should be maintained.  The questions which arise, as I see the
matter, are the scope of the so-called insurance exception to the rule against
double recovery, and whether employment plans such as those here at issue fall
within that exception.  B.   The Precedents                     The fundamental
principle, to repeat, is that a plaintiff is entitled to recover to the full
extent of the loss, and no more.  However, the law, in limited circumstances,
has permitted exceptions to the rule against double recovery.                     The first exception
to the rule against double recovery is the case of charitable gifts.  If a
plaintiff is injured and his neighbour brings him a basket of groceries or
donates to him a sum of money, the law will not deduct the value of the basket
from the damages which the negligent defendant must pay nor require that the
monetary gift be called into account.  This exception reflects the concern of
the courts who initiated it that people should not be discouraged from aiding
those in misfortune.  Arguably, it also reflects the reality that in most cases
it would be more trouble than it is worth to require the courts to hear evidence
and rule on the value of charitable assistance.                     A second apparent
exception to the rule against double recovery was introduced in 1874 by the
English decision of Bradburn v. Great Western Railway Co. (1874), L.R.
10 Ex. 1.  Mr. Bradburn had purchased a private accident insurance policy.  He
was injured in an accident.  The insurance company paid him £31.  Bradburn sued
the railway company which had negligently caused the accident.  The railway
company argued that the £31 that Bradburn had received from the insurance
company should be deducted from the damages payable by the railway.  The court
disagreed.  It reasoned (per Pigott B., at p. 3) that the plaintiff  does
not receive that sum of money because of the accident, but because he has made
a contract providing for the contingency; an accident must occur to entitle him
to it, but it is not the accident, but his contract, which is the cause of his
receiving it.                     This language
suggests an exception of narrow scope.  At very least, the case does not seem
to stand for more than the fact that an insurance policy triggered by a
specific event, in this case a railroad accident, need not be brought into
account in assessing damages for negligence causing the accident.  What
Bradburn had lost seems to play no role in what he is entitled to recover; it
is not his loss which entitles him to payment under the policy, but the event
of the accident.  While it is impossible to be sure more than one hundred years
later, the words used suggest that the contract of insurance was not viewed as
an indemnity contract, indemnifying the policy holder for a stipulated loss,
but rather as a contract for a payment of a certain sum upon the happening of a
certain event.                     The
distinction between indemnity and non-indemnity insurance is well-recognized in
the insurance industry.  The following definitions, which I adopt here, were
used by the 1988 Report of Inquiry into Motor Vehicle Accident
Compensation in Ontario (the Osborne Commission), at p. 429:    An
indemnity payment is one which is intended to compensate the insured in whole
or in part for a pecuniary loss. . . .   A non-indemnity payment is a payment
of a previously determined amount upon proof of a specified event, whether or
not there has been pecuniary loss.  Perhaps the best example of
non-indemnity insurance is that of life insurance.  The beneficiary under a
life-insurance policy collects a set amount upon the death of the policy holder
without reference to any pecuniary loss.  Pensions are also considered to be
non-indemnity payments:  Canadian Pacific Ltd. v. Gill, [1973] S.C.R.
654 (Canada Pension Plan  benefits);  Guy v. Trizec Equities Ltd., [1979]
2 S.C.R. 756 (company pension plan benefits).  Subject to these exceptions and
the specific wording of the policy, there is a virtual presumption in the
insurance industry that indemnity is the essence of all contracts of
insurance:  C. Brown and J. Menezes, Insurance Law in Canada (2nd ed.
1991), at para. 1:1:7.                     This distinction is
critical to a discussion of collateral benefits.  If the insurance money is not
paid to indemnify the plaintiff for a pecuniary loss, but simply as a matter of
contract on a contingency, then the plaintiff has not been compensated for any
loss.  He may claim his entire loss from the negligent defendant without
violating the rule against double recovery.  Viewed thus, Bradburn  may
not even represent a true exception to the compensatory principle of
compensation.                     This much appears
uncontroversial.  Controversy arises, however, when attempts are made to apply Bradburn
to indemnity policies or plans which compensate the plaintiff for the very loss
claimed against the tortfeasor.  This is because application of Bradburn
to such plans raises starkly the problem of double recovery in a context that
is more significant and questionable than the exception for charitable gifts. 
Courts are far from unanimous on the question of whether Bradburn
applies to indemnity policies and plans.  Some, particularly the earlier cases,
held that it does.  The trend in recent years, however, has been to hold that Bradburn
does not extend so far.  Let us turn then to the cases.                     The House of Lords
leaned in favour of non-deduction in Parry v. Cleaver, [1969] 1 All E.R.
555.  It held that an employment pension for disability should be treated like
a private insurance policy for purposes of deduction.  It reasoned that the
employee must be regarded as having paid for the benefit through his labour or
as having purchased it with his wages, and that it would be "unjust and
unreasonable to hold that the money which he prudently spent on premiums and
the benefit from it should enure to the benefit of the tortfeasor" (per
Lord Reid at p. 558).  It may be noted that the pension, payable on the event of
disability regardless of the loss sustained, was not a benefit designed to
indemnify the plaintiff against the loss which he later claimed against the
tortfeasor.  Like Bradburn, it was a benefit payable on a stipulated
contingency, in this case, disability.                     More recent
decisions in England unanimously favour deductibility*.  As Cory J. put
it in Ratych v. Bloomer, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 940, at p. 950:                     While
courts in Canada and England have consistently applied the Bradburn
principle with respect to private insurance proceeds, they have encountered
difficulties in developing a uniform approach for dealing with collateral
benefits provided by an employer to an employee.                     As I stated of the
British position in the same case, at p. 967:  While
some benefits, like private insurance, remain non-deductible, wages or sick
benefits paid during the period the plaintiff is unable to work have always
been required to be brought into account in calculating the plaintiff's damages. 
This was affirmed by Lord Reid in obiter dicta in Parry v. Cleaver
and applied by the House of Lords in Hussain v. New Taplow Paper Mills Ltd.                     Hussain v. New
Taplow Paper Mills Ltd.,
[1988] 1 All E.R. 541 (H.L.), like the appeals at bar, raised the issue of the
deductibility of wage benefits paid pursuant to an employment contract.  The
plan was designed to indemnify the plaintiff against wage loss.  It provided
that during the first 13 weeks after injury, the plaintiff would receive full
pay.  Thereafter, he would receive 50 percent of his pre-accident earnings by
way of long-term sickness benefits payable under an insurance scheme run by the
defendant, which had taken out a permanent health insurance policy to insure
itself against contractual liability for long-term sickness benefits to its
employees.  The only issue on appeal was whether the long-term benefits should
be deducted; it was accepted that the trial judge correctly deducted the wage
benefits for the first 13 weeks.  It was argued that because of its
insurance-like nature, the benefits paid under the long-term disability plan
fell into the Bradburn principle as extended by Parry v. Cleaver
and should not be deducted.  The House of Lords accepted that the employment
plan could be viewed as "a partial substitute for earnings" (p.
546).  Even so, it ruled that the benefits paid under the plan must be deducted
from the amount claimed for lost earnings from the tortfeasor.  Lord Bridge
stated at pp. 546-47:                     Counsel
for the plaintiff seeks to apply by analogy a principle said to be established
by Parry v Cleaver in support of the argument that all payments to an
employee enjoying the benefit of the defendants' permanent health insurance
scheme are effectively in the nature of the fruits of insurance accruing to the
benefit of the employee in consideration of the contributions he has made by
his work for the defendants prior to incapacity.  Much emphasis was laid on the
long-term nature of the scheme payments to which the plaintiff has become entitled
and it was submitted that they are strictly comparable to a disability
pension.  Both these arguments fall to the ground, as it seems to me, in the
light of the concession rightly made at an early stage that the nature of
payments under the scheme is unaffected by the duration of the incapacity which
determines the period for which payments will continue to be made.  The
question whether the scheme payments are or are not deductible in assessing
damages for loss of earnings must be answered in the same way whether, after
the first 13 weeks of incapacity, the payments fall to be made for a few weeks
or for the rest of an employee's working life.  Looking at the payments made
under the scheme by the defendants in the first weeks after the expiry of the period
of 13 weeks of continuous incapacity, they seem to me indistinguishable in
character from the sick pay which the employee receives during the first 13
weeks.  They are payable under a term of the employee's contract by the
defendants to the employee qua employee as a partial substitute for earnings
and are the very antithesis of a pension, which is payable only after
employment ceases.  The fact that the defendants happen to have insured
their liability to meet these contractual commitments as they arise cannot
affect the issue in any way.  [Emphasis added.]  So in England, any payments under an
employment scheme which are a substitute for wages must be deducted from the
plaintiff's claim for wages against the defendant.  Only if the benefit is not
in the nature of an indemnity for wages, but rather a true non-indemnity
insurance benefit or pension, does it fall within the Bradburn
principle.                     Almost a year
later, in Hodgson v. Trapp, supra, the House of Lords reaffirmed the
fundamental and axiomatic nature of the rule requiring deduction of collateral
benefits.  The House of Lords further held that all state benefits, such as
unemployment benefits, statutory sick pay, attendance and mobility benefits and
others not specifically exempted by statute, would be deductible from an award
of damages.  The court emphasized that, given the compensatory nature of
damages, the Bradburn exception must be narrowly applied and that any
exceptions to the rule against double recovery must be clearly and demonstrably
justified.  Lord Bridge stated at pp. 1285-86:  . .
. it cannot be emphasised too often when considering the assessment of damages
for negligence that they are intended to be purely compensatory.  Where the
damages claimed are essentially financial in character . . . the basic rule is
that it is the net consequential loss and expense which the court must
measure.  If, in consequence of the injuries sustained, the plaintiff has
enjoyed receipts to which he would not otherwise have been entitled, prima
facie, those receipts are to be set against the aggregate of the plaintiff's
losses and expenses in arriving at the measure of his damages.  All this is
elementary and has been said over and over again.  To this basic rule there
are, of course, certain well established, though not always precisely defined
and delineated exceptions.  But the courts are, I think, sometimes in
danger, in seeking to explore the rationale of the exceptions, of forgetting
that they are exceptions.  It is the rule which is fundamental and axiomatic
and the exceptions to it which are only to be admitted on grounds which clearly
justify their treatment as such. [Emphasis added.]                     The position in
Australia echoes that in England. The leading case of Graham v. Baker
(1961), 106 C.L.R. 340 (Austl. H.C.) remains authority for the position that
sick pay received by a plaintiff from his employer following a car accident
will be deducted from the damages assessed against the tortfeasor.  That case
also decided, as did Parry v. Cleaver, that pension benefits received by
the plaintiff would not be deducted.                     In the United
States, the original rule was that a defendant must bear the full cost of the
injury he caused the plaintiff, regardless of any compensation the plaintiff
receives from an independent or collateral source:  The Propeller Monticello
v. Mollison, 58 U.S. (17 How.) 152 (1854).  However, many states have
overturned this rule by statute and the majority have implemented exceptions to
it.                     In sum, it can be
stated with confidence that, subject to the exceptions of charity and
non-indemnifying personal insurance or pensions, the rule in other common law
jurisdictions remains one of deductibility.  Where plaintiffs have received collateral
benefits with respect to wages and "wage-alikes", such as sick leave
entitlement and unemployment benefits, these will be deducted from the
calculation of loss.  J. G. Fleming, The Law of Torts (8th ed. 1992),
summarizes the position as follows (at p. 246):  In
other words, they [collateral benefits] are treated not as gains which might or
might not be set off against an actual loss, but (like free medical services in
Britain) as preventing a loss from ever arising.                     This Court joined
the general trend in the common law world to deduction of collateral benefits
with its decision in Ratych v. Bloomer, supra.  The Court held
that, "[a]s a general rule", and subject to cases where a third party
was subrogated to the wage benefit, "wage benefits paid while a plaintiff
is unable to work must be brought into account and deducted from the claim for
lost earnings" (p. 982).  It affirmed the rule against double recovery and
stressed that before a claim for damages can be made, the plaintiff must
demonstrate an actual loss.  Accordingly, it held that a plaintiff who had
received payment of wages while he was unable to work due to an accident could
not claim damages for loss of earnings against the tortfeasor.                     Ratych v. Bloomer might be left at this were it not for
the interpretation placed on it by my colleague, which requires some response. 
Cory J. cites (at p. 403) the following passage (omitting the last sentence)
for the proposition that Ratych holds that collateral wage benefits paid
for by the plaintiff need not be deducted from a damage claim for wage loss
against the tortfeasor (at p. 983):                     These
comments should not be taken as extending to types of collateral benefits other
than lost earnings, such as insurance paid for by the plaintiff and gratuitous
payments made by third parties. Those issues are not before the Court and
must be left for another day.  [Emphasis added.]  With the greatest respect, I cannot
draw as much from this passage as does Cory J. The passage cited asserts no
principle of law, but merely reserves certain cases for another day.  Moreover,
it excludes lost earnings from its ambit.                     My colleague
couples his construction of this passage with an argument that Ratych
was only a case about evidence; if better proof had been adduced that the
plaintiff paid for the wage benefit, it would not have been deducted.  He draws
this inference from the following passage of the majority reasons in Ratych
(at p. 972):                     I
accept that if an employee can establish that he or she has suffered a loss in
exchange for obtaining wages during the time he or she could not work, the
employee should be compensated for that loss.  Thus in Lavigne v. Doucet
the New Brunswick Court of Appeal quite rightly allowed damages for loss of
accumulated sick benefits.  I also accept that if an employee can establish
that he or she directly paid for a policy in the nature of insurance against
unemployment, equivalent to a private insurance, he or she may be able
to recover the benefits of that policy, although I would leave resolution of
this question for another case.  [Emphasis added.]  My colleague goes on to argue that
this passage creates "two exceptions" (p. 404).  The first,
compensation for lost sick days, he agrees, creates no double recovery
problem.  The second exception, he says, "is an application of the
insurance exception" (pp. 404-5).                     Again, with
respect, the words of the sentence said to create this exception amount only to
reservation of the issue for another case, as the passage plainly states.  No
legal principle is advanced, no exception created.  As for the obiter
passage relied on by my colleague (at p. 405), it is confined to the situation
"where a person has prudently obtained and paid for personal
insurance", the classic Bradburn situation, and is expressly
distinguished from cases where benefits are paid under an employment plan.                     The Court of Appeal
on these appeals, (1991), 64 B.C.L.R. (2d) 62, interpreted Ratych v. Bloomer
as holding that as a general rule, and leaving aside certain insurance-like
situations which were not before the Court, wage benefits paid under an
employment scheme must be brought into account (per Southin J.A. at pp.
79-80).  I agree with this interpretation.  Ratych v. Bloomer is not
merely a ruling on evidentiary sufficiency.  Rather, following on the lead in
other common law jurisdictions, it pronounces on the general requirement for
deduction of employment wage benefits from claims for loss of wages against a
tortfeasor.                     We are not asked to
overrule our decision in Ratych v. Bloomer.  Therefore, the appellants
can succeed only by establishing, first, that they fall within a situation
which Ratych left for future decision and, second, that the rule in that
undecided category should be in favour of non-deductibility.                     On the first point,
it is argued that the fact that the appellants have contributed to, or should
be deemed to have contributed to, the employment plans under which the wage
benefits were paid brings this appeal within the class of cases which Ratych
left for future decision.  The classes of case excluded from the purview of Ratych
were types of collateral benefits other than lost earnings, such as
non-indemnity insurance paid for by the plaintiff and "gratuitous payments
made by third parties" (p. 983).  This is a restatement of the exception
for charitable contributions and the Bradburn rule.  Later, the private
insurance exception is again left for another case (at p. 972) and (at pp.
973-74) the majority affirms the distinction "between cases where a person
has prudently obtained and paid for personal insurance and cases where the
benefits flow from the employer/employee relationship".  In the former
case there may be reasons for asserting an exception, in the latter, by
contrast, "there is little to be weighed in the balance against the
general policy of the law against double compensation" (p. 974).  In
short, what Ratych left for consideration for another day were simply
the long-standing exceptions of charitable contributions and private insurance
in the nature of Bradburn.                     It is here that we
come to the heart of the difference between the parties.  The appellants
contend that the private insurance exception of Bradburn should be
extended to employment plans to which employees have contributed, notwithstanding
the language in Ratych to the contrary.  They urge that we confine Ratych
to its facts -- a voluntary wage continuance by the employer -- and hold that
benefits to which the employee has contributed fall within Bradburn. 
The respondents, on the other hand, argue that the Bradburn exception
applies only to personal contracts of insurance taken out by and paid for by
the plaintiff, and does not extend to benefits paid under employment contracts.                     Viewing the matter
from the point of view of precedent, it is my considered view that the
respondents' submission is the better of the two.  The courts of England, the
jurisdiction which has most closely considered the question of the scope of the
Bradburn exception, after extending the exception to non-indemnity
pensions in Parry v. Cleaver, have concluded that the better course is
to confine Bradburn to true insurance or pension situations and to
exclude benefits designed to indemnify the plaintiff against wage loss.  In
Australia and the United States, the trend has been in the same direction.  In
Canada, this Court has affirmed the general rule against double recovery in Ratych
v. Bloomer.  Simply put, all the recent cases point to deduction*.  
Even Parry v. Cleaver does not assist; it was a case of non-indemnity
benefits, and the courts in England have themselves declined to extend it to
wage benefits.  In my view, the courts of Canada should not go against the
weight of current authority and rule in favour of non-deduction of wage
benefits unless the departure is clearly required on grounds of common sense or
policy.   C.  Policy                     1.The
Substitute Loss Argument                     My colleague
concludes that if the plaintiff has given consideration, or "paid
for" the employment plan, he or she can recover the amount claimed twice:
once from the plan and again from the tortfeasor.  He argues that "[i]t
would be unjust to deprive employees of the benefits which, through prudence
and thrift, they have provided for themselves" (p. 404).  It is suggested
that the fact the plaintiff has paid something avoids the prohibition against
double recovery.                     In fact,
contribution by the plaintiff to the plan does not have that effect.  Two
arguments support this; one based on logic, the other on the reality of how
such plans operate.                     As a matter of
logic, the fact that a plaintiff may lose the benefit of having made a
contribution does not affect the fact that, to the extent a loss is made good
by the plan, the plaintiff in fact suffers no parallel loss recoverable against
the defendant under tort principles.  Tort law says the plaintiff who is
prevented from working by an injury caused by the defendant's negligence may
claim any lost earnings from the defendant.  If the earnings have not been lost
because they continued under an employment plan, then the plaintiff has
suffered no loss of earnings.  So logic dictates the plaintiff can recover
nothing on account of lost earnings.  The fact that the plaintiff has
contributed to the plan does not enter into the chain of reasoning which tort
principles require.  And even if this contribution could somehow be considered,
the amount credited to the plaintiff would at best be the cost to the plaintiff
of the contribution, in many cases a sum much smaller than the claim for loss
of wages.  So the fact that the plaintiff has made a contribution to the plan
does not avoid the problem of double recovery.                     The law reflects
this logic.  The law has consistently refused to compensate a plaintiff because
he or she took precautions which minimized the loss flowing from the negligent
act.  The defendant takes the plaintiff as the defendant finds the plaintiff. 
Sometimes this increases the damages a defendant must pay, as in the case of
what the law calls the "thin skulled" plaintiff.  Sometimes it
decreases the damages the defendant must pay.  The point is simply this: the
fact that the plaintiff is more or less vulnerable and hence suffers greater or
lesser damages as a consequence of the defendant's negligence will not be
reflected in the actual award of damages.  The plaintiff will be compensated to
the full extent of the loss, and no more, regardless of the measure of the
plaintiff's personal vulnerability.                     Turning to the
argument based on the nature of employment plans, it appears wrong as a matter
of fact to suggest that contribution to a plan can be traded off against
indemnification for accident-caused loss to avoid double recovery.  Deduction
of benefits paid by employment plans does not deprive the plaintiff of the
value of his contribution to the plan.  The contribution covers, after all, a
wide range of circumstances which may result in an inability to work, including
sickness or injury, while ensuring that income is continued.  In many cases,
the claim does not involve injury caused by another's negligence and there is
no defendant to sue for the loss.  In those cases where there is a defendant,
recovery is not assured.  The tortfeasor may be unknown, unavailable or
judgment-proof.  Where these particular problems do not arise, recovery may
nevertheless be long-delayed.  Each of these difficulties is attenuated by an
employee benefits plan.  The plaintiff enjoys the benefits provided by the plan
regardless of whether deduction of plan benefits from tort claims is required
or not.                     Taken together,
these arguments demonstrate that the "substitute loss" argument based
on contribution to a plan by the plaintiff does not support the unacceptable
result of double recovery by the plaintiff.                     2.The
Deterrence Argument                     It is suggested
that wage benefits paid under employment plans should not be deducted from
damages for lost earnings claimed from tortfeasors because requiring the
tortfeasor to pay more will increase the deterrent effect of tort actions and
reduce the incidence of negligent conduct.  The general deterrent effect of
tort actions is not the issue here, although recent research casts doubt on its
validity: see D. W. Shuman, "The Psychology of Deterrence in Tort
Law" (1993), 42 Kans. L. Rev. 115.  What is at issue is the
additional deterrent effect, if any, gained by requiring the defendant to pay
more than what the plaintiff has truly lost; by paying again for benefits
already received.                     This argument
suggests two answers.  First, it is far from clear that the difference between
the damages payable without deduction of collateral benefits received from
employment plans and damages payable with deduction would have any effect on
negligent conduct.  Large and well-publicized awards of punitive damages such
as those permitted in some countries might arguably have such an effect.  But
it strains credulity to imagine that the prospect of paying wage benefits in a
negligence action, as opposed to not paying them, will play an important role
in people's decisions about the care they take in the way they drive their
automobiles or carry out their work.                     Second, even if
some connection between non-deduction of employment benefits from damage awards
and deterring negligent conduct could be established, our law has not generally
gone so far as to suggest that deterrence alone is a valid basis upon which to
justify increasing damages.  If that were so, one might expect heavily punitive
damages in many more cases.  In fact, we have not chosen to follow that path.  3.The
Argument that the Tortfeasor Should Bear the Loss                     It is argued that,
as between the prudent employee and the negligent tortfeasor, the tortfeasor
should bear the loss.  Or in the words of Cory J., "[i]t makes little
sense for a wrongdoer to benefit from the private act of forethought and
sacrifice of the plaintiff" (p. 401).                     This argument rests
on the assumption that there is a loss which someone must pay.  A plaintiff who
has been compensated for lost earnings by an employment benefits plan has
suffered no loss to the extent of those benefits.  It is not a question of who
will bear the loss, but rather of whether there is any loss to be borne.                     Nor is this a case
of the tortfeasor unjustly benefiting at the plaintiff's expense.  The
plaintiff contributes regardless of whether the accident occurs or not.  And
the tortfeasor does not benefit, in any usual sense of the word; he or she pays
the actual measure of the plaintiff's loss.  If the fact that a plaintiff was
wearing a seat belt lessens the injury which might have otherwise occurred from
a defendant's negligence, we do not say that the defendant has benefited from
the prudence of the plaintiff, nor do we suggest there is any unfairness in this. 
The measure of tort damages is what the plaintiff has lost, not what the
defendant should be compelled to pay as the price of his negligence.                     The fallacy behind
the argument that the tortfeasor should bear the loss is the notion that the
tortfeasor should be punished.  That is an approach which our law has eschewed
except for those special situations in which punitive damages may be awarded. 
Rather, the law of damages for negligence insists that damages must be fair to
both the plaintiff and the defendant: Livingstone v. Rawyards Coal Co., supra;
Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229.  4.The
Social Inequity Argument                     Cory J. argues (at
pp. 403-4) that deduction of wage benefits from damages  . .
. would create barriers that are unfair and artificial.  It would mean that top
management and professionals who could well afford to purchase their own
insurance would have the benefit of the insurance exception, while those who
made the same provision and made relatively greater financial sacrifices to
provide for the disability payments through their collective bargaining
agreement would be denied the benefits of the insurance exception.  This would
be manifestly unfair.  Cory J. calls such a distinction
"socially regressive".                     This point was not
argued before us and the record does not appear to support the assumptions upon
which it rests.  The first assumption is that privately purchased wage-loss
protection always falls within the Bradburn exception, and hence will
not be deductible from wage claims against a tortfeasor.  But if the Bradburn
exception is confined, as it has been in other jurisdictions, to non-indemnity
insurance or true pensions, this assumption cannot be made.  As the reasoning
of the House of Lords in Hussain demonstrates, who paid for the benefit
is not the test; the test, rather, is whether the benefit is a replacement, or
indemnity, for lost wages.  If so, it amounts to an indemnification benefit and
must be brought into account.                     Even were that not
the case, the argument further assumes that employees either cannot afford to
purchase private insurance or that they make relatively greater financial
sacrifices to obtain their employment plans than would those able to purchase
insurance privately.  It might well be, however, that employees pay relatively
less than self-employed persons for their benefits.  Again, many employees who
benefit from plans in government or corporations earn relatively high salaries,
higher than the salaries of many self-employed persons.  It is not just
"top management and professionals" who purchase insurance privately,
and it is not true that all employees are in inferior financial positions.  Is
the self-employed carpenter with private insurance in a better position than a
deputy minister with employment sickness and disability plans?  Clearly not. 
In the absence of further proof, the case that deduction of wage benefits is
socially regressive is not made out.  5.Subrogation                     The argument that
it makes sense for the tortfeasor to pay damages for wage losses already
indemnified by others succeeds only if the employer or insurer who pays the
wage benefit recovers the damages allocated to lost wages from the employee by
way of subrogation.  In this case there is no double recovery.  The burden is
properly placed on the tortfeasor rather than the employee or insurance
company.  The latter result, unlike the result of double payment to the
plaintiff, is defensible economically and in justice.  For this reason, Ratych
v. Bloomer suggested that where subrogation is exercised, no deduction for
double recovery need be made.                     If subrogation were
effected in each case of payment of employment benefits, it would favour a
regime of non-deduction of the benefits from damage awards in tort.  The
plaintiff would end up with compensation for his or her net loss, and no more. 
However, this is not what happens in the majority of cases.  Rights of
subrogation appear to be exercised rarely.  The Report of Inquiry into Motor
Vehicle Accident Compensation in Ontario, supra, at p. 430,
concluded that the collateral benefits rule in Ontario resulted in persons with
collateral sources of indemnity recovering an average of 136 percent of their
gross wage loss.  Similarly, the Ontario Law Reform Commission, in Report on
Compensation for Personal Injuries and Death (1987), stated at pp. 189-90:  . .
. we are advised that disability insurers and employers generally do not
exercise their rights of subrogation.  Most disability and accident insurers
apparently regard the cost of establishing a system of subrogation to be
unwarranted in light of the benefit that would be derived and, accordingly,
prefer to absorb and spread the amounts paid to the insured through their own
funding structure.  Employers also regard the exercise of subrogation rights to
be impractical and costly, particularly where recovery would be attempted
months or years after providing the benefit.  They often have no effective
means of monitoring the progress of the injured person's claim, or of
identifying what parts of a settlement represent lost wages.  Furthermore,
there is a reluctance on the part of employers to exercise such a right of
recovery because of its possibly detrimental impact on employee relations.                      The rare exercise
of the right of subrogation suggests that the best approach is a regime of
deductibility of employment plan benefits, subject to the plaintiff's right to
claim the benefits if it is established that they will be paid over to the
subrogated third party.  In that case, the plaintiff would hold the recovered
monies in trust on behalf of the subrogated insurer or employer: Ratych,
supra, at p. 978.  6.The
Need for Certainty                     What is required is
a coherent, consistent rule which can be applied with certainty (J. M.
Flaherty, "A Purposeful Uniform Collateral Benefits Rule" (1991), 3 C.I.L.R.
1).  Each year, thousands of cases similar to those at bar arise.  Failing a
negotiated settlement, they fall to be decided in our courts.  Lack of
certainty as to when a deduction for a benefit should be made adds to the
complexity of settlement negotiations and increases the number of cases which
must be litigated.  This in turn adds to the burden on the courts, delays
resolution of the plaintiff's suit, and increases the cost to the general
public.  The desirability of a coherent, consistent rule which can be applied
with certainty favours adhering as closely as possible to the fundamental
principle of restorative, compensatory damages for actual loss suffered.                     Consider the
problems posed by the rule based on contribution of the employee proposed by my
colleague.  Cases at either end of the spectrum are clear enough.  At one
extreme, the proceeds of a non-indemnity insurance policy purchased by the
plaintiff, such as that at issue in Bradburn, would not be deducted.  At
the other extreme, benefits under a scheme whereby an employer simply continues
to pay the employee's wages during the time he or she is off work are fully
deductible: Ratych v. Bloomer.  Between these extremes, however, lie a
multiplicity of different situations susceptible of categorization as
deductible or non-deductible depending upon whether the judge finds, on the
facts, sufficient evidence of contribution by the plaintiff to bring the
benefit into the category of something which the plaintiff has paid for or
"earned".  This is a question on which different people may hold
different views.  In fact, it is often possible to see the same benefit as
having been paid for by either the employee or the employer, depending on how
one looks at the benefit scheme and its integration into the compensation
package.                     Cory J. enumerates
a number of evidentiary considerations which he states may be sufficient to
bring a plan within the "insurance exception".  However helpful these
may be, the very number of the considerations and the vagueness of their
parameters underscores the difficulty of determining whether there has been a sufficient
contribution to bring the case within the insurance exception.  The
difficulties of applying an expanded Bradburn exception are reflected
even in my colleague's reasons.  In applying the rule, Cory J. seems to assume
that all employer contributions are to the employee's account.  But in another
case, evidence might well demonstrate the contrary.  Courts would then be in
the position of trying to determine whether the employee's contribution was
sufficient to bring it within the expanded insurance exception.  Moreover, the
reasoning by which Cory J. arrives at the conclusion that the employee paid for
the benefit in the case of Mr. Shanks, who on the evidence contributed nothing
to his wage benefit plan, demonstrates the large area left to inference by the
test he proposes.  The "open texture" of the process is caught by
phrases such as "it must be inferred from this evidence that . . ."; 
"[t]here must have been trade-offs made by the employees . . ."; [i]t
is hard to imagine that Mr. Shanks' employer was in any different position . .
."; and finally, "[i]t would . . . be  cruelly insensitive and
unrealistic to think that this was not the case after such a long strike"
(p. 414).  Where so much must be left to inference and supposition, can
litigation be far behind?                     One solution to
this uncertainty might be to introduce a deeming provision or a presumption
that all employment benefit plans are paid for by the employee.  But this poses
problems of its own.  How is Ratych v. Bloomer, which arguably involved
a type of employment benefit scheme, to be distinguished?  More fundamentally,
what power has a court of review to replace the fact-finding task of the judge
with presumptions or deeming provisions?  The essential question -- whether the
employee has contributed to the premium bringing the benefit within the Bradburn
principle -- is one which would seem to lie squarely within the domain of the
trial judge to decide on the evidence.  But so long as this is so, the problem
of uncertainty remains.  The history of judicial attempts to deal with
collateral benefits belies the suggestion that it is easy to decide when they
should or should not be brought into account in a negligence action.                     The better
approach, in my view, is that adopted in England and other jurisdictions: to
confine the Bradburn exception to the facts upon which it was
enunciated.  The proceeds of non-indemnity insurance would not be brought into
account in assessing damages for negligence.  Employment benefit plans, on the
other hand, designed to indemnify the plaintiff for the inability to work,
would be deductible from claims for lost earning capacity unless the plaintiff
establishes that he or she is bringing the claim on behalf of a subrogated
third party.  7.Recommendations
of Those Who Have Studied the Problem                     Often when courts
are presented with policy arguments, they face the problem of insufficient
study and expert comment on the ramifications of the choices before them.  That
is not the case here.  There exists a wealth of research and comment on the
question of whether wage benefits and the like should be deducted from damage
awards for the same losses.  Virtually all of it favours deduction.                     In Ontario, the
Report of the Osborne Commission, supra, discussed the issue of
collateral benefits at some length and concluded at p. 438 that a rule premised
upon non-deductibility is "wasteful in practice and cannot be justified in
principle.  It ought to be changed."  The Commission recommended that the
collateral source rule be abolished, by statute if necessary, and that
collateral benefits in the nature of indemnity payments be deducted from the
relevant components of an award of damages in tort.                     Similarly, the
Ontario Law Reform Commission in its Report on Compensation for Personal
Injuries and Death, supra, also recommended that collateral benefits
be taken into account with respect to a damage award for a pecuniary loss.  The
Ontario Law Reform Commission, in fact, went farther than the Osborne
Commission and recommended, inter alia, that all indemnity payments
received by the plaintiff, including ex gratia payments, be assessed. 
The amount of those payments would then be set aside from the damage award and
held in trust for the collateral source.                     It is argued that
art. 1608 of the 1994 Civil Code of Québec supports non-deduction of
collateral benefits (at pp. 402-3).  It should, however, be noted that art.
1608 is expressly stated not to apply to subrogated claims.  Since art. 2474
provides for statutory subrogation of the insurer in all cases of damage insurance,
it follows that art. 1608 will apply only to damage claims where the payment is
not made by way of insurance.  Article 1608 is therefore of very limited
application.                     Academic
commentators also favour a rule of deductibility.  Flaherty, supra, at p.
3, has suggested a rule in the following terms:  All
benefits in the nature of indemnity payments, regardless of source, are to be
taken into account and deducted in the assessment of compensation to the
plaintiff for pecuniary loss in tort.  He further suggests a corollary rule
which ensures that the collateral source with an existing right to repayment
will be able to recover from the defendant when choosing to exercise that
right.  Finally, for certainty, Flaherty states a third rule holding that where
there is no right of repayment, the collateral benefits are still to be
deducted from an award of damages for pecuniary loss.                     Flaherty's position
is echoed, albeit with minor variations, in articles published in the wake of
the decision in Ratych by a number of other commentators: H. David,
"Collateral Benefits: Ratych v. Bloomer" (1990), 12 Advocates' Q.
124; C. A. Taylor, "When is a Loss Not a Loss?: The Deductibility of
Collateral Benefits after Ratych v. Bloomer" (1990), 12 Advocates' Q.
231; G. Dougans, "Collateral Benefits: Some Further Thoughts" (1991),
49 Advocate 43; H. David, "An Update on Collateral Benefits: Ratych
v. Bloomer" (1992), 14 Advocates' Q. 221.  8.Summary
on Policy                     Considerations of
policy and the views of those who have studied the problem support the
deduction of wage benefits paid pursuant to employment plans from claims for
lost earnings made against tortfeasors.  D.  Conclusion on the Law                     I conclude that
principle, precedent and policy all favour the conclusion that wage benefits
paid pursuant to employment plans should be deducted from damages for loss of
earnings claimed against the tortfeasor, except where it is established that a
right of subrogation will be exercised, thereby avoiding double recovery.  The
only exceptions that should be endorsed are charity and cases of non-indemnity
insurance or pensions.  Any benefits which indemnify the plaintiff against wage
loss must be brought into account in a damage claim for that loss against a
tortfeasor because, to the extent the plaintiff has been indemnified, no loss
arises.  On the other hand, benefits which are not in the nature of
indemnification for the loss claimed against the tortfeasor need not be brought
into account.  E.  Application to the Facts of
this Case                     The benefits under
the plans at issue on these appeals were paid in lieu of wages to the
plaintiffs.  Having been compensated for these lost wages, neither Shanks,
Miller nor Cunningham can claim that they suffered a loss for those amounts. 
For the reasons I have suggested, the benefits should not be held to fall under
any of the exceptions to the principle of compensatory damages.  It follows
that they must be brought into account in calculating damages.                     The Court of Appeal
held that notwithstanding the fact that generally the benefits must be deducted
from the damages, this should not happen in the case of Shanks' long-term
disability benefits because the employer was subrogated to them.  It did the
same in the case of Miller, even though there appears to have been no
subrogation in that case.  The latter conclusion appears to have been in
error.  I would dismiss the appeals except in the Miller action, where the
appeal should be allowed.                     Like Cory J., I
would make no deduction of the amount of income tax which would have been owing
on wages, and dismiss the cross-appeal.                     The judgment of
Sopinka, Cory, Iacobucci and Major JJ. was delivered by                     Cory
J. -- These three appeals
were heard together.  They raise the following questions.  First, should
payments received by a plaintiff pursuant to a private policy of insurance be
deducted from the amount recovered for loss of wages?  Second, if private
policies of insurance are to be exempt from deduction, then should disability
benefits negotiated under a collective agreement also be exempted from
deduction?  Third, if disability benefits provided by a collective agreement
are to be exempt from deduction, what proof is required of the payment for the
benefits by the plaintiff employee?  Fourth, should there be a reduction in the
amount paid for loss of wages equivalent to the amount of income tax which
would have been payable on those wages?  I.  Cunningham
v. Wheeler  Factual Background                     Some confusion may
arise from the designation of the parties as appellants or respondents.  I will
therefore refer to those seeking to recover lost wages without deduction of
their insurance or disability benefits as the plaintiffs, and those arguing for
deduction as the defendants.                     On November 14,
1988, the plaintiff Bradwell Cunningham was injured when he was struck by a car
while he was walking across a road.  At the time he was 46 years old and had
been employed by B.C. Rail, for about 25 years.  He was in hospital for 9 days
and off work for almost 20 weeks.  During this period, pursuant to the
provisions of a collective bargaining agreement, he collected disability
benefits which amounted to $5,327.15.                     No deductions were
made from his pay for the disability benefits.  However, there was evidence
accepted by the trial judge which demonstrated that collateral benefits formed
an important aspect of the negotiations between the company and its various
unions.  A union representative and the company vice-president of human
resources explained that if the indemnity coverage was increased, there would
be a proportionate decrease in either the hourly wages or the other collateral
benefits paid to the employees.  Put another way, it was said that under the collective
bargaining agreement the employees were entitled to receive an hourly wage
package.  That package was made up of an hourly rate of pay together with the
collateral benefits.  If the disability benefits were to be abandoned, then the
hourly wage rate would be proportionately higher.  The company held the funds
for the disability payments and turned them over to the Aetna Group Canada for
management.  Mr. Cunningham was not required to repay the weekly disability
benefits he recovered from the defendants either to B.C. Rail or to Aetna Group
Canada.  Decision at Trial                     The trial judge
found that the evidence established the disability benefits paid to Cunningham
were directly paid for by him.  He noted that any increase in the disability
benefits would result in a proportionate decrease in the hourly wage rate or
other benefits.                     He considered the
decision of this Court in Ratych v. Bloomer, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 940. 
He concluded that the plaintiff Cunningham had established that the indemnity
benefits were paid for by him as part of his wage package.  He therefore
determined that the weekly disability payments should not be deducted in
calculating the amount payable by the defendants for the wages lost by the
plaintiff as a result of his injuries.  The Court of Appeal                     The Court of Appeal
((1991), 64 B.C.L.R. (2d) 62) determined that since there was no subrogation
right in the employer, and the direct funding for the disability benefits came
from the employer, the plan was not in the nature of a private insurance
policy.  As a result the court held that the funds received should be deducted
from the damage award.  The position was put this way (at p. 81):                     It
is quite true, as was pointed out, by Mr. Justice Anderson in his judgment in Cunningham
v. Wheeler, that there are trade-offs in wage negotiations and, in the case
of B.C. Rail, it might well be willing to raise the wages of its employees if
the disability plan was abandoned.                     But
I have no reason to think that the Peel Regional Board of Commissioners of
Police did not look at the costs of paying the salaries of injured policemen as
part of the wage cost to the Board.  The right of Constable Ratych against the
Board was of no different order than the right of Mr. Cunningham against B.C.
Rail.  The Private Insurance Policy -- Its
History of Exemption From Deduction and Its Present Status                     For over
119 years, the courts of England and Canada have held that payments
received for loss of wages pursuant to a private policy of insurance should not
be deducted from the lost wages claim of a plaintiff.  The first question to be
considered is whether the rationale for this exemption persists.  In my view
there are convincing reasons both for the existence of the policy and for its
continuation.                     At the outset, it
may be well to state once again the principle of recovery in an action for
tort.  Simply, it is to compensate the injured party as completely as possible
for the loss suffered as a result of the negligent action or inaction  of the
defendant.  However, the plaintiff is not entitled to a double recovery for any
loss arising from the injury.  How then has the insurance exception arisen?  It
was first formally recognized in Bradburn v. Great Western Rail Co.,
[1874-80] All E.R. Rep. 195 (Ex. Div.).  In that case the plaintiff had
been injured as a result of the negligence of the defendant railway company. 
The plaintiff had received a sum of money from a private insurer to compensate him
for lost income as a result of the accident.  It was held that the plaintiff
was entitled to full damages from the defendant as well as the  payment from
the insurer.  That is to say, there was to be no deduction of the insurance
proceeds received from his recovery from the defendant.  This result was
explained by stating that there would be no justice in setting off an amount to
which the plaintiff had entitled himself under a contract of insurance such as
any prudent man would make.  The justification for the rule is explained in
these words at p. 197 in the reasons of Pigott B.:  . .
. I think that there would be no justice or principle in setting off an amount
which the plaintiff has entitled himself to under a contract of insurance, such
as any prudent man would make on the principle of, as the expression is,
"laying by for a rainy day."  He pays the premiums upon a contract
which, if he meets with an accident, entitles him to receive a sum of money. 
It is not because he meets with the accident, but because he made a contract
with, and paid premiums to, the insurance company, for that express purpose,
that he gets the money from them.  It is true that there must be the element of
accident in order to entitle him to the money; but it is under and by reason of
his contract with the insurance company, that he gets the amount; and I think
that it ought not, upon any principle of justice, to be deducted from the
amount of the damages proved to have been sustained by him through the
negligence of the defendants.                     The decision of the
court in that case was founded on the ground that the accident was not the causa
causans of the receipt of the insurance benefits, but merely a causa
sine qua non.                     Later the basis for
the exemption was shifted from the causal reason set out in Bradburn to
one based on the fact that the plaintiff had paid for the insurance benefit and
that benefit thus paid for should not enure to the benefit of the defendant. 
This was the approach adopted by Asquith L.J. for the Court of Appeal in Shearman
v. Folland, [1950] 1 All E.R. 976, at p. 978:  What
in a given case is, and what is not, "collateral"?  Insurance affords
the classic example of something which is treated in law as collateral.  Where
X is insured by Y against injury which comes to be wrongly inflicted on him by
Z, Z cannot set up in mitigation or extinction of his own liability X's right
to be recouped by Y or the fact that X has been recouped by Y:  Bradburn
v. Great Western Ry. Co. [supra] and Simpson v. Thomson
[(1877), 3 App. Cas. 279; 38 L.T. 1; 29 Digest 290, 2355].  There are special
reasons for this.  If the wrongdoer were entitled to set-off what the plaintiff
was entitled to recoup or had recouped under his policy, he would, in effect,
be depriving the plaintiff of all benefit from the premiums paid by the latter
and appropriating that benefit to himself.  This reasoning was adopted by the
House of Lords in Parry v. Cleaver, infra.                     The English courts
have in some cases narrowly interpreted the non-deductibility rule, but the
application of the Bradburn rule to private insurance has never been
questioned.  In Browning v. War Office, [1962] 3 All E.R. 1089 (C.A.),
the majority of the Court of Appeal held that the plaintiff's disability
pension should be deducted in assessing his damages for lost earnings. 
However, both Lord Denning, M.R. and Diplock L.J. cited the Bradburn
rule as an exception to the principle that a plaintiff should be compensated
for his or her full loss, but no more.                     In Parry v.
Cleaver, [1969] 1 All E.R. 555, the majority of the House of Lords reversed
Browning and held that a police officer's disability pension should not
be taken into account in assessing his damages for loss of income.  Their
reasons affirmed the importance of the Bradburn rule, and justified it
in terms of fairness.  Lord Reid stated at p. 558:                     As
regards moneys coming to the plaintiff under a contract of insurance, I think
that the real and substantial reason for disregarding them is that the
plaintiff has bought them and that it would be unjust and unreasonable to hold
that the money which he prudently spent on premiums and the benefit from it
should enure to the benefit of the tortfeasor.  Here again I think that the
explanation that this is too remote is artificial and unreal.  Why should the
plaintiff be left worse off than if he had never insured?  Lord Pearce stated at pp. 575-76:                     One
must, I think, start with the firm basis that Bradburn v. Great Western Ry.
Co. was rightly decided and that the benefits from a private insurance by
the plaintiff are not to be taken in account.                                                                     .
. .  The
Australian cases have accepted Bradburn's case as correct.  So, too, the
Canadian cases.  It has never been criticised in our courts.  It accords with
the view of the American Restatement. 
And counsel for the respondent has not assailed it here.                     One
may put the justification of Bradburn's case on various grounds.  Pigott, B., in deciding it said:  ".
. . there would be no justice or principle in setting off an amount which the
plaintiff has entitled himself to under a contract of insurance, such as any
prudent man would make on the principle of, as the expression is `laying by for
a rainy day' ...  It is true that there must be the element of accident in
order to entitle him to the money; but it is under and by reason of his
contract with the insurance company, that he gets the amount; and I think it
ought not, upon any principle of justice, to be deducted from the amount of the
damages proved to have been sustained by him through the negligence of the
defendants."  In Shearman
v. Folland the court in a judgment given by Asquith, L.J., in discussing what benefits were merely
"collateral" said of Bradburn's case:                     "If
the wrongdoer were entitled to set-off what the plaintiff was entitled to
recoup or had recouped under his policy, he would, in effect, be depriving the
plaintiff of all benefit from the premiums paid by the latter and appropriating
that benefit to himself."                     In Hussain v.
New Taplow Paper Mills Ltd., [1988] 1 All E.R. 541, the House of Lords once
again affirmed the importance of the Bradburn rule.  At
pages 544-45 Lord Bridge stated:  . .
. where a plaintiff recovers under an insurance policy for which he has paid
the premiums, the insurance moneys are not deductible from damages payable by
the tortfeasor. . . .                     The Bradburn
rule has been consistently applied by Canadian courts.  It has been affirmed by
appellate courts in Saskatchewan (Tubb v. Lief, [1932] 3 W.W.R. 245
(Sask. C.A.), Dawson v. Sawatzky, [1946] 1 W.W.R. 33 (Sask. C.A.)), New
Brunswick (Bourgeois v. Tzrop (1957), 9 D.L.R. (2d) 214 (N.B.S.C.A.D.)),
Ontario (Boarelli v. Flannigan, [1973] 3 O.R. 69 (C.A.)), and
British Columbia (Chan v. Butcher, [1984] 4 W.W.R. 363 (B.C.C.A.)).  In Canadian
Pacific Ltd. v. Gill, [1973] S.C.R. 654, at pp. 667-68, and in Guy v.
Trizec Equities Ltd., [1979] 2 S.C.R. 756, at pp. 762-63, this Court
affirmed the principle first set out in Bradburn's case and adopted in Parry
v. Cleaver that the proceeds of insurance should not be deducted from a
plaintiff's damages.                     I think the
exemption for the private policy of insurance should be maintained.  It has a
long history.  It is understood and accepted.  There has never been any
confusion as to when it should be applied.  More importantly it is based on
fairness.  All who insure themselves for disability benefits are displaying
wisdom and forethought in making provision for the continuation of some income
in case of disabling injury or illness.  The acquisition of the policy has
social benefits for those insured, their dependants and indeed their
community.  It represents forbearance and self-denial on the part of the
purchaser of the policy to provide for contingencies.  The individual may never
make a claim on the policy and the premiums paid may be a total loss.  Yet the
policy provides security.                     Recovery in tort is
dependent on the plaintiff establishing injury and loss resulting from an act of
misfeasance or nonfeasance on the part of the defendant, the tortfeasor.  I can
see no reason why a tortfeasor should benefit from the sacrifices made by a
plaintiff in obtaining an insurance policy to provide for lost wages.  Tort
recovery is based on some wrongdoing.  It makes little sense for a wrongdoer to
benefit from the private act of forethought and sacrifice of the plaintiff.                     There is a good
reason why the courts should be slow to change a carefully considered
long-standing policy that no deductions should be made for insurance monies
paid for lost wages.  If any action is to be taken, it should be by
legislatures.  It is significant that in general no such action has been taken.                     Although in Ontario
the non-deductibility principle was abandoned in relation to motor vehicle
accidents when a no-fault motor vehicle insurance regime was enacted, the
general rule in other tort litigation of non-deductibility has not been
altered:  s. 267 of the Insurance Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. I.8.  It is
significant that this was done in the context of creating a new system for
compensating victims of motor vehicle accidents, largely outside traditional
tort law.  The non-deductibility rule in respect to tort damages has not been
altered in any of the other provinces.  Even more significantly, the Quebec
legislators, after careful consideration of the advantages and disadvantages,
specifically provided that there was to be no deductibility.  The provision of
the Civil Code of Québec and the Attorney General's commentaries are
instructive.  They are as follows:  Article 1608                     The
obligation of the debtor to pay damages to the creditor is neither reduced nor
altered by the fact that the creditor receives a prestation from a third
person, as a result of the injury he has sustained, except so far as the third
person is subrogated to the rights of the creditor.  Commentary on Article 1608  [translation]  This article
adopts, with a few changes and making its application more general, the rule
regarding insurance contracts stated in art. 2494 C.C.L.C.  It
is intended to resolve the question of whether the obligation on a debtor to
compensate can be reduced or altered by payments made to the creditor by a
third party, whether those payments are gratuitous or for consideration.  This
would be the case if, for example, without being required to do so, the
creditor's employer continued to pay him his salary while he was unable to
work; it would also be the case if the creditor's insurer paid him, in his
capacity as an insured, the proceeds of an insurance policy he had taken out.   On
the other hand, an affirmative answer seems contrary to the preventive function
of the obligation to compensate, and may also lead to the somewhat disturbing
result of relieving the debtor of any obligation to compensate solely as the
result of the good will of a third party or the creditor's foresight in
protecting himself at his own expense against the possibility of the injury.  The
article comes down in favour of a negative answer to this question of whether
the debtor's obligation to compensate may be reduced or altered by payments the
creditor receives from a third party; but so as to avoid the principal cases in
which double compensation would result, it expressly excludes situations where
the third party is legally or by agreement subrogated to the creditor's rights.   Should the Insurance Exception Apply
in the Situation Where Disability Benefits Are Obtained Not Privately But
Pursuant to a Collective Bargaining Agreement?                     The Court of Appeal
refused to exempt the disability payments received by the plaintiff because they
were obtained as a result of a collective bargaining agreement, rather than by
way of a direct deduction from his pay.  That, I think, is too narrow an
exception.  They were bargained for and obtained as a result of a reduction in
the hourly rate of pay.  These benefits were therefore obtained and paid for by
the plaintiff just as much as if he had bought and privately paid for a policy
of disability insurance.                     The scheme in this
case can qualify as an insurance exception on the basis of the reasons of the
majority in Ratych v. Bloomer, supra.  In that case,
McLachlin J. writing for the majority specifically limited her comments to
benefits which were not in the nature of insurance or gratuitous payments in
these words (at p. 983):                     These
comments should not be taken as extending to types of collateral benefits other
than lost earnings, such as insurance paid for by the plaintiff and gratuitous
payments made by third parties.                     To say that the
exception applies only to private insurance, where actual premiums are paid to
the insurance company, would create barriers that are unfair and artificial. 
It would mean that top management and professionals who could well afford to
purchase their own insurance would have the benefit of the insurance exception,
while those who made the same provision and made relatively greater financial
sacrifices to provide for the disability payments through their collective
bargaining agreement would be denied the benefits of the insurance exception. 
This would be manifestly unfair.  There is no basis for such a socially
regressive distinction.                     Union
representation and collective bargaining are recognized as a means for working
people to protect their interests.  The benefits for which employees have
bargained in good faith should not be sacrificed simply because the mode of
payment for the disability benefit is different from that in private insurance
contracts.  Where evidence is adduced that an employee-plaintiff has paid in
some manner for his or her benefits under a collective agreement or contract of
employment, the insurance exception should apply.  It would be unjust to
deprive employees of the benefits which, through prudence and thrift, they have
provided for themselves.                     On the facts of Ratych
v. Bloomer McLachlin J. found that it could not be established that the
plaintiff in that case had paid for the benefits at issue, thus making them in
the nature of private insurance.  However, she held that if there were evidence
that the plaintiff had paid for the benefits, they might not be deductible.  At
page 972, she stated:                     I
accept that if an employee can establish that he or she has suffered a loss in
exchange for obtaining wages during the time he or she could not work, the
employee should be compensated for that loss.  Thus in Lavigne v. Doucet
the New Brunswick Court of Appeal quite rightly allowed damages for loss of
accumulated sick benefits.  I also accept that if an employee can establish
that he or she directly paid for a policy in the nature of insurance against
unemployment, equivalent to a private insurance, he or she may be able to
recover the benefits of that policy, although I would leave resolution of this
question for another case.  These are two different exceptions. 
The first has nothing to do with the insurance exception, but covers a
situation where although the employee continues to receive a salary while off
work, he or she has to give up something else to receive it.  An example of
such a loss, provided by McLachlin J., is sick leave.  The employee continues
to receive wages, but gives up sick days, which he or she could have used at
some other time.  In such a situation the insurance exception does not arise,
because there is in fact no double compensation problem.  The employee who uses
up his sick leave to get wages while he or she is off work loses the sick
benefits, and so should be compensated for them.  Or alternatively, the
employee could decide not to use his or her sick days, and not get paid.  There
is also a loss in such a case.                     The second
exception McLachlin describes is an application of the insurance exception. 
However, she held that proof was required that the employee had paid for the
benefit in some way to make it akin to private insurance.                     McLachlin J.,
although recognizing the rule for personal insurance, questioned whether, aside
from the evidentiary requirement, there was some substantive reason for there
to be deductibility in cases where the benefits arise out of a contract of
employment.  At pages 973-74 she wrote:                     The
foregoing comments rest primarily on evidentiary considerations.  Approaching
the problem from a substantive point of view, it may be that there is a valid
distinction between cases where a person has prudently obtained and paid for
personal insurance and cases where the benefits flow from the employer/employee
relationship.  The law has long recognized that in the first situation an
exception should be made to the usual rule against double recovery.  The
existence of such an exception does not mean it should be extended to
situations where personal prudence and deprivation are not demonstrated.  In
the latter case there is little to be weighed in the balance against the
general policy of the law against double compensation.                     The substantive
concern is, I think, inextricably linked with the evidentiary requirement. 
Once the evidentiary requirement is met, the substantive concern for personal
prudence and deprivation will also be satisfied.  If the plaintiff can show
that he or she has paid for the benefits in the nature of insurance against
unemployment akin to private insurance, that same proof will also demonstrate
personal prudence and deprivation.  Indeed such a deprivation for an employee
will often be proportionately very much higher than that of the executive or
professional person acquiring personal insurance.                     In my view Ratych
v. Bloomer, supra, simply placed an evidentiary burden upon
plaintiffs to establish that they had paid for the provision of disability
benefits.  I think the manner of payment may be found, for example, in evidence
pertaining to the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement just as
clearly as in a direct payroll deduction.                     Further, the
presence or absence of a third party carrier for the insurance will not affect
the non-deductibility of the benefits from the wage claim.  A requirement of a
third-party carrier as a necessary condition for non-deductibility was
considered, and in my view properly rejected, by the House of Lords in Parry
v. Cleaver.  At page 558, Lord Reid asks and answers this question:    What Proof is Required
to Establish Payment for the Disability Benefits by the Plaintiff?  In Other
Words, What Proof is Necessary to Establish the Insurance Policy Nature of the
Disability Benefits?                     In Ratych v.
Bloomer, there was no evidence put forward that the plaintiff had paid for
the disability benefits.  What type of proof will be required to show that the
benefits are in the nature of insurance?  It is my opinion that what is
required by the Ratych decision is that there be evidence adduced of
some type of consideration given up by the employee in return for the benefit. 
The method or means of payment of the consideration is not determinative. 
Evidence of a contribution to the plan by the employee, whether paid for
directly or by a reduced hourly wage reflected in a collective bargaining
agreement, will be sufficient.                     Generally speaking,
any of the following examples, by no means an exhaustive list, provide the sort
of evidence that could well be sufficient to establish that the employee paid
for the benefit:  (1)  Evidence that there
were trade-offs in the collective bargaining process, which demonstrate that
the employee has forgone higher wages or other benefits in return for the
disability benefits.  In such a case, the employee has paid for the benefits
through wages foregone.  (2)  Evidence of some money
foregone by the employee in return for the benefits.  For example if the
employees gave up the return of a percentage of their Unemployment Insurance
Plan premiums in return for the benefits.  (3)  Evidence of a direct
contribution by the employee, in a form such as payroll deductions, in return
for the benefits.  Such a contribution need not be 100 percent of the premium.  (4)  Evidence of payments by
the employer for the benefits made on behalf of the employee which shows that
those payments were part of the employee's wages, and thus the employee
provided work for the employer in order to have the premium paid.  For example,
if the employer's contribution is listed on the employee's pay slip or
statement of benefits, it can reasonably be inferred that the contribution is
part of the employee's wage package.                     The application of
the insurance exception to benefits received under a contract of employment
should not be limited to cases where the plaintiff is a member of a union and
bargains collectively.  Benefits received under the employment contracts of
non-unionized employees will also be non-deductible if proof is provided of
payment in some manner by the employee for the benefits.  Although there may
not be evidence of negotiations for the wage/benefits package which makes up
the employee's remuneration, evidence that the employer takes the cost of
benefits into account in determining wages would adequately establish that the
employee contributed by way of a trade-off against higher wages.  Clearly, if
the non-union employee contributed to the plan by means of payroll deductions,
that would prove the employee's contribution.  Again, these suggested methods
of proof are not an exhaustive list.                     In this appeal, there
is evidence that the plaintiff paid for the benefits pursuant to his collective
agreements through the trade-off of a reduced hourly wage rate.  For this
reason, this case is distinguishable from Ratych v. Bloomer, since there
is evidence to bring him within the insurance exception.  Disposition of the
Cunningham Appeal                     In the result, the
collateral benefits obtained by Cunningham as a result of his collective
bargaining agreement are in the nature of a private policy of insurance.  The
benefits obtained under the collective agreement, like those obtained under a
private policy of insurance, should not be deducted from the claim for lost
wages.  The order of the Court of Appeal should be amended accordingly.  The
plaintiff should have his costs throughout.  II.  Miller
v. Cooper  Factual Background                     On September 4,
1987 Mariea Cooper was injured in a motor vehicle accident.  At that time she
had been employed for nine years by MacMillan Bloedel in its Port Alberni Pulp
Mill.  After the accident she attempted unsuccessfully to return to work.  At
the time of the trial, three years after the accident, she was still totally
disabled.  The trial judge found that she would continue to be so for a further
one and one-half years.    Judgment at Trial and
on Appeal                     The trial judge
considered Ratych v. Bloomer and decided that the disability provisions
were paid for in part by the employee and in part by the employer pursuant to
the collective bargaining agreement.  He determined that the company deducted
its costs of the disability benefits from the hourly wage paid to the
employees.  It was his opinion that even though there was no subrogation
provision, as a result of the payment by the plaintiff of 30 percent of the
premium cost of the insurance she came within the category of those who had
bought insurance.  As a result, he concluded that her benefits should not be
deducted from her recovery for lost wages.                     The Court of Appeal
as well concluded that in light of the payments made by the plaintiff, the
disability benefit provisions were in the nature of a private contract of
insurance and should not be deducted from her recovery for loss of wages.  Analysis                     It is clear that
the disability benefits were in the nature of an insurance policy.  As such
they should not be deducted from the lost wages recovered from the defendant.                       Socially, these
disability payments represented a significant safeguard for her.  They meant
that she could live and remain independent without resort to social
assistance.  Nor should it be forgotten that the insurance itself represents a
gamble for the insured person.  It might well be that Mrs. Cooper could have
worked her entire career without any disabling injury and retired without ever
having resorted to disability payments.  It follows that for the reasons
expressed in the Cunningham appeal there should not be any deduction
from any recovery for lost wages.  If it could be said to be double recovery,
it constitutes a very small reward for the self-denial which the heavy cost of
premiums represents for the individual assured.  There is a benefit received by
society resulting from the purchase of these disability benefits by the
plaintiff.  The long history of the non-deductibility of the proceeds of
private insurance should be maintained for all disability insurance paid for by
the plaintiff.  III.  Shanks
v. McNee  Factual Background                     As a result of
injuries received in a motor vehicle accident on February 13, 1988, Samuel
Shanks was unable to return to work for a period of approximately two years.    Trial Judgment                     The trial judge
found that the disability payments were in the nature of insurance paid for by
the employee.  As a result of this finding, he did not deduct the benefits
received from the wages lost which were to be recovered from the defendants. 
He further held that there was to be no deduction from the lost wages for the
income tax which would have been paid on the lost wages if the plaintiff had
received them while he was working.  He concluded that the case law was clear
that such deduction should not be made.  The Court of Appeal                      On the issue of a
deduction for the income tax, it was held that although such a deduction was
logical, in light of the decisions of this Court, it should not be made.  Analysis                     The
Nature of the Benefits      Subrogation                     Generally,
subrogation has no relevance in a consideration of the deductibility of the
disability benefits if they are found to be in the nature of insurance. 
However, if the benefits are not "insurance" then the issue of
subrogation will be determinative.  If the benefits are not shown to fall
within the insurance exception, then they must be deducted from the wage claim
that is recovered.  However, if the third party who paid the benefits has a
right of subrogation then there should not be any deduction.  It does not
matter whether the right of subrogation is exercised or not.  The exercise of
the right is a matter that rests solely between the plaintiff and the third
party.  The failure to exercise the right cannot in any way affect the
defendant's liability for damages.  However, different considerations might
well apply in a situation where the third party has formally released its
subrogation right.  Should There Be a
Deduction for Income Tax                       The defendants
McNee argue that as a result of damage awards for lost income not being taxable
the plaintiff Shanks is overcompensated.  They contend that had the plaintiff
not been injured, he would have paid tax on the income he would have earned. 
As a result of the injury, the plaintiff receives damages to replace the
income, but the damages, unlike the income, are not taxable: Cirella v. The
Queen, [1978] 2 F.C. 195 (T.D.); V. Krishna, The Fundamentals of
Canadian Income Tax (4th ed. 1993), at pp. 315-16.  The
defendants therefore argue that a deduction should be made in assessing damages
for lost income to reflect tax which would have been payable on the income, had
the plaintiff not been injured.                     In Canada, the
cases have consistently held that damage awards should be calculated without
taking into account taxes that would have been paid if the sum awarded had been
received by the plaintiff in the form of income:  The Queen v. Jennings,
[1966] S.C.R. 532; Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978]
2 S.C.R. 229; Guy v. Trizec Equities Ltd., supra; Watkins v.
Olafson, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 750.  In contrast, tax is taken into account in
England and Australia:  British Transport Commission v. Gourley, [1956]
A.C. 185; National Insurance Co. of New Zealand v. Espagne (1961),
105 C.L.R. 569 (Austl. H.C.); O'Brien v. McKean (1968), 118 C.L.R. 540
(Austl. H.C.).  The position in the United States varies from state to state.                     In The Queen v.
Jennings, supra, Judson J., writing for the Court on this issue,
held that income tax should not be taken into account in assessing damages for
lost income.  In doing so he expressly rejected the principle stated by the
House of Lords in British Transport Commission v. Gourley.  In the
course of his reasons, Judson J. observed at pp. 545-46:                      The principle
established by this Court in Jennings is still recognized and applied by
litigants and government.  The recovering of tax damages for lost wages is a
matter between the state and the individual, and does not affect the damages
due to the plaintiff from the defendant.  In this respect, I agree with the
conclusion reached by the Ontario Law Reform Commission in the Report on
Compensation for Personal Injuries and Death (1987), at p. 54:                     The
Commission has concluded that the existing rule should continue to govern the
determination of damages for loss of working capacity in cases of non-fatal
injury, and we so recommend.  It is our view that the incidence of taxation is
a concern extraneous to the assessment of damages as between plaintiff and
defendant; it is a matter solely between the plaintiff and Revenue Canada. 
Should the impact of the Income Tax Act be regarded as overgenerous to
plaintiffs, the legislation may be amended by Parliament.                     The taxation of
damages for lost income is a question which should be left to the legislatures
which can, if they wish, readily pass amendments to make damages for lost
income taxable.                     This is really a
question of tax policy and not of tort law.                     For these reasons,
the plaintiff Shanks' damages for lost income should not be reduced by the
amount of tax which would have been payable had they been earned as income.  Disposition                      The plaintiffs in
all three cases should have their costs throughout.                      Solicitors for the
appellant John Earl Miller, the appellants/respondents Thomas Harry McNee and
Beverly Ann McNee and the respondents Cherylee Lyn Wheeler and Edward Kenneth
Wheeler:  Harper Grey Easton, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
respondent Mariea Cooper:  Ramsay, Thompson, Lampman, Nanaimo, B.C.                     Solicitor for the
appellant/respondent Samuel H. Shanks:  John F. Carten, Comox,
B.C.                     Solicitors for the
appellant Bradwell Henry Cunningham:  Sugden, McFee & Roos,
Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
interveners:  Ladner Downs, Vancouver.      * See Erratum, [1994] 1 S.C.R.iv      * See Erratum, [1994] 1 S.C.R. iv  