M.B. v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 477, 2003 SCC 53  Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the  v.   and  Attorney General of Canada, Nishnawbe Aski Nation, Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, Patrick Dennis Stewart, F.L.B., R.A.F., R.R.J., M.L.J., M.W., Victor Brown, Benny Ryan Clappis, Danny Louie Daniels, Robert Daniels, Charlotte (Wilson) Guest, Daisy (Wilson) Hayman, Irene (Wilson) Starr, Pearl (Wilson) Stelmacher, Frances Tait, James Wilfrid White, Allan George Wilson, Donna Wilson, John Hugh Wilson, Terry Aleck, Gilbert Spinks, Ernie James and Ernie Michell                                          Interveners  Indexed as:  M.B. v. British Columbia  Neutral citation:  2003 SCC
53.  File No.:  28616.  2002:  December 5, 6; 2003:  October 2.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Iacobucci, Major,
Bastarache, Binnie, Arbour, LeBel and Deschamps JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia Torts — Liability — Intentional torts — Sexual assault — Foster
child sexually assaulted by foster father — Whether government vicariously
liable for sexual abuse — Whether government breached non-delegable duty.  Torts — Damages — Prejudgment interest — Intentional torts — Sexual
assault — Foster child sexually assaulted by foster father — Whether government
liable for sexual assault — Whether Court of Appeal erred in varying trial
judge’s assessment of damages — Whether trial judge correct in deducting social
assistance benefits from award for loss of past opportunity to earn income —
Whether Court of Appeal adopted proper approach in calculating prejudgment
interest on award for loss of earning capacity — Whether Court of Appeal
correct to reduce damage award.  The respondent was apprehended by the Ministry of Social Services at
the age of thirteen.  She had come from a severely troubled home.  Her father
was frequently violent and had abused the respondent for eight years beginning
when she was four years old.  The respondent was made a
temporary ward of the Superintendent of Child Welfare, and placed in the foster
home of Mr. and Mrs. P.  Mr. P. engaged in sexually inappropriate
behaviour during this time and sexually assaulted the respondent near the end
of June 1976.  The respondent brought claims against the Crown for negligence,
vicarious liability, breach of non-delegable duty and breach of fiduciary duty. 
The trial judge found that although the respondent’s social
workers were negligent in their monitoring and supervision of the placement,
this negligence was not a cause of the abuse.  However, the trial judge
held that the Crown was vicariously liable to the respondent for Mr. P.’s tort,
and also for Mr. P.’s breach of his fiduciary duty to her.  She also held that
his tort constituted a breach of the Crown’s non-delegable duty to look after
the welfare of foster children.  A majority of the Court of
Appeal dismissed the Crown’s appeal, but reduced the award for non-pecuniary
loss on the basis that the trial judge had failed to exclude the effects of the
abuse that the respondent received from her biological father before entering
foster care.  A five-member panel of the court subsequently concluded by a
majority that social assistance payments should not have been deducted from the
respondent’s award for past loss of earnings, but it lowered the award on the
basis that due consideration should be given to the effects of the prior abuse
by the respondent’s biological father.  It also held that prejudgment interest
on the award should be calculated by treating the award as a stream of income
received evenly in six-month intervals over the pre-trial period.  The Crown
appealed to this Court on the question of liability, and on the question of
whether the Court of Appeal was correct in ruling that social assistance
payments are not deductible from awards for past loss of earnings.  The
respondent cross-appealed on whether the Court of Appeal was correct to reduce
the damage award and whether it adopted the proper method for calculating
prejudgment interest on the award.  Held (Arbour J. dissenting in part):  The appeal should be
allowed and the cross-appeal dismissed.  Per McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache,
Binnie, LeBel and Deschamps JJ.:  The government is not
vicariously liable for torts committed by foster parents against foster
children in their care on the ground that foster parents are not, in their
daily affairs, acting “on account of” or on behalf of the government.  For
this reason, it would be inappropriate to hold the Crown
vicariously liable for the sexual abuse of the respondent by her foster father. 
On the issue of non-delegable duty, there is no provision in the Protection
of Children Act that suggests that the Superintendent stands under a
general non-delegable duty to ensure that no harm comes to children through the
abuse or negligence of foster parents, such as would render the Superintendent
liable for their tortious conduct.  While the Crown’s appeal is accordingly
allowed and it is therefore not necessary to decide the three issues pertaining
to damages, they should be canvassed briefly in the interest of providing
guidance.  The trial judge was correct in deducting social assistance benefits
from the respondent’s award for loss of past opportunity to earn income. 
Nothing has been put forward to displace the common sense proposition that
social assistance benefits are a form of wage replacement.  It follows that the
only way in which they can be non-deductible at common law is if they fit
within the charitable benefits exception, or if this Court carves out a new
exception. Otherwise, retention of them would amount to double recovery. 
Social assistance does not fit within the charitable benefits exception. 
Neither of the rationales for the exception — that individuals who wish to help
those who are in need should not be discouraged from doing so and that it is
difficult to assess the monetary value of certain forms of private charity —
seems to apply in the case of social assistance benefits made by the
government.  The Court should not carve out a new policy-based exception for
social assistance.  Given that social assistance benefits come out of public
funds, and given that taxpayers contribute to these funds in the belief that
they will be used for legitimate purposes such as relieving genuine need, it
seems unfair to taxpayers to allow certain plaintiffs to recover from these
funds and then receive a duplicative payment from a tort award.  The Court of Appeal adopted the proper approach in holding that the
award for loss of earning capacity should be treated as compensation for the
loss of a stream of income received evenly over the pre-trial period, and that
prejudgment interest was therefore calculable in six-month intervals under s.
1(2)(b) of the Court Order Interest Act.  The Court of Appeal erred,
however, in substituting its own assessment of the appropriate quantum of
damages.  The trial judge’s assessment of what proportion of the damage
sustained by the respondent was caused by the foster father’s assault is a
judgment of fact, which an appellate court cannot set aside
absent “palpable and overriding error”, and there was no such error in
the trial judge’s approach.  Per Arbour J. (dissenting in part):  Vicarious liability is made
out in this case.  The relationship between the state and foster parents is
sufficiently close that the relationship is capable of attracting vicarious
liability.  In addition, the wrongful act is so closely associated with the
power and intimacy created by the foster care relationship that it can fairly
be said that the government’s empowerment of foster parents materially
increased the risk of sexual abuse of foster children.  There is no breach of
non-delegable duty for the reasons set out by the majority in K.L.B. 
There was agreement with the majority on the damages issues.  Cases Cited  By McLachlin C.J.  Applied:  K.L.B. v.
British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, 2003 SCC 51; referred to:  E.D.G
v. Hammer, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 459, 2003 SCC 52; M. (M.) v. F. (R.)
(1997), 52 B.C.L.R. (3d) 127; Cunningham v. Wheeler, [1994] 1 S.C.R.
359; Bustard v. Boucher, [1997] N.B.J. No. 39 (QL); Cockerill v.
Willms Transport (1964) Ltd. (2001), 284 A.R. 256, 2001 ABQB 136; Ramsay
(Tichkowsky) v. Bain (1995), 170 A.R. 298; M.S. v. Baker (2001), 309
A.R. 1, 2001 ABQB 1032; Krangle (Guardian ad litem of) v. Brisco, [2002]
1 S.C.R. 205, 2002 SCC 9; Lincoln v. Hayman, [1982] 2 All E.R. 819; Hodgson
v. Trapp, [1989] 1 A.C. 807; Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd.,
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 229; The Queen v. Jennings, [1966] S.C.R. 532; Earnshaw
v. Despins (1990), 45 B.C.L.R. (2d) 380; Palmer v. Goodall (1991),
53 B.C.L.R. (2d) 44; Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia
(1995), 100 B.C.L.R. (2d) 260; Housen v. Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R.
235, 2002 SCC 33.  By Arbour J. (dissenting in part)  K.L.B v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, 2003 SCC 51.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  BC Benefits (Income Assistance)
Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 27.  Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79, s. 1(1), (2).  Guaranteed Available Income for
Need Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 158.  Health and Other Services
(Compensation) Act 1995 (Cth.).  Protection of Children Act, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 303 [am. 1968, c. 41], ss. 8(8), 11(1), 11A(1)
[am. 1973, c. 71, s. 6], 15(3).  Social Security (Recovery of
Benefits) Act 1997 (U.K.), 1997, c. 27.    Authors Cited   Cooper-Stephenson,
Kenneth D.  Personal Injury Damages in Canada, 2nd ed. 
Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1996.  Fleming, John G.  The
Law of Torts, 9th ed.  Sydney, Australia: LBC Information Services, 1998.  Great Britain.  Royal
Commission on Civil Liability and Compensation for Personal Injury.  Report,
vol. I.  London:  Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1978. Lewis, Richard.  “Deducting
collateral benefits from damages: principle and policy” (1998), 18 Legal
Studies 15.  APPEAL and CROSS-APPEAL from a judgment of the British
Columbia Court of Appeal (2001), 197 D.L.R. (4th) 385 (sub nom. B. (M.) v.
British Columbia), [2001] 5 W.W.R. 6, 151 B.C.A.C. 70, 249 W.A.C. 70, 87
B.C.L.R. (3d) 12, 4 C.C.L.T. (3d) 163, [2001] B.C.J. No. 586 (QL), 2001 BCCA
227, with supplementary reasons (2002), 10 C.C.L.T. (3d) 76, 99 B.C.L.R. (3d)
256, 164 B.C.A.C. 247, 268 W.A.C. 247, 211 D.L.R. (4th) 295, [2002] 5 W.W.R.
327, [2002] B.C.J. No. 390 (QL), 2002 BCCA 142, varying a decision of the British
Columbia Supreme Court, [2000] B.C.J. No. 909 (QL), 2000 BCSC 735.  Appeal
allowed and cross-appeal dismissed, Arbour J. dissenting in part.    David Sgayias, Q.C.,
and Kay Young, for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada.  Susan M. Vella and Elizabeth K. P. Grace, for the intervener
the Nishnawbe Aski Nation.  Christopher E. Hinkson, Q.C., and Guy P. Brown, for the intervener
the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia. David Paterson and Diane Soroka,
for the interveners Patrick Dennis Stewart et al.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier,
Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel and Deschamps JJ. was delivered by  1                                  
The Chief Justice — The
main issue in this appeal is whether the government is liable for the sexual
assault of a foster child by her foster father, under the doctrines of
vicarious liability or breach of non-delegable duty.  Issues also arise on the
trial judge’s damage awards.  2                                  
The appeal was heard together with K.L.B. v. British
Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, 2003 SCC 51,  and E.D.G. v.
Hammer, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 459, 2003 SCC 52.  In K.L.B., this
Court considered in detail whether the government should be held liable for the
abuse of foster children by foster parents, and on what basis.  The principles
established in that case are determinative of this appeal.  3                                  
On the basis of the principles established in K.L.B., and for the
reasons that follow, I would allow the appeal.  I.     Background  4                                  
The respondent, M.B., was apprehended by the British Columbia Ministry
of Social Services in May 1975, at the age of 13.  She had come from a severely
troubled home.  Her mother was chronically ill and suffered from ongoing drug dependency. 
Her father was frequently violent and had abused M.B. for eight years beginning
when she was four years old.  He was eventually convicted of a number of
criminal offences relating to his sexual abuse of her.  5                                  
In July 1975, M.B. was made a temporary ward of
the Superintendent of Child Welfare, and placed in the foster home of Mr. and
Mrs. P.  The couple had been foster parents for many years.  Mrs. P. was ill at
the time that M.B. lived with them, and so Mr. P. assumed primary care for her
and for the two other foster children who lived in the home from 1975 to 1976.  6                                  
Mr. P. engaged in sexually inappropriate
behaviour during this time.  This included masturbating in public areas of the
home where the foster girls could observe him; engaging in physical contact
with M.B. and one other foster girl that caused them discomfort; and offering
M.B. a ring and use of a car in exchange for sex, an offer that she rejected. 
According to the trial judge, neither Mr. P.’s friends nor the children’s
social workers were in a position to observe this inappropriate behaviour on
their visits to the home, since he did not engage in it while adults were
visiting.  M.B. did not tell anyone about Mr. P.’s inappropriate behaviour
while she was living in the home.  7                                  
During this time, M.B.’s social worker took few
if any steps to supervise and monitor the placement.  The trial judge found no
evidence that she visited the P. home or had any direct contact with M.B.
during the time that she was there.  She did offer M.B. counselling for her
prior experience of sexual abuse by her father.  However, M.B. either refused
or did not continue with this counselling.  8                                  
Mr. P. sexually assaulted M.B. near the end of
June 1976.  She left the home immediately, and returned to her mother’s house. 
The trial judge found that she did not tell her social worker that the assault
had taken place.  She also found that the lack of a good relationship between
M.B. and her social worker would have made it highly unlikely that further
counselling would have induced M.B. to go to a new foster home.  9                                  
M.B.’s life at home with her mother and brother
was chaotic.  Although her father had stopped visiting the home and was no
longer a threat, her mother was still addicted to prescription drugs and was
hospitalized from time to time for overdoses.  M.B. became primarily
responsible for the care of her mother and her brother.  She did not finish
Grade 9 and was expelled from school in Grade 10. Although social workers
attempted to provide help to the family, most of this help was directed towards
M.B.’s mother and younger brother.  Her mother received drug counselling; and
social workers were assigned to her brother to try to motivate him to attend
school.  Her mother committed suicide in 1983.  10                              
Both Mr. and Mrs. P. had died by the time that
M.B. initiated her action in 1997.  M.B. brought claims against the Crown for
negligence, vicarious liability, breach of non-delegable duty and breach of
fiduciary duty.  She initially joined her biological father as a defendant, but
a settlement with him was reached prior to trial.  11                              
At trial, Levine J. found that although M.B.’s social
workers were negligent in their monitoring and supervision of the placement,
this negligence was not a cause of the abuse ([2000] B.C.J. No. 909 (QL), 2000
BCSC 735).  In Levine J.’s assessment, more frequent visits to the P. home
would not have enabled social workers to detect the sexually inappropriate
behaviour of Mr. P., or to suspect that he would assault M.B.  Although regular
contact with her social worker and a more trusting and intimate relationship
with her might have led M.B. to tell her what was going on, Levine J. felt that
this possibility was too speculative to support a finding of causation.  However,
Levine J. held that the Crown was vicariously liable to M.B. for Mr. P.’s tort,
and also for Mr. P.’s breach of his fiduciary duty to her.  She also held that
his tort also constituted a breach of the Crown’s non-delegable duty to look
after the welfare of foster children.  She held that there was no breach of the
Crown’s fiduciary duty, on the grounds that the Crown did not take
advantage of M.B.’s trust for its own personal advantage.  12                              
The Crown appealed to the British Columbia Court
of Appeal on the issues of vicarious liability and breach of non-delegable duty
((2001), 87 B.C.L.R. (3d) 12, 2001 BCCA 227).  A majority of the Court of
Appeal dismissed the Crown’s appeal, but reduced the award for non-pecuniary
loss on the basis that Levine J. had failed to exclude the effects of the abuse
that M.B. received from her biological father before entering foster care. 
Both Prowse J.A. and Mackenzie J.A. upheld the conclusion that the Crown had
breached a non-delegable duty.  Prowse J.A. also upheld the conclusion that
vicarious liability was appropriate.  However, Mackenzie J.A.  rejected it, on
the grounds that the foster parents were not employees of the Crown. McEachern
C.J.B.C., in dissent, would have allowed the appeal.  In his view, the Crown’s
lack of control over the day-to-day activities in foster homes rendered
vicarious liability inappropriate; and the applicable statute did not, in his
mind, impose a non-delegable duty on the Crown to guarantee that no harm came
to foster children.  13                              
After the Court of Appeal delivered its judgment, it
convened a five-member panel to consider two further issues relating to
damages.  These were whether the social assistance payments received by M.B.
should be deducted from her award for past loss of earnings and how prejudgment
interest should be calculated on her award for past loss of earnings. 
The Court of Appeal concluded by a majority of 3-2 that social assistance
payments should not have been deducted; but it lowered the award for past loss
of earnings on the basis that due consideration should be given to the effects
of the prior abuse by M.B.’s biological father ((2002), 99 B.C.L.R. (3d) 256,
2002 BCCA 142).  It also held that pre-judgment interest on the award for past
loss of earnings should be calculated, not on the entire sum from the time of
the tort, as the trial judge had done, but by treating the award as a stream of
income received evenly in six-month intervals over the pre-trial period.  14                              
The Crown now appeals to this Court on the question of liability, and on
the question of whether the Court of Appeal was correct in ruling that social
assistance payments are not deductible from awards for past loss of earnings. 
M.B. cross-appeals on two further issues relating to damages: first, whether the Court of Appeal was correct to reduce the awards for non-pecuniary
loss and past loss of earnings on the basis that the trial judge failed to
factor in the effects of the pre-foster-care abuse, and second, whether the
proper method for calculating prejudgment interest on an award for past loss of
earnings is by treating the award as a stream of income received evenly in
six-month intervals over the pre-trial period.  II.    Issues  15                              
The issues are:  (1)        
Is the Crown vicariously liable for the sexual abuse of M.B. by her
foster father?  (2)        
Did the Crown breach a non-delegable duty?  (3)        
Did the Court of Appeal err in varying the trial judge’s assessment of
damages, on the basis of its own judgment regarding apportionment; on the basis
that social assistance payments are not deductible; or on the basis that
prejudgment interest should be calculated incrementally?  III.    Analysis  1.           
Is the Crown Vicariously Liable for the
Sexual Abuse of M.B. by Her Foster Father?  16                              
This issue is answered in K.L.B., where it is held that the
government is not vicariously liable for torts committed by foster parents
against foster children in their care on the ground that foster parents are
not, in their daily affairs, acting “on account of” or on behalf of the
government.  For this reason, discussed more fully in K.L.B., it would be inappropriate to hold the Crown vicariously liable for
the sexual abuse of M.B. by her foster father.  I would therefore allow
the Crown’s appeal on this issue.  2.     Did the Crown’s Conduct
Amount to a Breach of a Non-Delegable Duty?  17                              
The applicable statute in the case at bar is the
same statute that was considered in K.L.B., albeit with certain
amendments which do not affect the substance of the provisions at issue: Protection
of Children Act, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 303 (am. S.B.C. 1968, c. 41).  (The
relevant legislative provisions are reproduced in the Appendix.)  As noted in K.L.B., at para. 34,  the Act imposes
a number of non-delegable duties upon the Superintendent, including: a duty to
care for the physical well-being of the child before the child is placed in
foster care (s. 8(8)); a duty to place the child in such a place as best meets
his or her needs, or to deliver the child to a children’s aid society (ss.
11(1) and 11A(1)); and a duty to make a report to the Minister if at any time
it appears to the Superintendent that any children’s aid society or foster home
is not in the best interests of a child in its custody or care (s.15(3)). 
These are all non-delegable duties to ensure that certain quite specific
actions are performed in connection with the children’s care.  However, there
is no provision in the Act that suggests that the Superintendent stands under a
general non-delegable duty to ensure that no harm comes to children through the
abuse or negligence of foster parents, such as would render the Superintendent
liable for their tortious conduct.  18                              
For these reasons, laid out in full in K.L.B., I would allow the
Crown’s appeal on the issue of non-delegable duty.  3.        
Was the Court of Appeal Correct to Reduce the Awards for
Non-Pecuniary Loss and Past Loss of Earnings?  19                              
Given my conclusion that the Crown is not liable to M.B., it is not
necessary to decide the three issues pertaining to damages.  However, in the
interest of providing guidance on the issues raised, I will briefly canvass
them.  20                              
The three issues concerning damage assessment are:  (a)         
Was the trial judge correct in deducting social assistance benefits from
M.B.’s award for “loss of past opportunity to earn
income”?  (b)        
What is the appropriate method for calculating interest on this loss? 
Should interest be awarded on the full amount of this part of the damage
award from the time that the cause of action arose, or should this part of the
damage award be treated as a stream of income received evenly over the
pre-trial period?  (c)     Was the Court of Appeal correct to lower
the damage award, on the grounds that Levine J. had failed to
exclude the effects of the prior abuse by M.B.’s biological father?  (a)   Deductibility of Social Assistance
Benefits  21                              
At trial, Levine J. awarded M.B. damages in the amount of $172,726.04. 
This included damages for “loss of past opportunity to
earn income” in the net amount of $10,000.  She arrived
at the latter figure by deducting social assistance benefits which M.B. had
received from a gross award of approximately $132,000.  She did not expand on
her reasons for deducting the social assistance benefits, save by citing M. (M.)
v. F. (R.) (1997), 52 B.C.L.R. (3d) 127, a decision of the British Columbia
Court of Appeal in which that court held that social assistance benefits were
deductible.  22                              
In its initial judgment on the merits of the case, the Court of Appeal
substituted an award of $50,000 for past loss of opportunity to earn income,
without deduction of social assistance benefits.  Mackenzie J.A. stated, at
para. 106, that “the income assistance arrangement is a
collateral matter between the plaintiff and the provincial government that
should not influence the quantum of the tort award”,
but did not further elaborate upon the court’s reasons for not deducting social
assistance benefits.  23                              
Counsel applied in writing to the court for clarification of the court’s
decision concerning the damages award.  As a result, the court convened a
five-member panel to decide the issues of deductibility of social assistance
payments and prejudgment interest.  A 3-2 majority held that income assistance
benefits should not be deducted from the award for past loss of earnings.  24                              
The first question is whether social assistance is a form of income
replacement.  If it is not, no duplication arises.  If it is, the further
question arises of whether social assistance can be excluded from the
non-duplication rule under an existing or new exception.  (i)  Is Social Assistance a Form of Income Replacement?  25                              
It is argued that social assistance is not a form of income replacement,
because it is given on the basis of need for the purpose of relieving poverty.  26                              
In my view, this argument is mistaken.  It is true that social
assistance benefits are intended to relieve poverty, and that need is the
relevant criterion.  However, as Smith J.A. pointed out in his dissenting
judgment in the Court of Appeal in the case at bar, this does not mean that
they are not intended as wage replacement.  On the contrary, it suggests that
they are intended to replace that part of employment income that would
normally be spent on meeting basic needs (para. 162).  Most people who require
welfare require it because they lack sufficient income to meet their basic
needs, and the normal source of sufficient income is employment of one sort or
another.  Social assistance therefore replaces income that most people would
have obtained through employment.  It does not purport to replace all of the
income they would have obtained if they had a job.  It only replaces enough to
satisfy basic needs.  But it is no less “wage
replacement”, simply because it only replaces a portion
of the income a person might otherwise have had.  27                              
The arguments to the contrary do not, with respect, withstand
scrutiny.   Prowse J.A. argued that neither the Guaranteed
Available Income For Need Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c.
158 (“GAIN Act”), nor the BC Benefits (Income Assistance) Act,
R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 27 — the legislation under which M.B. received social
assistance — describes social assistance as “wage replacement” or “income
replacement”.  However, that is not determinative. 
Prowse J.A. also argued that past employment and future employability are not
prerequisites for obtaining social assistance under this legislation.  This too
does not seem determinative, since part of the legislature’s intent may be to
provide a substitute income for those who are unable to work.  Prowse 
J.A.’s  third argument, that the legislation nowhere contemplates repayment of
social assistance from the proceeds of a future tort award, again says nothing
on the issue of whether social assistance is partial income replacement. 
Mackenzie J.A. argued that social assistance benefits do not duplicate damages
received for a tort because “[t]hey are independent of
any loss”, such as a loss caused by a tort (para.
104).  However, an inability to earn an income through employment is a
loss.  It is not a loss that is invariably caused by a tort, to be
sure.  But the test for whether a certain category of collateral benefit “duplicates”  a certain head of
damages is not whether the benefit was intended as compensation for a loss
caused by a tort but simply whether the benefit was of the same type as the
particular head of damages in tort law — i.e., in this case, wage replacement. 
Mackenzie J.A.’s second argument was that the social assistance benefits
received by M.B. could not possibly duplicate her entire tort award, because
the tort award was made for a much longer period.  But an award for loss of
earning capacity is really compensation for the loss of the use of that
capacity over time.  It does not matter, for this purpose, for how much of this
period M.B. was on social assistance.  28                              
I conclude that nothing has been put forward to displace the common
sense proposition that social assistance benefits are a form of wage
replacement.  It follows that the only way in which they can be non-deductible
at common law is if they fit within the charitable benefits exception, or if
this Court carves out a new exception. Otherwise, retention of them would
amount to double recovery.  (ii)  Does Social Assistance Fit Within the Charitable Benefits
Exception?  29                              
Both Prowse J.A. and counsel for M.B. argue in the alternative that
social assistance benefits fit within the charitable benefits exception to the
rule against double recovery, because they are analogous to charitable benefits
in their purpose, which is to relieve need.  30                              
Although superficially attractive, this argument misconstrues the
rationale behind the charitable benefits exception.  The rationale for the
charitable benefits exception does not concern the purpose of charitable
donations.  It is therefore irrelevant whether social assistance benefits share
the same purpose as charitable donations made by private individuals.  The
rationale for the exception lies in the effect that a rule of
deductibility might have on individuals who wish to help those who are in need:
the idea is that they should not be discouraged from doing so.  A further
rationale is that it is difficult to assess the monetary value of certain forms
of private charity — for instance, the value of companionship; the value of
assistance with daily errands; or the value of raising and training a “helper dog” to perform tasks that a
person who has been rendered disabled can no longer perform (see Cunningham v. Wheeler, [1994] 1
S.C.R. 359, at p. 370, per McLachlin J.).  31                              
Neither of these rationales for the charitable benefits exception seems
to apply in the case of social assistance benefits made by the government, as
indeed the Court of Appeal recognized in M. (M.) v. F. (R.), supra,
where social assistance benefits were deducted from the damage award.  It is
not difficult to value social assistance benefits.  Moreover, since the
governmental schemes are already in place, and since individuals are entitled
to receive these benefits if they meet the specified criteria, there is no
possibility that the government will be discouraged from offering the benefits
at all, or will use discretion to deny them to people who may in the future
receive a damage award.  As for counsel for M.B.’s suggestion that taxpayers
will balk at the thought of their money “subsidizing” people who engage in sexual assaults, it seems doubtful
that anyone would favour denying social assistance to someone who was genuinely
needy on the grounds that if social assistance were given, a tortfeasor might
later benefit from the deduction of this sum from a damage award.  (iii)  A Policy-Based Exception for Social Assistance?  32                              
The remaining possibility is that this Court endorse a new exception for
social assistance payments from the general rule of deductibility.  33                              
It is difficult to find a principled rationale for carving out a new
policy-based exception for social assistance.  Given that social assistance
benefits come out of public funds, and given that taxpayers contribute
to these funds in the belief that they will be used for legitimate purposes
such as relieving genuine need, it seems unfair to taxpayers to allow certain
plaintiffs to recover from these funds and then receive a duplicative payment
from a tort award.  A policy-based exception creating a rule of
non-deductibility for social assistance payments does not, then, seem
justifiable on grounds of fairness.  Moreover, a rule of non-deductibility of
social assistance payments might also lead to inefficient results.  If the
courts were to affirm such a rule, then legislatures might move to institute
schemes to recoup social assistance funds from successful plaintiffs.  Current
scholarship suggests that such legislative schemes result in less efficient
loss distribution than does a simple rule of deductibility of social assistance
benefits: see below.  It therefore seems difficult to justify creating a new
policy-based exception for social assistance, whether on the basis of fairness
or on the basis of efficiency.  34                              
A further reason for not creating a new exception to the rule of
deductibility is the virtually unanimous view of those who have studied the
matter that deductibility should prevail.  35                              
John Fleming argues in The Law of Torts (9th ed. 1998) that,
because social assistance is based upon need and comes out of public
funds, there is “no justification for allowing a
claimant to recover in the aggregate from that source [public funds] and the
tortfeasor more than an indemnity for his net loss” (p.
280).  36                              
Ken Cooper-Stephenson, in Personal Injury Damages in Canada
(2nd ed. 1996), at p. 581, raises economic considerations and concludes that
deduction of the benefits from a tort award is “the
most satisfactory loss-distribution mechanism”, and that it is
preferable to allowing the government to recover the value of the social
assistance afterwards.  37                              
Richard Lewis, in “Deducting collateral benefits from damages: principle
and policy” (1998), 18 Legal Studies 15, likewise favours
deductibility.  He points out that a simple rule of deductibility “avoids the
wasteful litigation and administrative cost sometimes associated with
recoupment” (p. 17).  38                              
In the courts, as well, a general principle of deductibility is becoming
increasingly entrenched.  In particular, lower courts have held that the
rationale for the charitable benefits exception does not apply to social
assistance benefits, and that social assistance benefits should be deducted
from tort awards for lost earning capacity: see M. (M.) v. F. (R.), supra;
Bustard v. Boucher, [1997] N.B.J. No. 39 (QL) (Q.B.); Cockerill v.
Willms Transport (1964) Ltd. (2001), 284 A.R. 256, 2001 ABQB 136; Ramsay
(Tichkowsky) v. Bain  (1995), 170 A.R. 298 (Q.B.); M.S. v. Baker
(2001), 309 A.R. 1, 2001 ABQB 1032.  39                              
A rule of deductibility is also consistent with this Court’s recent
judgment in Krangle (Guardian ad litem of) v. Brisco, [2002] 1 S.C.R.
205, 2002 SCC 9.  This case concerned a claim for the costs of future care in a
group home once the respondent reached age 19.  The trial judge had declined to
award damages for these costs on the grounds that in the future, the respondent
would be eligible for monthly social security benefits paid under the very same
legislation that is at issue in the case at bar — the GAIN Act — which
would cover these costs.  The Court deemed this the correct conclusion. 
Although the Court’s reasoning turned on the issue of whether it was the
parents’ or the state’s obligation to absorb the costs of their child’s
disabilities once the child reached adulthood, the case has relevance to the
case at bar in that it was clearly an underlying aim of the Court to avoid
double recovery in such a situation.  If it is appropriate to deduct social
assistance benefits that might be received in the future from a damage
award, in order to eliminate the risk of double recovery, then it seems it must
also be appropriate to deduct social assistance benefits that have been
received in the past.  40                              
Finally, other jurisdictions are increasingly moving toward a policy of
deductibility. In England, the Pearson Commission concluded in 1978 that:  . . . the time has come for full co-ordination of the
compensation provided by tort and social security.  An injured person, or his
dependants, should not have the same need met twice, not only because it is
inequitable, but because it is wasteful.  (Report of the Royal Commission on Civil Liability and Compensation for
Personal Injury (1978), vol. I, p. 107, at para. 475)  Parliament
followed this advice in 1989, introducing a recoupment scheme whereby the state
may recoup the value of a number of benefits paid out to those who subsequently
receive damage awards.  The scheme is now in force through the Social
Security (Recovery of Benefits) Act 1997 (U.K.), 1997, c.  27. 
Public benefits that fall outside the recoupment scheme are subject to a common
law rule of deductibility.  41                              
Prior to the enactment of this legislation, both the English Court of
Appeal and the House of Lords had recommended deductibility of social
assistance benefits (reversing the earlier common law rule of
non-deductibility).  In Lincoln v. Hayman, [1982] 2 All E.R. 819, the
Court of Appeal held that a statutory income support payment received by the
plaintiff was deductible from an award for past loss of earnings.  Lord Waller,
at p. 823, gave a helpful statement of why deductibility was necessary to avoid
double recovery.  The rationale that he put forward there seems also to apply
to the case at bar:  When he [the plaintiff] became unemployed he did not lose the total of
his wages because part of that loss was replaced by supplementary benefit.  If
the supplementary benefit is not taken into account and deducted the plaintiff
will recover more damages than he has suffered.  It will be a fortuitous
windfall.   Similarly, in Hodgson
v. Trapp, [1989] 1 A.C. 807, the House of Lords stated that statutory
benefits in the form of mobility and attendance allowances were deductible from
a tort damage award, on the grounds that “[t]o allow
double recovery . . . at the expense of both taxpayers and insurers
seems to me incapable of justification on any rational ground”
(p. 823, per Lord Bridge).  42                              
Australia, too, has now enacted legislation to compel reduction or
repayment of all social security benefits upon receipt of any form of
compensation for the injury, under the Health and Other Services
(Compensation) Act 1995 (see Fleming, supra, at p. 280).  43                              
I conclude that this Court should not carve out
a policy-based exception to the rule of deductibility.  (b)   Calculation of
Prejudgment Interest 44                              
A second issue pertaining to damages is whether the Court of Appeal
adopted the proper approach in calculating prejudgment interest on the award
for loss of earning capacity.   The Court of Appeal held that this award should
be treated as compensation for the loss of a stream of income received
evenly over the pre-trial period, and hence, that prejudgment interest was
calculable in six-month intervals under s. 1(2)(b) of the Court Order
Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79 (“COIA”).  45                              
Section 1(1) of the COIA establishes a
general rule that prejudgment interest at a rate that the court considers
appropriate must be added to pecuniary damages.  Section 1(2) of the COIA
provides an exception for this rule in the case of “special damages”, the
interest for which must be calculated on an incremental basis.  It stipulates
that:  1 . . .  (2)       Despite subsection (1),
if the order consists in whole or part of special damages, the interest on
those damages must be calculated from the end of each 6 month period in which
the special damages were incurred to the date of the order on the total of the
special damages incurred  (a)  in the 6 month period
immediately following the date on which the cause of action arose, and  (b) in any subsequent 6 month
period.  46                              
Counsel are agreed that the damage award for loss of earning
capacity constitutes “special damages”.  They disagree, however, over how to
characterize this loss, and consequently, over when these damages were
incurred, for the purposes of s. 1(2).  Counsel for M.B. argues that loss of
earning capacity is the loss of a capital asset.  She contends that it
was therefore incurred entirely in “the 6-month period
immediately following the date on which the cause of action arose”.  Consequently, on her view, s. 1(2) requires that the interest on
this award be calculated on the full amount of the award from the end of the
first six months after the tort.  Counsel for the Crown argues that the loss
for which these damages compensate is not the loss of a capacity per se,
but rather the loss of the earnings that this capacity would have
yielded — earnings that would have been received in a steady stream over the
pre-trial period. In his view, s. 1(2) therefore requires that the interest be
calculated in six-month increments, beginning six months after the commission
of the tort.  47                              
There is considerable case law establishing that an award for
loss of earning capacity is intended to compensate for the loss of an asset,
the capacity to earn.   In Andrews v. Grand
& Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229, at p. 251, Dickson J. (as he
then was), following The Queen v. Jennings, [1966] S.C.R. 532, stated that:  It is not loss of earnings but, rather, loss of
earning capacity for which compensation must be made: The Queen v. Jennings,
supra.  A capital asset has been lost: what was its value?  Subsequent decisions have followed this approach: see Earnshaw v.
Despins (1990), 45 B.C.L.R. (2d) 380 (C.A.), at p. 399;  Palmer v.
Goodall (1991), 53 B.C.L.R. (2d) 44 (C.A.), at p. 59; Pallos v.
Insurance Corp. of British Columbia (1995), 100 B.C.L.R. (2d) 260 (C.A.),
at para. 27.  As Finch J.A. noted in Pallos, these cases “all treat
a person’s capacity to earn income as a capital asset, whose value may be lost
or impaired by injury”.  48                              
This does not, however, settle the issue of how interest is to be
calculated under s. 1(2) of the COIA.  As Dickson J. noted in Andrews,
supra, there is a further question that must be asked — namely, how
do we determine the value of the lost asset?  49                              
As Cooper-Stephenson notes, supra, at p. 138, damages under this
head are universally quantified on the basis of what the plaintiff would
have earned, had the injury not occurred.  As far as concerns lost income, the courts fluctuate between the notion
of “loss of earnings” and “loss
of earning capacity”, not for the most part intending any aspect of the
substance of an assessment to depend on the particular wording, since damages
are universally quantified on the basis of what the plaintiff would have,
not what he or she could have earned absent the injury. [Emphasis
in original.]   50                              
These damages are not, then, based on a fixed value that has been
assigned to an abstract capacity to earn.  Rather, the value of a particular
plaintiff’s capacity to earn is equivalent to the value of the earnings that
she or he would have received over time, had the tort not been committed.  It
follows that the loss of this value — the loss that the plaintiff has
sustained, and that the damage award is intended to compensate for — should be
treated as a loss sustained over time, rather than as a loss incurred entirely
at the time that the tort was committed.  Section 1(2) of the COIA
therefore requires that interest be calculated in six-month increments,
beginning six months after the commission of the tort.  51                              
A further consideration supporting this approach, as Mackenzie J.A.
noted, is the desirability of avoiding overcompensation for the effects of
inflation.  Since the loss in this case occurred 20 years prior to the trial
and inflation was considerable over the interim, an award of interest of the
full amount of the damages from the time of the tort would give M.B. more than
is necessary to compensate her for her loss, and would vastly overcompensate
her for the effects of inflation.  While this consideration alone might not
provide sufficient reason to calculate interest in six-month increments, it
shows that the approach we have recommended on conceptual grounds, far from
having objectionable policy implications, seems to be the only adequate
approach from the standpoint of policy.  (c)    The Court of Appeal’s Reduction of the
Damage Award  52                              
It remains to consider whether the Court of Appeal was correct to reduce
the damage award.  The court did so on the grounds that because
the damage award was at the high end of the spectrum, Levine J. must have
failed to exclude the effects of the abuse that M.B. had received at the hands
of her biological father, prior to entering foster care.  53                              
When assessing damages, Levine J. explicitly acknowledged that M.B.’s “‘original position’ must be taken into account in awarding
damages” (para. 265).  She then went on to note that “[t]his
does not relieve J.P. [the foster father] of his measure of responsibility for
the plaintiff’s injuries” (para. 266).  With respect to the foster father’s
contribution to M.B.’s injuries, she concluded that “[t]he
plaintiff’s condition was significantly exacerbated by the repetition of
a type of behaviour that could only serve to reinforce a distrustful and flawed
view of human relationships” (para. 266 (emphasis added)).  It was this damage
for which she held the Crown liable.  54                              
The trial judge’s assessment of what proportion of the damage
sustained by M.B. was caused by the foster father’s assault is a judgment of
fact, which an appellate court cannot set aside absent
“palpable and overriding error”:  Housen v.
Nikolaisen, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, 2002 SCC 33.  I can find no palpable and
overriding error in the trial judge’s approach.  The Court of Appeal therefore
erred in substituting its own assessment of the appropriate quantum of damages.  IV.  Conclusions  55                              
For the reasons given above, I would allow the
appeal and dismiss the cross-appeal.  The following are the reasons delivered by  56                              
Arbour J. (dissenting in part) — This case, like its companion case K.L.B.
v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, 2003 SCC 51, raises the issue of
whether, and on what grounds, the government can be held liable for abuse
committed by a foster parent against a child in foster care.  Specifically,
this case requires the Court to consider whether the government can be held
liable for the sexual assault of the respondent by her foster father while she
was living in foster care based on the doctrines of vicarious liability and
breach of non-delegable duty.  57                              
I find that vicarious liability is made out in this case, substantially
for the reasons I provide in K.L.B.  In brief, it is my view, the
relationship between the state and foster parents is sufficiently close that
the relationship is capable of attracting vicarious liability.  In addition,
the wrongful act is so closely associated with the power and intimacy created
by the foster care relationship that it can fairly be said that the
government’s empowerment of foster parents materially increased the risk of
sexual abuse of foster children.  58                              
I am in agreement with the Chief Justice, however, that there is no
breach of non-delegable duty for the reasons she set out in K.L.B. and I
would dispose of the damages issues as she does.  I would accordingly dismiss
the appeal on the issue of liability and allow the appeal on the issue of
damages.  I would allow the cross-appeal in part.                                                             APPENDIX  Relevant
Legislative Provisions  Protection
of Children Act, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 303 (am. S.B.C. 1968, c. 41)  8.  . . .  (8)  Subject to subsection (7), from the time that a
child is apprehended under section 7 until final disposition of the case by the
Judge, the person who apprehends the child is responsible for the care,
maintenance, and physical well-being of the child, and no liability shall
attach either to such person or to any duly qualified physician or surgeon by
reason only that the child is provided with necessary medical or surgical care
during such time.  11A. (1)  Where a child is committed to the
care and custody of the Superintendent by an order, or delivered to him
pursuant to subsection (2) of section 11, the Superintendent is thereupon the
legal guardian of the person of the child, and he is authorized to take, and
shall receive, the child into his custody.  The Superintendent shall make
arrangements as soon as may be for the placement of the child in a foster home,
or such other place as will best meet the needs of the child.  (2)  Where a child is committed to the care and
custody of a society by an order, or delivered to a society pursuant to
subsection (1) or (2) of section 11, the society is thereupon the legal
guardian of the person of the child, and the society is authorized to take, and
shall receive, the child into its custody.  (3)  It is the duty of the society to use special
diligence in providing suitable foster homes for such children as are committed
to its care, and the society is hereby authorized to place such children in
foster homes on a written agreement, during minority, or for any less period in
the discretion of the society. . . .  14.  Every society to whose care any child is
committed under the provisions of this Act, and every person entrusted with the
care of the child by any such society, shall from time to time permit the child
to be visited, and any place where the child may be, or reside, to be inspected
by the Superintendent or by any person authorized by the Superintendent for the
purpose.  15. (1)  Every organization that deals with
or cares for children . . . shall, in addition to all other
requirements of this Act, upon request of the Superintendent or of any person
authorized by the Minister,  (a)    furnish to the Superintendent or
person so authorized full information and particulars concerning every child
with whom the organization has dealt, or to whom the organization has given
care, or of whom the organization has had the custody; and  (b)    permit the Superintendent or person
so authorized to have access to all parts of the premises and buildings of the
organization . . . and to all children therein, and to all books and
records of the organization.  .
. .  (3)  If it appears to the Superintendent that the
management of any organization referred to in subsection (1) is not such as to
be in the best interests of the children in its care or
custody . . . the Superintendent shall report the circumstances
to the Minister . . . .  Appeal allowed and cross-appeal dismissed, Arbour J. dissenting in part.    Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada:  Deputy
Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the intervener the Nishnawbe Aski Nation:  Goodman
and Carr; Lerner & Associates, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Insurance Corporation of British
Columbia:  Harper Grey Easton, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the interveners Patrick Dennis Stewart
et al.: David Paterson Law Corp., Surrey, B.C.; Hutchins, Soroka &
Grant, Vancouver.   