Fontaine v. British Columbia (Official Administrator), [1998]
1 S.C.R. 424  Beth Naomi Fontaine Appellant  v.  Insurance Corporation of British Columbia                                     Respondent  Indexed as:  Fontaine v. British Columbia (Official
Administrator)  File No.:  25381.  Hearing and judgment: November 14, 1997.  Reasons delivered: March 19, 1998.  Present:  Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and
Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia   Appellant claimed damages with respect to the death of
her husband who was found several weeks after his expected return from a
hunting trip.  His body and that of his hunting companion (which was still
buckled in the driver’s seat) were in the companion’s badly damaged truck which
had been washed along a flood swollen creek flowing alongside a mountain
highway.  No one saw the accident and no one knew precisely when it occurred. 
A great deal of rain had fallen in the vicinity of the accident the weekend of
their hunting trip and three highways in the area were closed because of 
weather-related road conditions.  The trial judge found that negligence had not
been proven against the driver and dismissed the appellant’s case.  An appeal
to the Court of Appeal was dismissed.  At issue here was when res ipsa
loquitur applies and the effect of invoking it.  Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.  Since various attempts to apply res ipsa loquitur
have been more confusing than helpful, the law is better served if the maxim is
treated as expired and no longer a separate component in negligence actions.  
Its use had been restricted to cases where the facts permitted an inference of
negligence and there was no other reasonable explanation for the accident.  The
circumstantial evidence that the maxim attempted to deal with is more sensibly
dealt with by the trier of fact, who should weigh the circumstantial evidence
with the direct evidence, if any, to determine whether the plaintiff has
established on a balance of probabilities a prima facie case of
negligence against the defendant.  If such a case is established, the plaintiff
will succeed unless the defendant presents evidence negating that of the
plaintiff.  The circumstantial evidence here did not discharge the
plaintiff’s onus.  Many of the circumstances of the accident, including the
date, time and precise location, were not known.  There were minimal, if any,
evidentiary foundations from which any inference of negligence could be drawn. 
Although severe weather conditions impose a higher standard of care on drivers
to take increased precautions, human experience confirms that severe weather
conditions are more likely to produce situations where accidents occur and
vehicles leave the roadway regardless of the degree of care taken.  In these
circumstances, it should not be concluded that the accident would ordinarily
not have occurred in the absence of negligence.  Any inference of negligence
which might be drawn in these circumstances would be modest.  Most of the
explanations offered by the defendants were grounded in the evidence and were
adequate to neutralize whatever inference the circumstantial evidence could
permit to be drawn.  The trial judge’s finding that the defence had succeeded
in producing alternative explanations of how the accident may have occurred
without negligence on the driver’s part was not unreasonable and should not be
interfered with on appeal.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Family
Compensation Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 120.  Authors Cited  Balkin,
Rosalie P., and J. L. R. Davis.  Law of Torts, 2nd ed.  Sydney: 
Butterworths, 1996.  Clerk, John Frederic, and William
Harry Barber Lindsell.  Clerk & Lindsell on Torts, 13th ed. Common
Law Library No. 3.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1969.  Klar, Lewis N.  Tort Law,
2nd ed.  Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 1996.  Linden, Allen M.  Canadian Tort
Law, 5th ed.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1993.  Sopinka, John, Sidney N. Lederman
and Alan W. Bryant.  The Law of Evidence in Canada.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1992.  Stanton, K. M.  The Modern Law
of Tort.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1994.  Wright, Cecil A.  “Res Ipsa
Loquitur”, in Special Lectures of the Law Society of Upper Canada (1955), 
Evidence.  Toronto: Richard de Boo, 1979, 103.  APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (1996), 22 B.C.L.R. (3d) 371, 74 B.C.A.C. 241, 121 W.A.C. 241, 18
M.V.R. (3d) 1, [1996] 9 W.W.R. 305, [1996] B.C.J. No. 845 (QL), dismissing an
appeal from a judgment of Boyd J., [1994] B.C.J. No. 716 (QL).  Appeal
dismissed.  Robert A. Easton, for
the appellant.  Patrick G. Foy and A.
M. Gunn, for the respondent.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  //Major J.//  1                                  
Major J. -- This appeal
provides another opportunity to consider the so-called maxim of res ipsa
loquitur.  What is it?  When does it arise?  And what effect does its
application have?  This appeal centres on these questions.  At the conclusion
of the hearing, the appeal was dismissed with reasons to follow.  These are the
reasons.  I.  Facts  2                                  
The appellant claimed damages under the Family Compensation Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 120, as amended, with respect to the death of her husband,
Edwin Andrew Fontaine.  3                                  
On November 9, 1990, Edwin Andrew Fontaine (“Fontaine”) and Larry John
Loewen (“Loewen”) left Surrey, B.C. for a weekend hunting trip.  They were
expected back on November 12, 1990, and were reported missing later that day.
Their bodies were found on January 24, 1991 in Loewen’s badly damaged truck
(“the vehicle”), which was lying in the Nicolum Creek bed adjacent to Highway 3
(approximately seven kilometres east of Hope, B.C.).  There were no witnesses
to the accident, and no one knows precisely when or how the accident happened.  4                                  
The weather was bad on the weekend the men went missing.  Between 10
p.m. on November 8 and 10 p.m. on November 10, 1990, the area in and around the
Hope weather station received approximately 328 mm. of rain.  Three highways
lead out of Hope.  Highway 1 was cut off by a major landslide, Highway 3 was
closed owing to the washout of a large culvert from under the highway, and two
bridges on Highway 5 were closed because of heavy river flooding and potential
damage to the bridges’ understructures.  5                                  
Police investigators concluded that, at the time of the accident, the
vehicle had been travelling westbound on Highway 3 and left the roadway at a
point approximately 10 metres east of the entrance to a rest area.  The vehicle
then tumbled down a rock-covered embankment into the swollen flood waters of
Nicolum Creek and was swept downstream.  The vehicle left the road with
sufficient momentum to break a path through some small alder trees.  Loewen was
found, with his seatbelt in place, in the driver’s seat.  6                                  
A police constable testified that, at the presumed time of the accident,
Nicolum Creek was in flood condition with the water within two-thirds of a
metre of the edge of Highway 3 at the likely site of the accident.  The wind
was gusting to “extremely high velocities” and a rainstorm was raging.  7                                  
The constable also testified that there is a swale in the highway at the
point where the vehicle is believed to have left the road.  With heavy rains,
between 12.5 and 38 mm. of rain may collect in the swale.  In the constable’s
opinion, if the driver continued to drive straight at this point, loss of
control would be unlikely.  However, if the driver were to suddenly turn the
vehicle’s wheels in an attempt to avoid the pool of water or engage in any
other sudden driving manoeuvres, the vehicle might hydroplane, particularly if
the vehicle had worn tires.  The police report indicated that the two front
tires of the vehicle showed “excessive” wear, with only 4 and 5 mm. of tread on
the tires.  The constable further testified that the sidewall of the right
front tire was cut and the rim was damaged, consistent with the tire hitting a
rock or other solid object on the road surface.  He considered it difficult to
say whether or not a flat tire might have caused the vehicle to go out of
control and leave the roadway.  He further agreed that the driver might have
swerved to avoid hitting an animal on the road surface.  8                                  
The trial judge found that negligence had not been proven and dismissed
the case. A majority of the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.  II.  Judicial
History  Supreme Court of British Columbia, [1994] B.C.J. No. 716 (QL)
(Boyd J.)  9                                  
The trial judge held that the appellant had not proven, on a balance of
probabilities, that driver negligence contributed to the fatal injuries
suffered by Fontaine.  She found the only evidence that potentially suggested
negligence was that the vehicle left the road at sufficient speed to break a
path through some small alder trees and wind up in the creek.  However, in her
view, given the road and weather conditions this evidence was no more than
neutral and did not point to negligence on Loewen’s part.  10                              
She rejected the appellant’s contention that the fact that the vehicle
left the highway was prima facie evidence of the driver’s negligence. 
The trial judge also found that even if it were, the respondent had succeeded
in producing several explanations for the accident that were equally consistent
with no negligence.  The onus remained on the plaintiff to prove negligence, on
a balance of probabilities.  Boyd J. held that the burden of proof had not been
met and she dismissed the action.  British Columbia Court of Appeal (1996), 22 B.C.L.R. (3d) 371  (1)   Gibbs J.A. (Proudfoot J.A. concurring)  11                              
Gibbs J.A. for the majority stated at p. 376 that “nothing in or about
the vehicle, or in respect of the bodies inside, or elsewhere, points to
negligence by the driver.  It is, of course, possible to speculate but
speculation does not discharge the burden of proof on a plaintiff.”  He then
distinguished this case from the numerous authorities referred to by the
appellant, finding that in every one of those judgments there were proven facts
from which inferences pointing to negligence could be drawn, whereas there were
none here.  12                              
Gibbs J.A. found that, as in National Trust Co. v. Wong Aviation Ltd.,
[1969] S.C.R. 481, the trial judge held that there were explanations as
consistent with no negligence as with negligence.  The consequence of this
finding was that res ipsa loquitur did not apply, the appellant was left
with the burden of proof, and that burden not having been discharged, the case
failed.  In addition, he considered res ipsa loquitur was not available
because the circumstances did not fall within the accepted definition of res
ipsa loquitur, as the road and weather conditions at the relevant times
were such that the accident could not be said to have happened “in the ordinary
course of things” (p. 379).  13                              
Gibbs J.A. noted that the trial judge appeared to have given little
weight to the evidence on excessive wear of the front tires.  He found that she
did not err in that assessment.  He agreed with the trial judge that the
plaintiff had failed to prove negligence and dismissed the appeal.  (2)   McEachern C.J., dissenting  14                              
McEachern C.J. held that the trial judge should have considered the
plaintiff’s negligence argument in light of cases where circumstantial evidence
was key, having regard to the standards of proof established in Gauthier
& Co. v. The King, [1945] S.C.R. 143.  The Chief Justice found that a
car leaving the roadway in the circumstances of this case was some evidence of
negligence.  In his view, the storm and its consequences did not assist the
defendants, given that if the storm made driving hazardous, the driver was
aware of the risk and should have taken greater care.  Also, the worn condition
of the front tires, for which Loewen was responsible, increased the risk when
driving in a storm.  15                              
Absent an alternative explanation, McEachern C.J. concluded that it was
probable the vehicle left the road because of the driver’s negligence.  He
further observed that there was no evidence that this accident was caused by
any of the agencies suggested by the trial judge.  He said the authorities are
clear that possible causes for which there is no evidence cannot be relied upon
and concluded that the appeal be allowed with or without recourse to res
ipsa loquitur.  III.  Issues  16                              
1.    When does res ipsa loquitur apply?  2.                What
is the effect of invoking res ipsa loquitur?  IV.  Analysis  A.  When
does res ipsa loquitur apply?  17                              
Res ipsa loquitur, or “the thing speaks for itself”, has been
referred to in negligence cases for more than a century.  In Scott v. London
and St. Katherine Docks Co. (1865), 3 H. & C. 596, 159 E.R. 665, at p.
596 and p. 667, respectively, Erle C.J.  defined what has since become known as
res ipsa loquitur in the following terms:  There must be reasonable evidence of negligence.  But where the thing is shewn to be under the
management of the defendant or his servants, and the accident is such as in the
ordinary course of things does not happen if those who have the management use
proper care, it affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of explanation by
the defendants, that the accident arose from want of care. 18                              
These factual elements have since been recast (see Clerk &
Lindsell on Torts (13th ed. 1969), at para. 967, quoted with approval in Jackson
v. Millar, [1976] 1 S.C.R. 225, at p. 235, and Hellenius v. Lees,
[1972] S.C.R. 165, at p. 172):  The doctrine applies (1) when the thing that inflicted the damage was
under the sole management and control of the defendant, or of someone for whom
he is responsible or whom he has a right to control; (2) the occurrence is such
that it would not have happened without negligence.  If these two conditions
are satisfied it follows, on a balance of probability, that the defendant, or
the person for whom he is responsible, must have been negligent.  There is,
however, a further negative condition: (3) there must be no evidence as to why
or how the occurrence took place.  If there is, then appeal to res ipsa
loquitur is inappropriate, for the question of the defendant’s negligence
must be determined on that evidence.  19                              
For res ipsa loquitur to arise, the circumstances of the
occurrence must permit an inference of negligence attributable to the
defendant.  The strength or weakness of that inference will depend on the
factual circumstances of the case.  As described in Canadian Tort Law
(5th ed. 1993), by Allen M. Linden, at p. 233, “[t]here are situations where
the facts merely whisper negligence, but there are other circumstances where
they shout it aloud.”  20                              
As the application of res ipsa loquitur is highly dependent upon
the circumstances proved in evidence, it is not possible to identify in advance
the types of situations in which res ipsa loquitur will arise.  The
application of res ipsa loquitur in previous decisions may provide some
guidance as to when an inference of negligence may be drawn, but it does not
serve to establish definitive categories of when res ipsa loquitur will
apply.  It has been held on numerous occasions that evidence of a vehicle
leaving the roadway gives rise to an inference of negligence.  Whether that will
be so in any given case, however, can only be determined after considering the
relevant circumstances of the particular case.  21                              
Where there is direct evidence available as to how an accident occurred,
the case must be decided on that evidence alone.  K. M. Stanton in The
Modern Law of Tort (1994), stated at p. 76:  Res ipsa loquitur only operates to provide
evidence of negligence in the absence of an explanation of the cause of the
accident.  If the facts are known, the inference is impermissible and it is the
task of the court to review the facts and to decide whether they amount to the
plaintiff having satisfied the burden of proof which is upon him.  See also R. P.
Balkin and J. L. R. Davis, Law of Torts (2nd ed. 1996), at p. 289; Lewis
Klar in Tort Law (2nd ed. 1996), at p. 421.  22                              
Finally, the phrase “in the ordinary course of things” in the passage
quoted from St. Katherine Docks, supra, has been the source of
some confusion.  It has been suggested that the circumstances themselves must
be ordinary in order for res ipsa loquitur to apply.  That is not
necessarily true.  The question that must be asked is whether, in the
particular circumstances established by the evidence, the accident would
ordinarily occur in the absence of negligence.  Granted, some circumstances may
be so extraordinary or unusual that it cannot be said with any degree of
certainty what would ordinarily happen in those circumstances.  In such cases, res
ipsa loquitur will not apply.  In other cases, expert evidence may be
presented to assist the trier of fact in understanding what would ordinarily
occur in a given set of circumstances.  B.  Effect
of the application of res ipsa loquitur  23                              
As in any negligence case, the plaintiff bears the burden of proving on
a balance of probabilities that negligence on the part of the defendant caused
the plaintiff’s injuries.  The invocation of res ipsa loquitur does not
shift the burden of proof to the defendant.  Rather, the effect of the
application of res ipsa loquitur is as described in The Law of
Evidence in Canada (1992), by John Sopinka, Sidney N. Lederman and Alan W.
Bryant, at p. 81:  Res ipsa loquitur, correctly understood,
means that circumstantial evidence constitutes reasonable evidence of
negligence.  Accordingly, the plaintiff is able to overcome a motion for a
non-suit and the trial judge is required to instruct the jury on the issue of
negligence.  The jury may, but need not, find negligence: a permissible fact
inference.  If, at the conclusion of the case, it would be equally reasonable
to infer negligence or no negligence, the plaintiff will lose since he or she
bears the legal burden on this issue.  Under this construction, the maxim is
superfluous.  It can be treated simply as a case of circumstantial evidence.  24                              
Should the trier of fact choose to draw an inference of negligence from
the circumstances, that will be a factor in the plaintiff’s favour.  Whether
that will be sufficient for the plaintiff to succeed will depend on the
strength of the inference drawn and any explanation offered by the defendant to
negate that inference.  If the defendant produces a reasonable explanation that
is as consistent with no negligence as the res ipsa loquitur inference
is with negligence, this will effectively neutralize the inference of
negligence and the plaintiff’s case must fail.  Thus, the strength of the
explanation that the defendant must provide will vary in accordance with the
strength of the inference sought to be drawn by the plaintiff.  25                              
The procedural effect of res ipsa loquitur was lucidly described
by Cecil A. Wright in “Res Ipsa Loquitur” (Special Lectures of the Law
Society of Upper Canada (1955), Evidence, pp. 103-36), and more recently
summarized by Klar in Tort Law, supra, at pp. 423-24:  If the plaintiff has no direct or positive evidence
which can explain the occurrence and prove that the defendant was negligent,
appropriate circumstantial evidence, as defined by the maxim res ipsa
loquitur, may be introduced.  Should the defendant, at this stage of the
proceeding, move for a nonsuit, on the basis that the plaintiff’s evidence has
not even made out a prima facie case for it to answer, the practical
effect of the maxim will come into play.  The court will be required to judge
whether a reasonable trier of fact could, from the evidence introduced, find an
inference of the defendant’s negligence.  That is, could a reasonable jury find
that on these facts the maxim res ipsa loquitur applies?  If it could so
find, the motion for a nonsuit must be dismissed.  If such an inference could
not reasonably be made, the motion must be granted.  In other words, the maxim,
at the least, will get the plaintiff past a nonsuit.  This, however, does not end the matter.  What, if
anything, must the defendant do at this point?  In theory, where the case is
being tried by a judge and jury, the defendant still need not do anything. 
Although the judge has decided that as a matter of law it would not be an error
for the trier of fact to find for the plaintiff on the basis of the
circumstantial evidence which has been introduced, it is still up to the jury
to decide whether it has been sufficiently persuaded by such evidence.  In
other words, the judge has decided that as a matter of law, the maxim can
apply.  Whether as a question of fact it does, is up to the jury.  The jury may
decide, therefore, that even despite the defendant’s failure to call evidence,
the circumstantial evidence ought not to be given sufficient weight to
discharge the plaintiff’s onus.  Thus, even if a defendant has decided not to
introduce evidence, a trial judge should not, in an action tried by judge and
jury, either take the case from the jury and enter judgment for the plaintiff,
or direct the jury to return a verdict in favour of the plaintiff.  It is up to
the trial judge to determine whether the maxim can apply, but up to the jury to
decide whether it does apply.  26                              
Whatever value res ipsa loquitur may have once provided is gone. 
Various attempts to apply the so-called doctrine have been more confusing than
helpful.  Its use has been restricted to cases where the facts permitted an
inference of negligence and there was no other reasonable explanation for the accident. 
Given its limited use it is somewhat meaningless to refer to that use as a
doctrine of law.  27                              
It would appear that the law would be better served if the maxim was
treated as expired and no longer used as a separate component in negligence
actions.  After all, it was nothing more than an attempt to deal with
circumstantial evidence.  That evidence is more sensibly dealt with by the
trier of fact, who should weigh the circumstantial evidence with the direct
evidence, if any, to determine whether the plaintiff has established on a
balance of probabilities a prima facie case of negligence against the
defendant.  Once the plaintiff has done so, the defendant must present evidence
negating that of the plaintiff or necessarily the plaintiff will succeed.  C.  Application
to this case  28                              
In this appeal, the trial judge had to consider whether there was direct
evidence from which the cause of the accident could be determined, or, failing
that, whether there was circumstantial evidence from which it could be inferred
that the accident was caused by negligence attributable to Loewen.  29                              
The trial judge found that the only potential evidence of negligence on
Loewen’s part concerned the fact that the vehicle left the roadway and was
travelling with sufficient momentum to break a path through some small trees. 
She concluded that, when taken together with other evidence concerning the road
and weather conditions, this was no more than neutral evidence and did not
point to any negligence on Loewen’s part.  That conclusion was not unreasonable
in light of the evidence, which at most established that the vehicle was moving
in a forward direction at the time of the accident, with no indication that it
was travelling at an excessive rate of speed.  30                              
There was some evidence about “excessive wear” on the front tires of the
vehicle.  In commenting upon this evidence, Gibbs J.A. for the majority of the
Court of Appeal stated at p. 379:  The fact was stated thus in an accident investigation report:  “The front
tires showed excessive wear with only 4 mm. LF and 5 mm. RF tread depth”.  The
author of the report was not called as a witness.  The evidence does not
disclose whether the witness who was asked about the effect of “excessive” wear
had himself measured the tires as well as observing the wear.  There was no
evidence of where on the tires the measurement was taken or of whether the wear
was uniform over the tires.  Perhaps most importantly, there was no evidence of
what the tread depth of an unworn tire of that make and style would be,
whatever the make and style was.  So there was no standard against which to
measure the 4 and 5 mm., and no way for the court to attach an objective
meaning to the observer’s subjective description of “excessive” wear.  In light of
these deficiencies in the evidence, I agree with Gibbs J.A. that the trial
judge did not err when she apparently treated this evidence as of negligible
value.  31                              
There are a number of reasons why the circumstantial evidence in
this case does not discharge the plaintiff’s onus.  Many of the circumstances
of the accident, including the date, time and precise location, are not known. 
Although this case has proceeded on the basis that the accident likely occurred
during the weekend of November 9, 1990, that is only an assumption.  There are
minimal if any evidentiary foundations from which any inference of negligence
could be drawn.  32                              
As well, there was evidence before the trial judge that a severe wind
and rainstorm was raging at the presumed time of the accident.  While it is
true that such weather conditions impose a higher standard of care on drivers
to take increased precautions, human experience confirms that severe weather
conditions are more likely to produce situations where accidents occur and
vehicles leave the roadway regardless of the degree of care taken.  In these
circumstances, it should not be concluded that the accident would ordinarily
not have occurred in the absence of negligence.  33                              
If an inference of negligence might be drawn in these circumstances, it
would be modest.  The trial judge found that the defence had succeeded in
producing alternative explanations of how the accident may have occurred
without negligence on Loewen’s part.  Most of the explanations offered by the
defendants were grounded in the evidence and were adequate to neutralize
whatever inference the circumstantial evidence could permit to be
drawn.  The trial judge’s finding was not unreasonable and should not be
interfered with on appeal.  34                              
The finding of facts and the drawing of evidentiary conclusions from
those facts is the province of the trial judge, and an appellate court must not
interfere with a trial judge’s conclusions on matters of fact unless there is
palpable or overriding error:  see Toneguzzo-Norvell (Guardian ad litem of)
v. Burnaby Hospital, [1994] 1 S.C.R. 114, at p. 121 per McLachlin
J.  There is no indication that the trial judge committed a palpable or
overriding error here.  35                              
The appellant submitted that an inference of negligence should be drawn
whenever a vehicle leaves the roadway in a single-vehicle accident.  This bald
proposition ignores the fact that whether an inference of negligence can be
drawn is highly dependent upon the circumstances of each case: see Gauthier
& Co., supra, at p. 150.  The position advanced by the appellant
would virtually subject the defendant to strict liability in cases such as the
present one.  V.  Disposition  36                              
The trial judge did not err in concluding based on either the direct or
circumstantial evidence or both that the plaintiff failed to establish on a
balance of probabilities that the accident occurred as a result of negligence
attributable to Loewen.  The appeal is therefore dismissed with costs.  Appeal
dismissed with costs. Solicitors
for the appellant:  Swinton & Company, Vancouver.  Solicitors
for the respondent:  Ladner Downs, Vancouver.   