Jacobi v.  Griffiths, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 570  Randal Craig Jacobi and Jody Marlane Saur                                  Appellants  v.  Boys’ and Girls’ Club of Vernon and Harry Charles Griffiths                                                                     Respondents  and  The Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops and Wunnumin Lake First Nation                                                     Interveners  Indexed as:  Jacobi v. Griffiths  File No.:  26041.  1998:  October 6; 1999:  June 17.   on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia  Torts -- Vicarious liability -- Intentional torts
-- Sexual abuse -- Children sexually abused by employee of boys’ and girls’
club -- Most of assaults occurring at employee’s home -- Whether club
vicariously liable for employee’s sexual assault of children. Employment law -- Liability of employers --
Intentional torts of employees -- Children sexually abused by employee of boys’
and girls’ club -- Most of assaults occurring at employee’s home -- Whether
club vicariously liable for employee’s tortious conduct.  The respondent Boys’ and Girls’ Club, a non-profit
organization incorporated under the Societies Act, employed the
respondent G as Program Director.  The Club required G to supervise volunteer
staff and organize recreational activities and the occasional outing.  G was
also encouraged to form friendships and a positive rapport with the children at
the Club.  Both of the appellants testified that all of their friends and
activities centred on the Club.  There was essentially a single incident of
sexual assault by G involving the male appellant and one incident of sexual
intercourse involving the female appellant at G’s home outside working hours
following several lesser incidents, including one incident of sexual touching
in the Club van.  The disclosure of these events was first made in 1992, some
ten years after they occurred.  After having his employment terminated
following a police investigation, G pled guilty to 14 counts of sexual assault
involving the appellants and other children.  The appellants sought civil
damages against the Club on the legal theory that it should be held vicariously
liable for the intentional sexual abuse by its employee, as well as directly
liable to the appellants for negligence and breach of fiduciary duty.  The
trial judge addressed only the issue of vicarious liability and held the Club
vicariously liable for the assaults committed by G. The Court of Appeal allowed
the Club’s appeal.  Held (L’Heureux-Dubé, McLachlin and Bastarache JJ. dissenting):  The
appeal should be dismissed and the matter sent back to trial for a
determination as to whether the respondent Club is directly liable under a
fault-based cause of action.  Per Cory, Iacobucci,
Major and Binnie JJ.:  The companion decision to this appeal, Bazley v.
Curry (hereinafter “Children’s Foundation”), sets out the two-step
process for determining when an unauthorized act of an employee is sufficiently
connected to the employer’s enterprise that vicarious liability should be
imposed.  A court should first determine whether there are precedents which
unambiguously determine on which side of the line between vicarious liability
and no liability the case falls.  If prior cases do not clearly suggest a
solution, the next step is to determine whether vicarious liability should be
imposed in light of the broader policy rationales behind strict liability.  Under the first phase of the Children’s Foundation analysis,
the case law, reflecting policy judgments by various courts over many years and
across many different jurisdictions, clearly suggests that the imposition of
no-fault liability in this case would overshoot the existing judicial consensus
about appropriate limits of an employer’s no-fault liability.  Courts have
consistently held that mere opportunity to commit a tort does not suffice to
impose no-fault liability.  Even where the job-created opportunity is
accompanied (as in the present appeal) by privileged access to the victim,
Canadian courts have not thought there to be a sufficiently strong connection
between the type of risk created and the actual assault that occurred.  The
result has been otherwise, and the employer held vicariously liable, in sexual
assault cases where the strong connection between the employment and the
assault was enhanced by a combination of job-created power and job-created
intimacy, neither of which was present in this case to the requisite degree. As to the second phase of the analysis set out in Children’s
Foundation, the imposition of no-fault liability is justified by the policy
considerations of compensation and deterrence.  The theory is that a person who
employs others to advance his own economic interest should in fairness be
placed under a corresponding liability for losses incurred in the course of the
enterprise.  Non-profit enterprises, however, lack an efficient mechanism to
“internalize” such costs.  They do not operate in a market environment and have
little or no ability to absorb the cost of such no-fault liability by raising
prices to consumers in the usual way to spread the true cost of “doing
business”.  Deterrence, which is another key policy reason supporting vicarious
liability, also has to be assessed with some sensitivity to context, including
the nature of the conduct sought to be deterred, the nature of the liability
sought to be imposed, and the type of enterprise sought to be rendered liable. 
Given the weakness of the policy justification for the expansion of vicarious
liability to non-profit organizations, the respondent is entitled to insist
that the requirement of a “strong connection” between the enterprise risk and
the sexual assault be applied with serious rigour.  To find a strong connection, there must be a material
increase in the risk of harm occurring in the sense that the employment
significantly contributed to the occurrence of the harm.  In this case the
Club’s “enterprise” was to offer group recreational activities for children to
be enjoyed in the presence of volunteers and other members.  The opportunity
that the Club afforded G to abuse whatever power he may have had was slight. 
The sexual abuse only became possible when G managed to subvert the public
nature of the activities.  The success of his agenda of personal gratification,
which ultimately progressed to sex acts, depended on his success in isolating
the victims from the group.  The progress from the Club’s program to the sexual
assaults was a chain with multiple links, none of which could be characterized
as an inevitable or natural “outgrowth” of its predecessor.  It is not enough
to postulate a series of steps each of which might not have happened “but for”
the previous steps.  Where, as here, the chain of events constitutes
independent initiatives on the part of the employee for his personal
gratification, the ultimate misconduct is too remote from the employer’s
enterprise to justify “no fault” liability.  Per L’Heureux-Dubé,
McLachlin and Bastarache JJ. (dissenting):  Since the case law on the issue is
inconclusive and unsatisfactory, it must be decided whether vicarious liability
should be imposed in light of the considerations of principle and policy
discussed in Bazley v. Curry (hereinafter “Children’s Foundation”). 
Applying the test set out, it must be decided whether G’s intentional torts
were sufficiently linked to his employment duties to justify the imposition of
vicarious liability.  The evidence and the findings of the trial judge in this
case establish that the employment materially and significantly enhanced the
risk of the sexual assaults that occurred.  Almost all of the factors listed in
Children’s Foundation point in favour of liability.  The first factor is
the opportunity that the enterprise afforded G to perpetrate his attacks.  An
environment into which children are entrusted not just for adult supervision,
but for adult mentoring, is one highly charged with potential for an abuse of
that trust.  G was authorized to interact with the children at the Club, and it
seems logical to conclude that he was authorized to interact with the children
outside the presence of other adults.  While a second factor, whether these
acts could be said to further the employer’s aims, militates against finding
liability, this factor is of little significance here since it can be assumed
that intentional torts do not further employers’ ends.  With respect to the
third factor, whether the wrongful act was related to intimacy inherent in the
employer’s enterprise, the Club went further, in its nurturing activities, than
encouraging rapport with a role model; it positively encouraged an intimate
relationship to develop between G and his young charges.  The risk associated
with this position of trust was exacerbated by the troubled and vulnerable
nature of many of the Club’s clients.  The rationales of risk allocation and
deterrence are engaged, and liability may more readily be imposed.  With
respect to the fourth consideration, the extent of power conferred on the
employee in relation to the victim, the trial judge’s finding that G exercised
a “god-like” authority over his victims shows that this factor also points
toward liability.  The fifth factor is the vulnerability of potential victims
to the wrongful exercise of employees’ power.  It goes without saying that
children are vulnerable as potential victims of intentional torts such as
sexual abuse.  These children, troubled adolescents, were more vulnerable than
most.  While G’s assaults, other than the van incident, all took place off site
(at his home) and after hours,  it was his fostering of trust at the Club,
flowing from the requirement of his employment that he forge bonds of intimacy
and respect, that enabled him to commit his despicable acts.  It is not the
mere coincidence of location and interaction that led G to prey upon his
victims -- it is rather that he worked at a job where he was put in a special
position of trust and power over vulnerable people and used that position to
carry out an abuse of the power with which he was conferred to carry out his
duties.  It is this connection that justifies the Club being held liable to
bear the costs of the losses inflicted by G.  The policy rationales
underpinning vicarious liability __ fair compensation and deterrence
__ support this conclusion.  Cases Cited  By Binnie J.  Distinguished:  Bazley
v. Curry, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 534, aff’g (1997), 30 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1 (sub
nom. B. (P.A.) v. Curry); disapproved:  S.T. v. North
Yorkshire County Council, [1999] I.R.L.R. 98; referred to:  Boothman
v. Canada, [1993] 3 F.C. 381; The Queen v. Levy Brothers Co., [1961]
S.C.R. 189; E.D.G. v. Hammer, [1998] B.C.J. No. 992 (QL); Q. v. Minto
Management Ltd. (1985), 15 D.L.R. (4th) 581, aff’d (1986), 34 D.L.R. (4th)
767; Goodwin v. Commission scolaire Laurenval, [1991] R.R.A. 673, 8
C.C.L.T. (2d) 267; B. (J.-P.) v. Jacob (1998), 166 D.L.R. (4th) 125; Barrett
v. The Ship “Arcadia” (1977), 76 D.L.R. (3d) 535; Boykin v. District of
Columbia, 484 A.2d 560 (1984); Lourim v. Swensen, 936 P.2d 1011
(1997); Ciarochi v. Boy Scouts of America, Inc., Alaska Sup. Ct.,
Ketchikan Registry IKE-89-42 CI, August 6, 1990; Lloyd v. Grace, Smith &
Co., [1912] A.C. 716; Lockhart v. Canadian Pacific Railway Co.,
[1941] S.C.R. 278; W. W. Sales Ltd. v. City of Edmonton, [1942] S.C.R.
467; McDonald v. Mombourquette (1996), 152 N.S.R. (2d) 109, leave to
appeal refused, [1997] 2 S.C.R. xi; Destefano v. Grabrian, 763 P.2d 275
(1988); Tichenor v. Roman Catholic Church of the Archdiocese of New Orleans,
32 F.3d 953 (1994); Milla v. Tamayo, 232 Cal. Rptr. 685 (1986); Canadian
Pacific Railway Co. v. Lockhart, [1942] A.C. 591; Big Brother/Big Sister
of Metro Atlanta, Inc. v. Terrell, 359 S.E.2d 241 (1987); Rabon v.
Guardsmark, Inc., 571 F.2d 1277 (1978); Webb by Harris v. Jewel
Companies, Inc., 485 N.E.2d 409 (1985); Doe v. Village of St. Joseph,
Inc., 415 S.E.2d 56 (1992); Noto v. St. Vincent’s Hospital and Medical
Center of New York, 537 N.Y.S.2d 446 (1988); A. (C.) v. Critchley
(1998), 166 D.L.R. (4th) 475; D.C.B. v. Boulianne, [1996] B.C.J. No.
2183 (QL); B. (K.L.) v. British Columbia (1998), 51 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1; B.
(W.R.) v. Plint (1998), 161 D.L.R. (4th) 538; K. (W.) v. Pornbacher
(1997), 32 B.C.L.R. (3d) 360; Doe v. Samaritan Counseling Center, 791
P.2d 344 (1990); Mary M. v. City of Los Angeles, 814 P.2d 1341 (1991); John
R. v. Oakland Unified School District, 769 P.2d 948 (1989); London Drugs
Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299; Bradley
Egg Farm, Ltd. v. Clifford, [1943] 2 All E.R. 378; Dodd v. Cook,
[1956] O.R. 470; Olinski v. Johnson (1997), 32 O.R. (3d) 653; Armagas
Ltd. v. Mundogas SA, [1986] 2 All E.R. 385.  By McLachlin J. (dissenting)  Bazley v. Curry, [1999]
2 S.C.R. 534, aff’g (1997), 30 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1 (sub nom. B. (P.A.) v.
Curry); McDonald v. Mombourquette (1996), 152 N.S.R. (2d) 109.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, s. 271 . Societies Act, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 362, s. 3(1).  Authors Cited  Atiyah, P.
S.  Vicarious Liability in the Law of Torts.  London:  Butterworths,
1967.  Baty, T.  Vicarious Liability. 
Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1916.  Flannigan, Robert.  “The Liability
Structure of Nonprofit Associations:  Tort and Fiduciary Liability Assignments”
(1998), 77 Can. Bar Rev. 73.  Fleming, John G.  The Law of
Torts, 9th ed.  Sydney:  LBC Information Services, 1998.  Fridman, G. H. L.  The Law of
Torts in Canada, vol. 2.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1990.  Laski, Harold J.  “The Basis of
Vicarious Liability” (1916), 26 Yale L.J. 105.  Salmond and Heuston on the Law of Torts,
21st ed.  By R. F. V. Heuston and R. A. Buckley.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell,
1996.  APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (1997), 31 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1 (sub nom. T. (G.) v. Griffiths),
89 B.C.A.C. 126, 145 W.A.C. 126, [1997] 5 W.W.R. 203, 27 C.C.E.L. (2d) 307,
[1997] B.C.J. No. 695 (QL) (sub nom. G.J. v. Griffiths), reversing
a decision of the British Columbia Supreme Court, [1995] B.C.J. No. 2370 (QL),
finding the respondent Club vicariously liable for intentional sexual abuse by
one of its employees.  Appeal dismissed, L’Heureux-Dubé, McLachlin and
Bastarache JJ. dissenting.  Christopher R. Penty,
for the appellants.  Gordon G. Hilliker and Julie
D. Fisher, for the respondent Boys’ and Girls’ Club of Vernon.  William J. Sammon, for
the intervener the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops.  Susan M. Vella and Jonathan
Eades, for the intervener Wunnumin Lake First Nation.  The reasons of L’Heureux-Dubé, McLachlin and
Bastarache JJ. were delivered by  //McLachlin J.//  McLachlin J. (dissenting) __  Introduction  1                                  
This case involves claims for damages by a brother and sister against
the Vernon Boys’ and Girls’ Club (“the Club”) for incidents of sexual assault
by one of the Club’s employees.  The plaintiffs sought damages against the Club
on the legal theory that it should be held vicariously liable for the
intentional sexual abuse of its employee.  The appeal from the trial judge’s
finding that the Club was vicariously liable was heard before the British Court
of Appeal as a companion appeal to the Children’s Foundation appeal
((1997), 30 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1 (sub nom. B. (P.A.) v. Curry)).  2                                  
My colleague Binnie J. adopts the test set out in Bazley v. Curry,
[1999] 2 S.C.R. 534 (hereinafter “Children’s Foundation”), which
the reasons in this case do not alter.  However, he finds that on the facts in
this case, that test is not met.  I cannot, with respect, agree.   The findings
of fact of the trial judge, who concluded the Club should be held vicariously
liable, confirm the same conclusion on the test set out in Children’s
Foundation.  Facts  3                                  
The Club employed Harry Griffiths as Program Director from 1980 to
1992.  Among others, the objectives of the Club were “to provide behaviour
guidance and to promote the health, social, educational, vocational and
character development of boys and girls”.   As Program Director during this
time, Griffiths was encouraged to cultivate positions of trust and respect with
his young charges.  His relationship with the appellants in this case resulted
in one incident of sexual assault against the male appellant and several incidents
of assault, culminating in sexual intercourse, with the female appellant.  The
disclosure of these events was first made in 1992, some ten years after they
occurred.  After being removed from office, pursuant to the instigation of a
police investigation, Griffiths pled guilty to 14 counts of sexual assault
involving the plaintiffs and other children.  The appellants in this appeal
sought civil damages from both Griffiths and the Club.  4                                  
Activities at the Club generally were carried on after school and on
Saturdays.  While most activities occurred on Club premises, various outings
took place for camping, sporting, and other purposes.  During the appellants’
time at the Club, Griffiths developed a friendship with them and paid
particular attention to them.  Every effort was made to present the Club as a
trusted place to be and safe environment.  The Club held Griffiths out to be a
trusted confidant and role model.  5                                  
The appellants were among the children who frequented the Club. There
they met and developed relationships with Griffiths. In the beginning, the
relationships were entirely appropriate. In the end, it is alleged, they
culminated in sexual assaults. In the case of the male appellant, then 10 or 11
years old, the allegation is that while at the Club, Griffiths invited him to
his home and engaged him in a conversation of a sexual nature that devolved
into an assault. In the case of the female appellant, it is alleged that after
a period of working with her and encouraging her to develop a leadership role,
Griffiths repeatedly assaulted her.  In one of the incidents, on board a van
drive to a Club-related sporting event, Griffiths allegedly placed her hand on
his exposed penis.  Judgments
Below  British
Columbia Supreme Court, [1995] B.C.J. No. 2370 (QL)  6                                  
The trial judge, Wilkinson J., found that Griffiths had cultivated a
“god-like” relationship with the children.  Wilkinson J. also found that it was
Griffiths’ position at the Club that allowed him to create the relationships of
trust that predicated the attacks: “the cultivation of his victims by Griffiths
took place on Club premises during Club working hours and that without that
special relationship and the cultivation that took place, the actual acts would
not have taken place” (para. 74).  Comparing the case to the precedents
discussed in our Children’s Foundation decision, Wilkinson J. found that
the incidents fell closer to the dishonest employee cases.  He also, however,
resorted to policy-based considerations for the ascription of vicarious
liability (at paras. 67-70):  The principles set out in the authorities on vicarious liability rely
on the usual questions, “Was he engaged on his master’s business?” or “Was he acting
as a stranger to his contract of employment?”  Unless the business of the
principal is to molest children, the answers to these and other questions may
result in a denial of liability.  Is that a result to be desired in the case of
children who are sexually molested while in the care of adults?  Institutions engaged in the care of children are
able to protect themselves with insurance and, more importantly, are in a
better position than the children to prevent sexual misconduct.  If the scourge of sexual predation is to be stamped
out, or at least controlled, there must be powerful motivation acting upon
those who control institutions engaged in the care, protection and nurturing of
children.  That motivation will not in my view be sufficiently supplied by the
likelihood of liability in negligence.  In many cases evidence will be lacking
or have long since disappeared.  The proof of appropriate standards is a
difficult and uneven matter.  In my view liability ought to, and does, follow where
an employee’s responsibility and employment involve the care and protection of
children and the actions in question amount to doing wrongfully or criminally
that which the employee was to do properly.    7                                  
Based on these conclusions, Wilkinson J. held the Club vicariously
liable for Griffiths’ intentional torts.  British
Columbia Court of Appeal (1997), 31 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1  8                                  
The same panel that decided the Children’s Foundation appeal
presided over the proceedings below.  Newbury J.A., applying the multi-faceted
test she formulated in the Children’s Foundation decision, would have
allowed the appeal in part. For her, a critical factor was that most of the
assaults occurred off Club property. Only the one incident of assault
(involving the van trip to the Club-related sporting event) could anchor
vicarious liability, as the others, which occurred off site and in Griffiths’
own home, were too disconnected from the performance of Griffiths’ job
functions.  Finch J.A. concurred, noting his independent reasons in Children’s
Foundation. Huddart J.A., however, applying the control-oriented test she
developed in Children’s Foundation, would have allowed the appeal in
toto.  In her opinion, there was no exercise of authority under which
Griffiths carried out his assaults.  As such, there could be no basis for
vicarious liability.  Hollinrake J.A. (for himself and  Donald J.A.) concurred
with  Huddart J.A., also noting his separate reasons in Children’s
Foundation.  Accordingly, the appeal was allowed and the finding of
vicarious liability against the Club was reversed.  Issue  9                                  
The issue in this appeal is whether vicarious liability should attach to
the Club for Griffiths’ intentional sexual torts.  Analysis  10                              
The reasons in Children’s Foundation outline the preferable focus
of inquiry for whether vicarious liability should attach for intentional torts
such as the child abuse in this case.  It might be noted at the outset that the
learned trial judge proceeded much in the manner we suggest:  he first analysed
the relevant case law and then focussed the analysis through the lens of policy
(albeit in a cursory manner).  11                              
The trial judge concluded that the case law clearly supported holding
the employer vicariously liable on this case.  By contrast, Justice Binnie
concludes that the cases point against holding the employer vicariously
liable.  Some courts have found vicarious liability in circumstances such as
these. Others, some of which are emphasized by my colleague, have reasoned formalistically
that no vicarious liability can lie when sexual abuse is antithetical to the
employer’s aims (e.g. McDonald  v. Mombourquette (1996), 152
N.S.R. (2d) 109 (C.A.)).   As discussed in Children’s Foundation, the
state of the case law on the issue is inconclusive and unsatisfactory.  The
cases therefore do not advance us.  We must focus rather on the considerations
of principle and policy discussed in the companion appeal.  12                              
Applying the test expressed in the companion appeal of Children’s
Foundation and mindful of the policy reasons for which vicarious liability
exists, we must decide whether Griffiths’ intentional torts were sufficiently
linked to his employment duties  to justify the imposition of vicarious
liability.  As explained in Children’s Foundation, the key question is
whether the Club’s operation of its business and use of Griffiths in his
employment position created or materially enhanced the risk of the sexual
assaults that took place.  We must be mindful not to reduce this inquiry to
mere “but-for” causation analysis.  Clearly “but for” his employment, Griffiths
would never have even been introduced to the complainants.   The analysis is
more nuanced.  Did the Club’s operation throw into the community a very real
risk that something like Griffiths’ molestations would occur, and hence, should
it be held liable to compensate for the realized losses accruing from that
risk?  13                              
I conclude that this question must be answered in the affirmative, given
the findings of fact of the trial judge.  In Children’s Foundation, in
addition to general principles, I listed a number of factors that can aid a
court in considering this question.  I turn now to those factors, almost all of
which point in favour of liability.  14                              
The first factor is the opportunity that the enterprise afforded
Griffiths to perpetrate his attacks.  An environment into which children are
entrusted not just for adult supervision, but for adult mentoring, is
one highly charged with potential for an abuse of that trust.  Griffiths was
authorized to interact with the children at the Club, and it seems logical to
conclude that he was authorized to interact with the children outside the
presence of other adults (there were only two permanent staff members at the
Club, himself and the Executive Director).  The evidence reveals no
requirement  that he be in the presence of other adults when working with the
children.  The trial judge explicitly emphasized opportunity in imposing
vicarious liability, finding that it was only because Griffiths was put in this
special position vis-à-vis these children that he was able to effect his
illicit plan.  15                              
A second factor, whether these acts could be said to further the
employer’s aims, militates against finding liability.  Clearly the Club was not
in the business of molesting children.  But this observation is almost
tautological.  This suggests that whether the wrongful act furthers the
employer’s aims is more relevant when it points the other way, i.e., because we
assume that intentional torts do not further employers’ ends, it is only
remarkable when the intentional torts do, in fact, further those ends,
making imposition of vicarious liability in those instances almost always
appropriate.  In the instant appeal, however, this factor is of little significance.  16                              
Although the sexual tort itself was not in furtherance of the Club’s
aims, the securing of a position of trust, power and intimacy in order to
effectively mentor the children was squarely within the organization’s
objectives.  The trial judge found that  according to its own constitution, the
Club’s mandate was “to provide behaviour guidance and to promote the
health, social, education, vocational and character development of boys and
girls” (emphasis added).  He characterized the enterprise as devoted to “the
care, protection, and nurturing of children” (para. 69).  The employer’s
objective of a trusting and intimate relationship between its employees and the
children flowed from this objective.   The evidence and findings establish that
it was crucial for Griffiths to secure a position of trust in order to
cultivate his victim pool.  Thus while the intentional tort of sexual assault
itself was unauthorized, its necessary predicate __ cultivation of a
position of trust and intimacy __ was.  It is this authorization of
the trusting relationship that favours the attribution of vicarious liability
under the second factor.  I thus draw a distinction between a situation where,
for example, an intimate situation of trust develops serendipitously, as a
matter of chance, and one where the relationship develops as a necessity of the
employer’s objectives.  (I would contrast a situation where a school student
quite by chance befriends, and subsequently trusts, a school janitor whose work
does not require trust-like contact with students, with one where a school
student develops a situation of trust with the guidance counsellor.)  The Club,
by making one of its goals “to provide behaviour guidance”, and thus
authorizing the development of a trusting and intimate relationship, introduced
the risks associated with such relationships between adults and children.  This
strengthens the argument that it should be held financially responsible for
those risks when they materialized.  17                              
This brings us to the third factor discussed in Children’s Foundation: 
whether the wrongful act was related to intimacy inherent in the employer’s
enterprise and the opportunity for abuse it afforded.  On this point, I part
company with my colleague Binnie J.  The care, protection and nurturing of
children to which the trial judge alluded on the facts of how the Club and Mr.
Griffiths operated clearly encouraged relationships of intimacy.  The Club went
further, in its nurturing activities, than encouraging rapport with a role
model; it positively encouraged an intimate relationship to develop between
Griffiths and his young charges.  The risk associated with this position of
trust was exacerbated by the troubled and vulnerable nature of many of the
Club’s clients.  The Boys’ and Girls’ Club was not a garden-variety sports
league.  It rather took as its function the goal of guidance and moral
direction to youths,  many of whom  had disadvantaged or even troubled
backgrounds, like the appellants in this appeal.  For this, the Club cannot be
criticized.  Indeed, it may be lauded.   But the fact remains that having
assumed this special mentoring responsibility, the Club may also be properly
viewed as having assumed responsibility for the heightened risks it
introduced.  The rationales of risk allocation and deterrence discussed in Children’s
Foundation are engaged, and liability may more readily be imposed.  18                              
A fourth consideration is the extent of power conferred on the employee
in relation to the victim.  Courts must be conscious of both expressly and
implicitly conferred power.  In this case, I need go no further than the trial
judge’s finding that Griffiths exercised a “god-like” authority over his
victims to conclude that yet another factor points toward liability.  This
negates the suggestion that “[t]he Club did not confer any meaningful ‘power’
over the appellants” (Binnie J., at para. 83).  While the child’s subjective
assessment of the situation is not alone conclusive of the nature of the power
the employee exercised, when analysing the degree of power a job carries, it is
certainly appropriate to consider what a reasonable child would think of the employee’s
position in assessing whether the employer should be held vicariously liable
for the employee’s tort.  While Griffiths was hardly a police officer or foster
parent, power must be understood in context.  Here, as a role model at a club
that dealt with vulnerable children, there is little to negate the trial
judge’s conclusion that Griffiths’ position over the children was one of
power.  By clothing the employee with that power, the employer introduced a
risk, small but real, of its abuse.  This, in turn, supports the view that the
employer may fairly be held responsible for the misuses of such power.  19                              
The fifth factor is the vulnerability of potential victims to the
wrongful exercise of employees’ power.  When victims are vulnerable, a heightened
risk exists that a predatory employee will exploit the chance to abuse
positions of trust or power.  It goes without saying that children are
vulnerable as potential victims of intentional torts such as sexual abuse. 
These children, troubled adolescents, were more vulnerable than most.  20                              
The analysis does not end with the non-exhaustive list of factors in Children’s
Foundation provided to give guidance to lower courts.  The ultimate focus
must be on the connection between the employment and the tort, and whether the
former materially and significantly enhanced or exacerbated the
risk of the latter.  As suggested in Children’s Foundation, negativing
factors may come into play in making this determination.  This case provides
such an example.  Other than the van incident, Griffiths’ assaults all took
place off site (at his home) and after hours.  This fact weighs against holding
the Club liable for the Griffiths’ torts, buttressing the submission that
Griffiths’ conduct was perverse personal frolic, wholly unrelated to the scope
of his employment.  21                              
The force of that suggestion, however, is largely dissipated by two
countervailing considerations.   First, spatial and temporal factors such as
when and where the torts occurred must be considered together with all the
other relevant factors.  They are not per se determinative.  The issue
of whether a sufficient connection to posit vicarious liability exists between
the wrongful act and the employment involves much more than when and where the
wrongful act occurred.  This leads to the second countervailing consideration. 
To treat the torts simply as discrete incidents that occurred at Griffiths’
house ignores the careful plan of entrapment that Griffiths laid.  It was his
fostering of trust at the Club, flowing from the requirement of his employment
that he forge bonds of intimacy and respect, that enabled him to commit his
despicable acts.  Again, a comparison might be useful.  If one cashier at a
supermarket invites another over to dinner and assaults him, the tort cannot be
said to arise out of the employment.  This is so even though the employment
provided the opportunity, through on-the-job socialization, to convince the
co-worker to accept the invitation.  The incident would remain an example of
otherwise unremarkable “mere opportunity”.  Without more, it provides no basis
to draw the tort back to the supermarket.  The current case, however, is
entirely different.  It is not the mere coincidence of location and interaction
that led Griffiths to prey upon his victims __ it is rather that he
worked at a job where he was put in a special position of trust and power over
particularly vulnerable people and used that position to carry out an abuse of
the power with which he was conferred to carry out his duties.  It is this
considerably stronger connection that justifies the Club being held liable to
bear the costs of the losses inflicted by Griffiths.  22                              
Almost all the relevant factors suggest that Griffiths’ torts were, in
fact, linked to his employment.  I would therefore hold the Club vicariously
liable for his conduct.  The policy rationales underpinning vicarious liability
__ fair compensation and deterrence __ support this
conclusion.  The Club introduced Griffiths to the community’s children and
clothed him with special responsibilities and powers over those children who
were most vulnerable.  It created and sustained the risk that materialized. 
Compensation for the harm that followed may fairly be viewed as a cost of the
Club’s operations.  The rationales of risk distribution and deterrence support
vicarious liability in these circumstances.  23                              
  I differ from the Court of Appeal, not on the factors they considered,
but on how those factors relate to the ultimate issue of the relationship
between the employee’s wrongful act and his employment.  The ultimate issue is
not the time and place of the wrongs (emphasized by Newbury J.A.), nor whether
Griffiths could have perpetrated his wrongs as a friendly neighbour (emphasized
by Huddart J.A. ).    These factors, while relevant, must be considered with
the other factors to which I have alluded to determine whether the employment
materially and significantly enhanced the risk of the abuse that occurred. 
While the connection between employment and wrong in this case may have been
less compelling than the overwhelmingly close connection established in the Children’s
Foundation appeal, the evidence and the findings of the trial judge suffice
to establish that the employment materially and significantly enhanced the risk
of the sexual assaults that occurred.  24                              
I add three brief comments on related points.  First that I do not see
the issue as a contest between fairness and liability.  The goal of
compensation is not simply a deep pockets rule.  Fair compensation involves
internalizing the cost of a risk on the appropriate party, judged not by terms
of ability to pay but by introduction of the risk that led to the tort.  To
cast the issue in terms of “pro-liability” versus “fairness” is to posit a
false dichotomy between vicarious liability and what is fair.  Our ultimate
goal is a rule of vicarious liability that is fair to the plaintiff, the
defendant, and society.  25                              
Second, for the reasons set out in Children’s Foundation, I
cannot agree that the goals of compensation and deterrence are not served in
this case, notwithstanding the non-profit character of the Club.  I note that
the old common law charitable immunity rule has long been abolished.  The
animation of such a rule was that many charities, performing needed and
valuable services to the public, might have had to cease operations had they
been inundated with tort claims (either fault-based or non-fault-based
claims).  The rule having been rejected, the logic on which it was based __
that charities should be exempted from tort claims lest they be forced to cease
good works __ should also be rejected, absent legislative
countermand.  26                              
Finally, I would reject any suggestion that an employee’s job must bear
a sufficient similarity to parenting to invoke vicarious liability
in child abuse cases.  Such an analysis seems to me to focus inordinately on
the power exercised by the employee to the exclusion of other factors in the
test propounded in Children’s Foundation and is to be eschewed.  27                              
In the end, however one may parse this tort, it arose from the risks
created by the special situation of trust and respect fostered by Griffiths as
part of the Club’s enterprise.  The Club is an institution that has the
explicit agenda of taking in troubled youths like the appellants and providing
behavioural guidance through activities such as sport.  That enterprise carries
risks.  Those risks materialized here, with grave physical and emotional
consequences.  The Club’s goals are laudable, but they cannot immunize it from
responsibility for the losses generated by its employee’s conduct.  Conclusion  28                              
The appeal should be allowed with costs and the judgment of the trial
court  restored.   The judgment of Cory, Iacobucci, Major and Binnie JJ. was delivered by  //Binnie J.//  29                              
Binnie J. __ 
The attribution of vicarious liability is not so much a “deduction from
legalistic premises” as it is a matter of policy, as the Court observes in Bazley
v. Curry, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 534, released concurrently (hereinafter “Children’s
Foundation”), at para. 26.  Nevertheless, as the Court adds, “[a] focus on
policy is not to diminish the importance of legal principle” (para. 27).  In Children’s
Foundation, the employer set out to create, from the highest of motives, a
quasi-parental relationship between its employees and the children in their
care, with all of the authority and intimacy of such relationships, and thereby
“materially increased the risk of the harm that ensued” (para. 43).  The
physical touching associated with the quasi-parental relationship precipitated
into sexual abuse.  In my opinion, however, the present case falls on the other
side of the line, and does not warrant the imposition of vicarious liability. 
Much as the Court may wish to take advantage of the deeper pockets of the
respondent to see the appellants compensated, we have no jurisdiction ex
aequo et bono to practise distributive justice.  On the facts of this case,
legal principle and precedents favour the respondent.  30                              
If the Boys’ and Girls’ Club of Vernon were vicariously responsible for
damages arising out of the criminal conduct of its employee Griffiths, which so
far as this appeal is concerned must be taken to have been unknown,
unauthorized and unforeseen, then it would be difficult to imagine many
enterprises whose mandate includes mentoring or  role models for children being
able to escape vicarious liability to provide financial compensation for
criminal sexual abuse by an employee.  While on the positive side such an
all-embracing attribution of no-fault liability would assist victims in the
position of the appellants, it would also change the legal ground rules under
which recreational organizations were thought to be governed under the existing
case law.  These organizations could be expected to respond rationally, if
reluctantly, to a new harbinger of financial liability.  They might vote with
their feet.  It is therefore important that here, as elsewhere, the test for
vicarious liability adopted by the Court in Children’s Foundation be
applied with serious rigour.   31                              
McLachlin J. in Children’s Foundation sets out the two-step
process for determining when an unauthorized act is “so connected” to the
employer’s enterprise that liability should be imposed (at para. 15):  First, a court should determine whether there are precedents which
unambiguously determine on which side of the line between vicarious liability
and no liability the case falls.  If prior cases do not clearly suggest a
solution, the next step is to determine whether vicarious liability should be
imposed in light of the broader policy rationales behind strict liability.   In my view,
the case law, reflecting policy judgments by various courts over many years and
across many different jurisdictions, “clearly” suggests that the imposition of
no-fault liability in this case would overshoot the existing judicial consensus
about appropriate limits of an employer’s no-fault liability.  This same
conclusion is reached under the second step of the analysis in which the
“broader policy rationales” are confronted directly.  I therefore think the
British Columbia Court of Appeal correctly denied vicarious no-fault liability
in this case and I would dismiss the appeal on that point, without prejudice to
the appellants’ right to continue proceedings in the Supreme Court of British
Columbia, if so advised, on the issues of the Club’s potential fault-based
liability.  Facts  32                              
The enterprise operated by the Vernon Boys’ and Girls’ Club is typical
of a vast number of non-profit organizations operating in communities from
coast to coast.  The founders wisely had the Club incorporated in 1976 under
the Societies Act, R.S.B.C. 1960, c. 362.  As a society, the Club cannot
carry on “any trade, industry, or business” (s. 3(1)).  It derives most of its
revenue from federal and provincial grants, membership and program fees, and
fundraisers.  Its constitution includes as objectives:  to provide behaviour guidance and to promote the health, social,
educational, vocational and character development of boys and girls. . . .   At the time of
the assaults, the Club had a board of volunteer Directors.  There were two
salaried employees.  Griffiths, as Program Director, reported to the only other
paid employee, the Executive Director.  Griffiths supervised volunteer staff on
a daily basis.  Unlike the employer in the Children’s Foundation, the
Vernon Boys’ and Girls’ Club provided a recreational, not a residential,
facility for children.  It did not purport to offer parenting of any
description to its members.  Griffiths’ function, so far as the Club was
concerned, was to organize recreational activities and the occasional outing,
as will be discussed below in greater detail, and nothing more.  33                              
In 1982 Jody Jacobi was 13 years old, and her brother Randy was 11. 
They lived at home.  The Club was within walking distance.  Jody and Randy on
occasion participated in Club activities after school or on Saturdays.  Amongst
these activities, Randy played floor hockey and Jody did gymnastics.  The trial
judge found that “[t]he Club was a fun place to go and was safe” ([1995] B.C.J.
No. 2370 (QL), at para. 7).  34                              
For both Jody and Randy, their home life was not easy.  Their mother had
moved them to Vernon, British Columbia from Calgary in 1979 after splitting up
with their father, her second husband.  Her third marriage lasted a few months
in 1980 and came to an end in January 1981.  She married again in 1982, but
separated in 1985.  The trial judge found that there was “a lot of turmoil at
home” (para. 26) in the late 1970s, and her marriage in 1980 was “a disaster”,
including “inter-family tension” and “serious emotional and physical abuse,
certainly in the presence of the two youngest children [the appellants], if not
directed at them” (para. 27).  35                              
The Vernon Boys’ and Girls’ Club happened to offer something of a
sanctuary for these children, particularly Jody, who completed a course of
leadership training.  Jody testified at trial that she felt safe at the Club
and her only friends were other members of the Club.  After the assaults in
question she continued her association with the Club, and years later
participated in its activities as a full-time salaried worker.  Randy also felt
safe at the Club and all his friends and activities centred around the Club. 
The trial judge found (at para. 8):  All this was precisely the sort of thing the Club was supposed to
foster and was particularly beneficial to children such as [Randy] whose family
background was not especially happy.    36                              
The sexual abuse occurred on separate occasions in approximately 1982. 
Randy and Jody were each assaulted away from the Club and outside working hours
(except for one incident of sexual touching of Jody in the Club’s van for which
Newbury J.A. in the British Columbia Court of Appeal would have found the Club
vicariously responsible).  Griffiths’ job was to coordinate the after-school
activities.  This  included supervising and some participation in the members’
activities.  He was expected to develop a “rapport” with the members.  The
trial judge found that both Jody and Randy suffered long-term trauma from the
incidents.  Neither even felt able to disclose them until about 10 years
later.  The trial judge found that “[e]ssentially there was a single incident
involving” Randy and “one incident of sexual intercourse involving” Jody
“following several lesser incidents” (para. 1).  Griffiths pleaded guilty to
these and other offences and was jailed for six years.  37                              
This background is important because it is clear that by reason of their
age and unsettled home life these children were vulnerable to a sexual
predator like Griffiths.  If the Club was negligent in hiring Griffiths, or
supervising him, or in using Griffiths to discharge its own duty of care to the
children, direct liability would result.  In this appeal, however, we are asked
to proceed on the basis that there is no direct liability.  We are
concerned only with the possibility of the Club’s vicarious “no-fault”
liability for Griffiths’ crimes.  The trial judge considered that it was necessary
to impose vicarious liability as a matter of public policy “[i]f the scourge of
sexual predation is to be stamped out, or at least controlled” (para. 69).  I
agree that we are dealing with public policy as developed in the jurisprudence
but, with respect, it seems to me there is a whole complex of such public
policy considerations that have to be weighed if justice is to be done to all
concerned.  More importantly, at the end of the day, judicial policy must yield
to legal principle.  The
“Opportunity” for Abuse Created by the Employer  38                              
The trial judge found that Griffiths took the opportunity to develop
friendly relationships with the victims through Club activities.  With regard
to Randy, the trial judge stated at para. 8:  During the course of his attendance, Harry
[Griffiths] paid more and more attention to him, appeared to respect him and
encouraged him to become involved in more activities.  Harry made him feel more
important.  Randy was taken on a floor hockey trip to Edmonton in the Club van.
 He felt safe at the Club and his friends and activities became centred at the
Club and Harry made him feel important and respected.  In respect of
Jody, the trial judge stated at para. 11:  [Jody] found Harry Griffiths to be very friendly and supportive.  He
encouraged her and appeared to respect her greatly.  He encouraged her to take
leadership roles in various activities and she became an instructor and
eventually a full-time worker in the Club.  She thought Harry was wonderful and
believed that he liked and respected her.  39                              
The testimony of Griffiths in portions of his discovery transcript that
were read in at trial demonstrate that Griffiths was not placed in a special
position of trust with respect to the children’s “care, protection and
nurturing”.  While any friendship between an adult and a child has an aspect of
trust, the trial judge I think went beyond the reality of this Club when he
accepted Jody’s description at trial of Griffiths as a “god-like” authority. 
Even if true, it is fair to say that this view of Griffiths did not reflect any
state of affairs willed into existence by the Club or that was foreseeably
incidental to its enterprise.  40                              
When asked how he selected these victims from all of the children that
attended at the Club, Griffiths responded that there was no specific reason. 
The children who later became victims were particularly outgoing and friendly
and were the ones who had sought Griffiths out to participate in the games and
activities.  Over a period of time a friendly relationship was built up between
Griffiths and the two children.  The course of criminal conduct grew step by
step from that friendship, and not from any alleged position of trust.  This is
evident from the transcript:   when asked whether there were any particular
words he used to get the children to participate in sex acts, Griffiths
responded:  . . . it was the __ I guess the sexual talk and innuendo,
joking, and they seemed to partake in that also with the jokes back and
comments.  So you know that started and then it continued on into where they
spent more and more time and they were coming over at my place and then
the sexual acts started.   [Emphasis added.]  41                              
In my view, an accurate summary of the evidence relating to the
relationship between Griffiths and the Club as well as the authority (or lack
thereof) Griffiths had over the children is found in the decision by Huddart
J.A. of the British Columbia Court of Appeal ((1997), 31 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1, at
pp. 7-8):  Mr. Griffiths was the Program Director of the
respondent Club, one of two full-time employees.  His job was to encourage
children to participate in its activities and to supervise those activities,
and in so doing to further the Club’s objectives, among which is “to promote
behaviour guidance and to promote the health, social, educational, vocational
and character development of boys and girls.”  In that capacity he was
encouraged to form friendships with the boys and girls. That was the most the
Club could ask him to do.  It had no power or authority over the children. 
It was not their parent.  Nor did it stand in loco parentis.  The boys
and girls went home to their parents after every activity.   [Emphasis added.]   This
description is to be contrasted with the facts in Children’s Foundation
where, as explained by McLachlin J. at para. 58, “[t]he opportunity for
intimate private control and the parental relationship and power required by
the terms of employment created the special environment that nurtured
and brought to fruition Curry’s sexual abuse. . . .  Indeed, it is difficult to
imagine a job with a greater risk for child sexual abuse” (emphasis added). 
While any situation which places adults in contact with children creates some
possibility of abuse, an employer who encourages an employee to create no more
than a positive rapport with children is not at the same end of the spectrum of
risk as the employer in Children’s Foundation.  Applying
the Test from Children’s Foundation  42     
In Children’s Foundation, this Court endorses the “enterprise
risk” approach to vicarious liability.  Thus at para. 31 McLachlin J. explains,
“[t]he employer puts in the community an enterprise which carries with it
certain risks.  When those risks materialize and cause injury to a member of
the public despite the employer’s reasonable efforts, it is fair that the
person or organization that creates the enterprise and hence the risk should
bear the loss.”  The touchstone of  “fairness” in this context depends not on
“foreseeability of risks from specific conduct, but . . . foreseeability of the
broad risks incident to a whole enterprise” (para. 39).  Finally, “there must
be a strong connection between what the employer was asking the employee
to do (the risk created by the employer’s enterprise) and the wrongful act.  It
must be possible to say that the employer significantly increased the
risk of the harm by putting the employee in his or her position and requiring
him to perform the assigned tasks” (para. 42) (first emphasis added; second
emphasis in original).  43                              
It is important to be precise about the characteristics of the
particular enterprise at issue in this appeal.  The Club provided the employee
with an opportunity to meet children, as does any organization that deals with
children.  The Club authorized Griffiths to develop a rapport with these
children.  This again is inevitable in any such enterprise.  The Club offered
recreation in a public setting (as opposed to the privacy of Griffiths’
home) in group activities with other persons including children and
volunteers whose continuing presence would have been fatal to Griffiths’
personal agenda.  Griffiths had no job-created authority to insinuate himself
into the intimate lives of these children.  Unlike Children’s Foundation
the enterprise here had only two employees and its emphasis was on developing
(horizontal) relationships among the members, not (vertical) relationships to
persons in authority.  Stage 1:  
Previous Cases  44                              
As McLachlin J. points out, different torts may raise different issues
in the analysis of potential vicarious liability.  It is easier to rationalize
the imposition of no-fault vicarious liability for an employee’s negligent
performance of the employer’s contract, for example, than to impose on the
employer vicarious liability for criminal conduct, such as a sexual assault,
committed by the employee for personal gratification.  The case law included in
the stage 1 analysis ought therefore to raise as closely as possible the same
issues as are raised in the case under appeal.  Canadian courts have in fact
examined a variety of circumstances in which it has been sought to make
employers liable for sexual assaults committed by employees.  It is fair to say
that these cases demonstrate a strong reluctance to impose no-fault liability
for such deeply personal and abhorrent behaviour on the part of an employee. 
The trial judge in this case, navigating without the benefit of McLachlin J.’s
decision in Children’s Foundation, felt it unnecessary to make a
comprehensive study of the case law.  Apart from the trial decision in Children’s
Foundation, he cited only Boothman v. Canada, [1993] 3 F.C. 381
(T.D.), a case of workplace harassment by an immediate supervisor, and The
Queen v. Levy Brothers Co., [1961] S.C.R. 189, a case of mail theft by
employees of Canada Post.  Neither Boothman nor Levy Brothers
sheds much light on the specific problems raised by this appeal, and Children’s
Foundation is a very different case on the facts.  (a)   The
“Opportunity” Cases  45                              
As McLachlin J. notes at para. 40 of Children’s Foundation, “any
employment can be seen to provide the causation of an employee’s tort. 
Therefore, ‘mere opportunity’ to commit a tort, in the common ‘but-for’ understanding
of that phrase, does not suffice” to impose no-fault liability (emphasis in
original).  The “janitor” cases, for example, illustrate that the creation of
opportunity without job-created power over the victim or other link between the
employment and the tort will seldom constitute the “strong connection” required
to attract vicarious liability.  In E.D.G. v. Hammer, [1998] B.C.J.
No. 992 (QL) (S.C.), Vickers J. found there was no vicarious liability on
a school board for the sexual assault committed by a janitor since “[a]ll that
can be said to support a finding of vicarious liability is that Mr. Hammer was
employed as a janitor at the school and his duties provided him with the
opportunity to commit the wrongful acts” (para. 52).  With regard to the policy
considerations in such cases, Vickers J. expressed concern about courts
encroaching on matters better left to the legislature (at para. 54):  The choice is whether to impose the burden of these damages on an
innocent School Board as opposed to leaving them lie with the innocent victim. 
It is not a proper policy choice to impose on the court.  If school boards are
to become insurers for all of the actions of their employees then that is a
policy choice that must be made by Members of the Legislative Assembly.   46                              
The Ontario Court of Appeal declined to impose vicarious liability in Q.
v. Minto Management Ltd. (1985), 15 D.L.R. (4th) 581 (Ont. H.C.), aff’d
(1986), 34 D.L.R. (4th) 767 (Ont. C.A.).  In that case a tenant was raped in
her apartment by the landlord’s employee.  The employee had access through his
employment to the master keys for the apartment building.  Gray J. rejected the
claim of vicarious liability against the landlord for the sexual assaults
because he viewed the act of the employee as an independent act that was
insufficiently related to the scope of employment.  (Gray J. did, however,
find that the landlord was negligent, and this finding afforded a basis of direct
liability that was upheld by the Ontario Court of Appeal.)  47                              
Similarly, in Goodwin c. Commission scolaire Laurenval, [1991]
R.R.A. 673, 8 C.C.L.T. (2d) 267 (Que. S.C.), Forget J. found that a
janitor of a school in that case had been told that if he let students into the
locked school after hours, he was to follow them to ensure that they did not
wander in the school without supervision.  A young girl who had asked the
janitor to use the washroom facilities at a time when the school was closed was
subjected to an episode of sexual touching by the janitor.  Forget J. found
that the school board was not liable because even though the Board had
conferred some child-related responsibilities (i.e., supervision to and from
the washroom), the assault was insufficiently connected to the janitor’s duty
to supervise (at p. 679 R.R.A.):  [translation] 
Applying these criteria, it becomes clear that Mr. Cheng was not acting in the
performance of his duties when he engaged in the alleged conduct.  What Mr.
Cheng said and what he did were not in any way connected with a supervisory
activity.  The situation would be entirely different if, for example, the
janitor had struck the children because they refused to leave the school or
obey his instructions; but that is not the case.   48                              
A further level of complexity is added in cases where the enterprise
provides not only the “bare opportunity”, but adds a job-created excuse for
intimate access to the individual who becomes the victim.  In these cases the
enterprise adds to a “mere” opportunity a mode of operation that facilitates
access to the victim to commit the very type of tort that happened.  This,
however, has not been thought by Canadian courts a sufficiently “strong
connection” to impose no-fault liability on the employer.  49                              
 In B. (J.-P.) v. Jacob (1998), 166 D.L.R. (4th) 125, the New
Brunswick Court of Appeal found that the hospital corporation was not
vicariously liable when one of the male nurses in its employ sexually assaulted
a sleeping patient.  The assault took place during working hours.  The court
found that the male nurse had, through his employment, the opportunity to enter
the room of the sleeping patient where he committed the assault, but these
facts were not sufficient to find the employer vicariously liable.  50                              
In Barrett v. The Ship “Arcadia” (1977), 76 D.L.R. (3d) 535
(B.C.S.C.), an employee engaged as an officer’s steward by the defendant
navigation shipping company dressed in a steward’s uniform and entered the
stateroom of a passenger.  The passenger had no reason to believe that he was
not acting within the capacity of a passenger’s steward.  Upon entering the
room, the employee began sexually assaulting the passenger, who then ran out of
the cabin to call for help.  The court found that the defendant steamship
company could not be held vicariously liable since the assault was “an act
clearly separate and apart from, and unconnected with his employment as an
officer’s steward” (p. 537).  51                              
While these cases did not have the benefit of the Children’s
Foundation framework of analysis, they do illustrate the historical
reluctance of judges in this country to fix employers with no-fault liability
on the basis merely of job-created opportunity even where accompanied (as in
the present appeal) by privileged access to the victim.  In such cases it may
be acknowledged that proximity and regular contact may afford a pool of
potential victims.  Nevertheless, while each of the enterprises in the above
cases foreseeably created risks that were not otherwise present, it was
concluded (to put it in terms of the Children’s Foundation analysis)
that there was an insufficiently strong connection between the type of risk
created and the actual assault that occurred to warrant imposition of no-fault
liability.  52                              
The U.S. cases are generally to the same effect.  In Boykin v.
District of Columbia, 484 A.2d 560 (D.C. 1984), the Court of Appeals found
that the District of Columbia public schools could not be held vicariously
liable for a sexual assault on a blind, deaf and mute student by the
coordinator of a program for blind and deaf students.  “We do not believe that
a sexual assault may be deemed a direct outgrowth of a school official’s
authorization to take a student by the hand or arm in guiding her past
obstacles in the building” (p. 562).   The employee’s conduct was “utterly
without relation to the service which he was employed to render” (p. 564).  (I
add, parenthetically, that the authority in the present case to “touch” a child
by steadying his or her dismount from a piece of gym equipment or as part of a
ball or hockey game, is no more related to a sexual assault than was the
authority to take the blind child by the hand to guide her around obstacles in
the building in the Boykin case.)  In Lourim v. Swensen, 936 P.2d
1011 (Or. Ct. App. 1997), at p. 1015, the Oregon Court of Appeals reviewed many
of the more recent cases of sexual assaults by employees and refused to find,
as a matter of law, that the Boy Scouts of America could be held liable for
sexual assaults committed by a scout leader.  See also Ciarochi v. Boy
Scouts of America, Inc., Alaska Sup. Ct., Ketchikan Registry IKE-89-42 CI,
August 6, 1990, where the trial court refused to impose vicarious liability on
the Boy Scouts of America for the sexual assaults committed by a scoutmaster.  (b)   The
“Employer’s Aims” Cases  53                              
It is difficult to think of a situation where sexual assault by an
employee would advance the aims of the employer’s enterprise.  For this reason,
my colleague McLachlin J. considers the employer’s aims to be “of little
significance” in the present appeal (at para. 15).  It is, of course, true
that generally it does not matter if an employee has not been acting in
furtherance of the employer’s aims so long as there is a strong connection
between the job and the tort, for example, where the employee is acting within
the scope of his authority:  Lloyd v. Grace, Smith & Co., [1912]
A.C. 716 (H.L.); Lockhart v. Canadian Pacific Railway Co., [1941] S.C.R.
278; W. W. Sales Ltd. v. City of Edmonton, [1942] S.C.R. 467.  However,
if, as my colleague argues at para. 16, the respondent’s vicarious liability in
this appeal is to be based on a type of “role modelling” inferred from the
Club’s  mission statement, it is only fair that the context of its aims and
objectives also be taken into account.  An employer’s aims do constitute
part of the architecture of an enterprise, and provide some guidance as to what
risks the employer reasonably believed it was introducing into the community,
and thus the sort of broad risks it may reasonably have contemplated, and for
which it may reasonably be held responsible.  Moreover, if one is to approach
the case law in a spirit of enquiry, the employers’ aims have traditionally
been given prominence in the decided cases.  54                              
Much reliance was placed by the respondent on McDonald v.
Mombourquette (1996), 152 N.S.R. (2d) 109 (C.A.) (leave to appeal refused,
[1997] 2 S.C.R. xi), which involved a claim against the Roman Catholic &
Episcopal Church Corporation for sexual assaults committed by one of its
priests against the children of parishioners.  The trial judge imposed
vicarious liability on the Church primarily because he considered that the
priest had been placed by the employer in a position of trust and authority. 
The Nova Scotia Court of Appeal reversed, finding that the test “is not simply
that an employee is placed in a position of trust and authority that provides
the opportunity to do wrong.  Applying that test employers would be liable for
all wrongful acts of their employees” (pp. 116-17).  The Court of Appeal
ruled that the fact the Church had employed Mombourquette as a clergyman and
authorized him to act in a privileged position was not sufficient to impose
liability, particularly “where he acts criminally and totally contrary to the
religious tenets which he has sworn to uphold” (p. 123).  The Court of
Appeal cited two U.S. cases where liability against religious institutions was
denied on similar grounds for sexual assaults by clergymen (at p. 122):  Destefano
v. Grabrian, 763 P.2d 275 (Colo. 1988), and Tichenor v. Roman Catholic
Church of the Archdiocese of New Orleans, 32 F.3d 953 (5th Cir. 1994).  In Tichenor
the Fifth Circuit court said:  “It would be hard to imagine a more difficult
argument than that [the priest’s] illicit sexual pursuits were somehow related
to his duties as a priest or that they in any way furthered the interests of
St. Rita’s, his employer” (p. 960).  This is not to say that churches and
other high-minded organizations will escape liability simply because of the
nature of their teachings, but nevertheless, as stated, the antithetical nature
of the crime has generally been thought a relevant factor to be considered in
assessing the risks associated with the enterprise which the employer set out
to introduce into the community.  In Milla v. Tamayo, 232 Cal. Rptr. 685
(Ct. App. 1986), the court asserted, at p. 690:   “It would defy  every notion
of logic and fairness to say that sexual activity between a priest and a
parishioner is characteristic of the Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Church.” 
As stated by McLachlin J. in Children’s Foundation at para. 39, quoting
Professor Fleming, The Law of Torts (9th ed. 1998), the Court is
properly concerned with “the measure of risks that may fairly be
regarded as typical of the enterprise in question” (emphasis added).  55     
Courts in many of the United States apply variants of the Salmond
test for vicarious liability (much discussed in Children’s Foundation,
particularly in the British Columbia Court of Appeal) and in that context have
placed considerable emphasis on the antithesis between the employer’s aims and
the employee’s personal agenda:   see Salmond and Heuston on the Law
of Torts (21st ed. 1996), at p. 443, which provides as follows:  A master is not responsible for a wrongful act done by his servant
unless it is done in the course of his employment.  It is deemed to be so done
if it is either (1) a wrongful act authorised by the master, or (2) a wrongful
and unauthorised mode of doing some act authorised by the master. . . .  [A
master] is liable even for acts which he has not authorised, provided they are so
connected with acts which he has authorised that they may rightly be
regarded as modes – although improper modes – of doing them.   [Emphasis
added.]   The Salmond
test was endorsed by the Privy Council in Canadian Pacific Railway Co. v.
Lockhart, [1942] A.C. 591, and by this Court in W. W. Sales Ltd., supra. 
The Salmond approach is reflected in much of the U.S. jurisprudence, and
this common legal foundation makes the U.S. decisions particularly
interesting.  56                              
In Big Brother/Big Sister of Metro Atlanta, Inc. v. Terrell, 359
S.E.2d 241 (Ga. Ct. App. 1987), it was held that the organization could not be
vicariously liable for sexual assaults committed by an accused volunteer:
“While Hendricks may have been advancing Big Brother’s interest by spending
time with Sheridan, he clearly abandoned Big Brother’s interest and pursued
only his own when he sodomized the child” (p. 243).  For other illustrations of
the U.S. “independent purpose” doctrine, see e.g.  Rabon v. Guardsmark, Inc.,
571 F.2d 1277 (4th Cir. 1978), where the plaintiff, who was the last person to
leave the building she worked in at night, was assaulted by the security guard
on duty.  On appeal, the justices held:  “The assault was to effect [the
security guard’s] independent purpose, and it was not within the scope of his
employment.  The mere fact that the tort was committed at a time that [the
guard] should have been about Guardsmark’s business and that it occurred at the
place where [the guard] was directed to perform Guardsmark’s business does not
alter these conclusions” (p. 1279).  See also:  Webb by Harris v. Jewel
Companies, Inc., 485 N.E.2d 409 (Ill. App. Ct. 1985) (vicarious liability
denied where a security guard who had the power both to detain and to search
suspected shoplifters detained and assaulted victim who was taken to an
enclosed office for the purpose of searching her); Doe v. Village of St.
Joseph, Inc., 415 S.E.2d 56 (Ga. Ct. App. 1992), (vicarious liability
denied where a recreational supervisor at a boarding school was alleged to have
engaged in a “consensual” sexual relationship with a 13-year-old student); and Noto
v. St. Vincent’s Hospital and Medical Center of New York, 537 N.Y.S.2d 446
(Sup. Ct. 1988) (hospital not vicariously liable for employing a psychiatrist
who engaged in an “affair” with a patient who sought treatment for depression
and drug and alcohol dependency).  57                              
Regard should be had in this connection to the decision of the English
Court of Appeal in S.T. v. North Yorkshire County Council, [1999]
I.R.L.R. 98 (whose reasoning is criticized in Children’s Foundation, at
para. 23, for undue emphasis on semantics).  In that case, on a school trip to
Spain, S.T., who suffered from epilepsy and a mental handicap, shared a room
with the deputy headmaster employed by the Council.  S.T. required nocturnal
supervision in case seizures occurred.  During the night, the deputy headmaster
sexually assaulted S.T.  The trial judge, applying the second branch of the Salmond
test, concluded that “the acts of the deputy head were so connected with his
authorised responsibilities that they can be regarded as modes, albeit improper
modes, of performing his authorised duties” (para. 5).  The Court of Appeal
reversed.  None of the members of the court were prepared to impose vicarious
liability on the Council.  Butler-Sloss L.J. found the deputy headmaster’s
conduct “a negation of the duty of the council to look after children for whom
it was responsible” (para. 18).  As McLachlin J. points out in Children’s
Foundation, the reasoning in S.T. presents difficulties.  (c)   Cases
of Risks Inherent and Foreseeable in the Nature of the Employer’s       
Enterprise   58                              
It may be thought that in many of the cases mentioned above, the
employer’s enterprise had created a “risk” that went beyond the mere creation
of an initial opportunity for the assailant to encounter his victims, yet
vicarious liability was denied.  In terms of the Children’s Foundation
analysis, the courts were not persuaded that the connection between the job-creating
enterprise and the sexual assault was sufficiently close or “strong” to impose
no-fault liability on the employer.  The result has been otherwise, and the
employer held vicariously liable, in cases where the “strong connection” was
enhanced by a combination of job-created power and job-created intimacy.  Power
and intimacy, of course, are hallmarks of a parenting relationship.  It was the
job-created parent-like relationship that attracted vicarious liability in Children’s
Foundation.  It is the same potent combination that explains numerous other
decisions in this country and in the United States.  In A. (C.) v. Critchley
(1998), 166 D.L.R. (4th) 475, the British Columbia Court of Appeal upheld a
trial decision finding the Crown liable vicariously as a result of sexual
assaults committed by Critchley, the operator of a wilderness group home, on
male youths at the facility.  Some question arose as to whether Critchley could
be considered an employee or an independent contractor, but the court found that
it is the true nature of the relationship, not the traditional classification,
that is determinative.  The court found the Crown vicariously liable because
the Crown conferred “virtual 24-hour-a-day parental authority over the
residents” (p. 506) and viewed Critchley as having essentially a “surrogate
parent” relationship with the victims (p. 506).  59                              
In D.C.B. v. Boulianne, [1996] B.C.J. No. 2183 (QL) (S.C.),
Clancy J. held that the Nanaimo Indian Band was not vicariously liable for a sexual
assault by Boulianne, a drug counsellor in its employ, on a woman he was
counselling.  The case shows a similar pattern of predatory ingratiation to the
present one.  Clancy J. concluded, at para. 56:  Mr. Boulianne could be said to have cultivated the
affections of Ms. B in the same time frame within which he provided counselling
services.  That seems to me to be a tenuous basis on which to found liability. 
What is lacking is a connection between the counselling and the growing
affection between the parties.  The evidence does not support the suggestion
that there was a deliberate cultivation of Ms. B.  It seems more likely that in
the course of meeting her Mr. Boulianne became attracted and acted upon that
attraction.  The same result could have occurred in any relationship which put
the parties in each other's company.   60     
In B. (K.L.) v. British Columbia (1998), 51 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1
(S.C.), Dillon J. found that the Crown was vicariously liable for the damage
caused by the wrongful behaviour of foster parents towards children in their
care.  Although the foster parents were not alleged to have sexually assaulted
the young children, it was contended that the foster parents had abused and
neglected the children.  Dillon J. found that, in addition to direct liability
for breach of fiduciary duty and negligence, the Crown was vicariously liable
for the actions of the foster parents within the Crown’s control because of the
job-related conferral of parental authority (see p. 41).  61                              
In B. (W.R.) v. Plint (1998), 161 D.L.R. (4th) 538 (B.C.S.C.),
the plaintiffs claimed against the United Church of Canada and the federal
government as a result of sexual assaults committed against them at the Alberni
Indian Residential School by a dormitory supervisor.  Brenner J. found that
Plint, as dormitory supervisor, had the authority of a parent conferred upon
him as he “in all respects functioned as their parent” (p. 545).  Both the
Church and the federal government were held to be vicariously liable.  62                              
In K. (W.) v. Pornbacher (1997), 32 B.C.L.R. (3d) 360 (S.C.),
Quijano J. held the Catholic Church to be both negligent and vicariously liable
for sexual assaults committed by a priest, based on his view that the
appropriate test was “whether Paul Pornbacher was to be involved in the care or
nurturing of children in the course of his employment” (p. 380).  63                              
The U.S. cases exhibit a similar judicial consensus that the combination
of power plus intimacy creates a strong connection between the enterprise and
the sexual assault.  In Doe v. Samaritan Counseling Center, 791 P.2d 344
(Alaska 1990), a counsellor at the Center engaged in sexual activity with the
plaintiff, which arose out of the counsellor’s handling of the “transference
phenomenon”, described as a “parent-dependent relationship” (p. 345). The
sexual activity was characterized as incidental to the therapy, and the
employer was held vicariously liable.  This result is consistent with the Children’s
Foundation analysis that employers who place employees in a parental-type
relationship will be more likely to be held vicariously liable for the
employee’s sexual assaults.  64                              
I would not want to be taken as suggesting that creation of a
parent-type relationship constitutes a precondition to vicarious liability in
child abuse cases.  However, not only do the “parental” cases have a particular
relevance to the facts of this appeal, they show how high the courts have set
the bar before imposing no-fault liability.  I think Huddart J.A. was correct in
this case in the B.C. Court of Appeal to emphasize job-created power as the
most relevant source of “connectedness” (p. 7) to the present appeal.  Of
course, other power relationships have also been held to supply the necessary
“strong connection” in different fact situations.  In the United States, the
cases suggest that job-created authority is sufficient, for example, if it
could be expected to intimidate a reasonable individual in the shoes of the
victim.  Thus the Supreme Court of California dealt with police power in Mary
M. v. City of Los Angeles, 814 P.2d 1341 (1991).  The majority of that
court, sitting en banc, found the City of Los Angeles to be liable for
the rape of a motorist by a police officer.  The majority concluded, in terms
of the Salmond test, that the rape had occurred in “the course of
employment”.  A police officer, in uniform, found a motorist impaired while
driving, and instead of taking her to the police station, he took her to her
house and raped her.  He was convicted and sent to prison.  The issue was
whether his employer should be held vicariously liable to provide financial
compensation.  The majority of the court found that in view of the significant
power and authority granted to the officer by the City, which included the power
to detain persons at gunpoint, place them in handcuffs, remove them from their
residences, frisk them, and even use deadly force, “it is neither startling nor
unexpected that on occasion an officer will misuse that authority by engaging
in assaultive conduct” (p. 1350).  In other words, the manifest power inherent
in the job-created role of police officer made the employer liable for its
abuse.  By contrast, the job-created power of a high school teacher over his
pupil was considered by the same court to be insufficient to impose vicarious
liability in John R. v. Oakland Unified School District, 769 P.2d 948
(Cal. 1989), discussed below. Conclusion
on the Stage 1 Analysis of the Case Law  65                              
It is as important on this subject as elsewhere to look at what courts
do, and not merely at what they say.  Courts and commentators have acknowledged
that the modern articulation of rules governing vicarious liability is largely
an attempt to rationalize or explain the existing case law. As noted by La
Forest J. in London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd.,
[1992] 3 S.C.R. 299, at p. 336, this articulation is “an attempt by the law to
give some formal, technical explanation of why the law imposes vicarious
liability”.  Adoption by this Court of the “enterprise risk” theory in Children’s
Foundation was an effort to explain the existing case law, not to
provide a basis for its rejection.  66                              
Unless we seek to overrule rather than explain the existing law, I
conclude as a result of the first step of the Children’s Foundation
analysis that the existing case law does not support the imposition of
vicarious no-fault liability on the respondent in this appeal.  Stage 2: 
Consideration of Policy  67                              
The “enterprise risk” rationale holds the employer vicariously
responsible because, however innocently, it introduced the seeds of the
potential problem into the community, or aggravated the risks that were already
there, but only if its enterprise materially increased the risk of the
harm that happened.  Once materiality is established under the “strong
connection” test, the imposition of no-fault liability is justified under the
second phase of the analysis, as set out in Children’s Foundation (para.
41) by policy considerations, including in particular:  (a) Compensation; and  (b) Deterrence.  These policy
considerations have to be balanced with a measure of fairness to the employer
and adherence to legal principle because standing on their own these particular
policies will generally favour vicarious liability, i.e., a solvent employer
will almost always be in a better position to provide effective compensation to
an assault victim than the assailant, and the higher the likelihood of
financial liability on the employer, generally speaking, the more potent the
deterrent.  These pro-liability policies have therefore been restrained
historically by a recognition that competing social objectives also have to be
weighed in the balance.  Professor Fleming, for example, explains that
initially the common law held employers generally liable for all of the
torts of their employees, a position that was abandoned in response to the
forces of economic change and the explosion of commerce that followed the
industrial revolution  (Fleming, supra, at p. 409).  68                              
The Court made it clear in Children’s Foundation (at paras. 47 et
seq.) that there is no exemption from the ordinary rules of vicarious
liability for non-profit organizations.  Immunity from direct or vicarious
liability is a matter for legislative consideration (see generally R.
Flannigan, “The Liability Structure of Nonprofit Associations:  Tort and
Fiduciary Liability Assignments” (1998), 77 Can. Bar Rev. 73, at p.
90).  It is nevertheless relevant to point out to those who contend for an
expansion of no-fault liability based on policies of compensation and
deterrence that imposition of no-fault liability does not necessarily achieve a
comparable result when applied to non-profit organizations as it does when
applied to commercial organizations.  If the objectives of effective
compensation and deterrence are not advanced to the same extent or in the same
way, these differences in function or performance undercut the argument for
expansion and may indeed call for a measure of judicial restraint.  (a)   Compensation  69                              
As stated by McLachlin J. in Children’s Foundation (at para. 30),
the law seeks “to provide a just and practical remedy to people who suffer as a
consequence of wrongs perpetrated by an employee”.  Vicarious liability is thus
seen as a no-fault mechanism for spreading the loss over the customer base of
the employer on the theory that “a person who employs others to advance his own
economic interest should in fairness be placed under a corresponding liability
for losses incurred in the course of the enterprise” (per McLachlin J.,
at para. 30, quoting Fleming, supra, at p. 410).  In London Drugs,
supra, La Forest J. observed that “[v]icarious liability has the broader
function of transferring to the enterprise itself the risks created by the
activity performed by its agents” (p. 339).  70     
Some commentators have less elegantly characterized this aspect of
public policy as primarily a search for deep pockets (Critchley, supra,
per McEachern C.J.B.C., at p. 506; G. H. L. Fridman, The Law of Torts
in Canada (1990), vol. 2, at pp. 315-16; P. S. Atiyah, Vicarious
Liability in the Law of Torts (1967), at p. 22; T. Baty, Vicarious
Liability (1916), at p. 154).  As Professor Fridman states (at pp. 315-16):  In truth, however, as some judges have recognised and accepted, the
reason why vicarious liability has been incorporated into the law of torts,
when, generally speaking, it has not been accepted in the criminal law, is
because the purpose of the law of tort, in contrast with that of the criminal
law, is compensation, not punishment;   therefore, it is desirable that the
plaintiff should be able to make liable someone who is financially capable of
satisfying a money judgment awarded the plaintiff in respect of his injuries or
loss.   The same point
is made in different words by Professor Atiyah (at p. 22):   “Accordingly if
the victims of torts are to be compensated for their losses this must, in
general, be done by finding someone other than the actual tortfeasor on whom
liability is to be imposed.”  71                              
The “strong connection” test limits the ability of a court to reach into
an employer’s deep pocket simply because it is there.  In the case of a
non-profit corporation such as the respondent, however, there is the further
reality that the employer does not operate in a market environment and has
little or no ability to absorb the cost of such no-fault liability by raising
prices to consumers in the usual way to spread the true cost of “doing business”. 
It has no efficient mechanism to “internalize” the cost.  This is not to say
that such employers should escape vicarious liability on that account.  Nor is
it to suggest that ability to pay is a necessary precondition to the imposition
of such liability.  It is simply to suggest that the Court would be hard
pressed to enlarge no-fault liability in this appeal based on a particular
policy justification that has little or no application to the broad category of
non-profit “enterprise” that  we have here under consideration.  (b)   Deterrence  72                              
Deterrence is another key policy reason supporting vicarious liability,
yet it too has to be assessed with some sensitivity to context, including the
nature of the conduct sought to be deterred, the nature of the liability sought
to be imposed, and the type of enterprise sought to be rendered liable.  73                              
As to the nature of the conduct, an employee who commits a sexual
assault is committing a crime.  Society has already placed a high deterrence
factor on such conduct: the tortfeasor can face up to ten years in jail for
sexual assaults (Criminal Code, R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46, s. 271 ).  There
may be little an employer can do in reality to deter such conduct in its
employees if the possibility of ten years in jail is not sufficient. 
Jahnke J. made this point in Ciarochi, supra, at p. 22:  It is difficult if not impossible for an enterprise
to structure inducements and precautions to deter sexually inappropriate
conduct toward children. While a business enterprise and its employees might
foresee a physical altercation or a safety violation on the shop floor and
negotiate means to deal with it, including inspections, procedures, risk
sharing, and personnel actions, the sexual abuse of children by caregivers is
rarely foreseen and is always surreptitious.  Conventional incentives and
disincentives used by enterprises simply do not work to deter compulsive sexual
misconduct.   74                              
As to the nature of the liability, an undue emphasis on the deterrence
factor may blur the line between vicarious liability and negligence.  This was
a point made by the Supreme Court of California in John R., supra,
where the court en banc considered a claim of vicarious liability
against a school district where a teacher invited a child to his home as part
of a school-authorized program, then sexually assaulted him.  Job-created
activities in the privacy of the teacher’s home obviously generated a higher level
of “enterprise risk” than did the Club’s activities in the present appeal, yet
a majority of the Supreme Court of California denied vicarious liability,
stating, at p. 956, note 10:  Thus, to the extent the extracurricular program
involved in this case may have lacked certain prudent safeguards, such as
requiring the written permission of a child’s parents before the child could
participate or requiring the presence of other children or adults if the
activities were to occur in a private location away from the school, we think
these factors relevant mainly to plaintiffs’ claims against the district based
on its own alleged negligence and not to the policy question. . .
.   [Emphasis in original.]   There is much
to be said for developing and refining the paths of potential direct
liability against employers which introduce child-related enterprises into the
community, but that is not the issue before us on this appeal.  75                              
As to the nature of the enterprise sought to be held liable, the imposition
of no-fault liability in this case would tell non-profit recreational
organizations dealing with children that even if they take all of the
precautions that could reasonably be expected of them, and despite the lack of
any other direct fault for the tort that occurs, they will still be held
financially responsible for what, in the negligence sense of foreseeability,
are unforeseen and unforeseeable criminal assaults by their employees.  It has
to be recognized that the rational response of such organizations may be
to exit the children’s recreational field altogether.  This is particularly the
case with unincorporated groups, whose key members may find themselves
personally responsible as the “employer” for the unforeseen criminal acts of a
deviant employee; see Professor Atiyah, supra, at pp. 387 et
seq., Bradley Egg Farm, Ltd. v. Clifford, [1943] 2 All E.R. 378
(C.A.), per Goddard L.J., at p. 381, referred to but distinguished by
Schroeder J.A. in Dodd v. Cook, [1956] O.R. 470 (C.A.), at p. 486; and,
in a non-employment context, Olinski v. Johnson (1997), 32 O.R. (3d) 653
(C.A.).  Children’s recreation is not a field that offers monetary profits as
an incentive to volunteers to soldier on despite the risk of personal financial
liability.  76                              
I agree entirely with McLachlin J. in Children’s Foundation,
para. 54, when she says that “[t]he suggestion that the victim must remain
remediless for the greater good smacks of crass and unsubstantiated
utilitarianism.”  The issue here, however, is whether the “greater good” would
be unnecessarily sacrificed by a judicial shift in policy that does not
in the end provide the effective remedy that is desired.  77                              
In the context of a public school board, the Supreme Court of California
expressed a related concern in John R., supra,  at p. 957:  [W]e see a significant and unacceptable risk that school districts
would be dissuaded from permitting teachers to interact with their students on
any but the most formal and supervised basis.   A public
authority such as a school board will typically have a greater capacity for
loss-spreading and deterrence management than a volunteer, non-profit
organization such as the Club.  Nevertheless, I think the California court is
correct to point out that in an understandable desire to help victims of child
abuse, courts ought not to be oblivious to the societal ramifications of the
proposed solution.  Conclusion
from the Stage 2 Policy Analysis  78                              
Applying the Children’s Foundation policy analysis, and despite
the serious reservations I have mentioned about the extent to which non-profit
organizations will be able to advance the policy objectives therein discussed,
I accept nevertheless that imposition of no-fault liability here will be of some
benefit to some victims.  I also accept, of course, that “fairness” to
these non-profit organizations is entirely compatible with vicarious liability provided
that a strong connection is established between the enterprise risk and
the sexual assault.  Given the weakness of the policy justification however, I
think the respondent and other non-profit organizations are entitled to insist
that the strong connection test be applied with appropriate firmness. 
My disagreement with the trial judge ultimately rests on my view, respectfully,
that his judgment in favour of the appellants represented an unfortunate
dilution of that requirement, as I will now discuss.  Application
of the Analysis to this Case  79                              
To find a strong connection, there must be a material increase in the
risk of harm occurring in the sense that the employment significantly
contributed to the occurrence of the harm.  In Children’s Foundation at
para. 41, the Court suggested that five factors (at least) could be relevant in
assessing whether an employer created or materially enhanced the risk of an
employee committing an intentional tort and thereby incurred no-fault
liability.  These were:  (a)   the opportunity that the enterprise afforded the employee to
abuse his or her power;  (b)   the extent to which the wrongful act may have furthered the
employer’s aims (and hence be more likely to have been committed by the
employee);  (c)   the extent to which the wrongful act was related to friction,
confrontation or intimacy inherent in the employer’s enterprise;  (d)   the extent of power conferred on the employee in relation to the
victim; (e)   the vulnerability of potential victims to wrongful exercise of
the employee’s power.  80                              
The key to this case, in my view, is that the Club’s “enterprise” was to
offer group recreational activities for children to be enjoyed in the presence
of volunteers and other members.  The opportunity that the Club afforded
Griffiths to abuse whatever power he may have had was slight.  The sexual abuse
only became possible when Griffiths managed to subvert the public nature
of the activities.  The success of his agenda of personal gratification, which
ultimately progressed to sex acts, depended on his success in isolating the
victims from the group.  The progress from the Club’s program to the sexual
assaults was a chain with multiple links, none of which could be characterized
as an inevitable or natural “outgrowth” of its predecessor:  (1)   The Club provided Griffiths with the opportunity to work with
children.  (2)   While it was undoubtedly part of Griffiths’ job to develop a
positive rapport with the children, the relationship envisaged by the Club had
no element of intimacy comparable to the situation in Children’s Foundation.  (3)   While Griffiths might come into occasional physical contact with
children by reason of his job, e.g., steadying a child on a piece of gym
equipment, the authorized “touching” had no more to do with parenting, nurture
or intimacy than could be said of a normal adult reaching out to steady a child
who, e.g., tripped over a carpet.  (4)   Griffiths enticed each child to his home to cultivate a
one-on-one relationship.  The Club activities did not require the Program
Director to be alone with a child off Club premises and outside Club hours. 
Such a practice was explicitly prohibited after 1988.  (5)   Griffiths established his own bait of home attractions, such as
video games, that had nothing to do with Club activities.  It was not part of
his job to entertain children at home after hours.  (6)   Unlike the situation in Children’s Foundation, the
appellants’ mother was a parental authority interposed between the assailant
and his victims.  She gave permission to the children to go to Griffiths’
home.  No doubt, knowing of Griffiths’ job at the Club, she did not regard him
as a stranger or as a threat.  Nevertheless, it must have been evident to a
reasonably cautious parent that Griffiths’ home entertainment was not part of
the Club’s program.  (7)   Once the children were drawn into his home-based activities,
Griffiths gradually increased the level of intimacy, initially with Randy and
subsequently with Jody, in terms of banter and sexually suggestive talk.  This
was not only unauthorized, it was antithetical to the moral values promoted by
the Club.  (8)   Eventually, when Griffiths saw his chance, he committed the
assaults.  81                              
If it was the law that the provision of “opportunity” was enough to
render the employer liable, then the progression from step 1 to step 8 might be
seen as a series of  “but-for” opportunities sufficient to impose liability. 
But that is not the law.  I accept that “but for” the opportunity created by
Griffiths’ employment at the Club, it is unlikely these assaults would have
occurred in the way that they did.  As pointed out by McLachlin J. in Children’s
Foundation (at para. 37), however, the relevant nexus, if it exists, is
between the job-related conduct at step one and Griffiths’ criminal assault at
step eight.  It is not enough to postulate a series of steps each of which
might not have happened “but for” the previous steps.  Where, as here, the
chain of events constitutes independent initiatives on the part of the employee
for his personal gratification, the ultimate misconduct is too remote from the
employer’s enterprise to justify “no fault” liability.  Direct liability would
attach, of course, if the employer could be found derelict in respect of any of
its own responsibilities towards these children.  However, this appeal has been
argued on the assumption that there is no such fault on the part of the
employer.  82                              
My colleague finds that because the Club’s formal constitutional
objectives include the provision of “behaviour guidance and to promote the
health, social, education, vocational and character development of boys and
girls” (para. 16) it must be taken to have “encouraged an intimate relationship
to develop between Griffiths and his young charges” (para. 17).  With respect,
using words like “intimate” and “trust and power” to describe the ordinary
relationship between recreational directors and their after-school participants
robs these words of their capacity to differentiate situations where vicarious
liability may be appropriate from those where it is not.  As noted by Professor
H. J. Laski over 80 years ago in “The Basis of Vicarious Liability” (1916), 26 Yale
L.J. 105, at p. 114:  The real problem in vicarious liability, in fact,
is not so much the rectitude of its basal principles, as the degree in
which they are to be applied.  [Emphasis added.]   I do not
accept that an enterprise that seeks to provide a positive role model thereby
encourages intimacy.  Nor do I believe that “mentoring”, as such, puts one on
the slippery slope to sexual abuse.  If it did, any organization that offered
“role models” would be looking at no-fault liability.  Most organizations
dealing with children inevitably involve role models, from the neighbourhood soccer
league to Girl Guides to the Duke of Edinburgh awards programs.  “Mentoring” is
characteristic of everything from Air Cadets to Big Sisters.  I can find in the
evidence nothing to suggest that Griffiths’ own role required anything more
than the establishment of a “rapport” with the children.  There is no
suggestion that physical intimacy would be either necessary or desirable. 
Intimacy between Griffiths and one or more of the members, even if maintained
on a wholly non-sexual level, would have been destructive of the Club’s
program, leading to problems of favouritism, feelings of exclusion, and
dissension.  83                              
The Club did not confer any meaningful “power” over the appellants. 
They were free to walk out of the Club at any time.  They went home to their mother
every night.  In the circumstances I agree with the point made by Newbury J.A.
in the British Columbia Court of Appeal in the Children’s Foundation
case (1997), 30 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1 (sub nom. B. (P.A.) v. Curry), at pp.
39-40:  Where, for example, a teacher uses his or her authority to develop a
relationship with a pupil in his or her class and then abuses that relationship
by approaching the child at a park during the summer holidays, it may be said
that by employing the teacher and giving him or her some authority (albeit not
parental authority) over the child, the teacher's employer "made the wrong
more probable".  But it is likely vicarious liability would not be imposed
on the employer given the absence of a close connection between the teacher's
duties and his or her wrongful acts.  To put the matter another way, the
fact that the teacher took advantage of his opportunity at the school to
develop a relationship with the child is not enough:  something more is
required __ a close connection between the teacher's duties and his
or her wrongful acts __ to render the school board liable without
proof of negligence or other fault on its part.  [Emphasis added.]   84                              
Griffiths took advantage of the opportunity the Club afforded him to
make friends with the children.  His manipulation of those friendships is both
despicable and criminal, but whatever power Griffiths used to accomplish his
criminal purpose for personal gratification was neither conferred by the Club
nor was it characteristic of the type of enterprise which the respondent put
into the community.  That being the case, I do not think the one act of sexual
touching which occurred on the Club van, given that it was a minor and
incidental part of Griffiths’ ongoing campaign of sexual predation outside Club
facilities and outside Club hours, was sufficient to trigger no-fault
liability.  As McLachlin J. pointed out in Children’s Foundation at
para. 45, the mechanical application of time and place criteria obscures the
more fundamental analysis.  85                              
Finally, as to the vulnerability of potential victims, my colleague
notes at para. 18 that the trial judge in this case found that “Griffiths
exercised a ‘god-like’ authority over his victims”.  The only reference to
“god-like” in the trial judgment is at para. 12 in relation to the intercourse
that occurred between Griffiths and the appellant Jody as follows:  “She did
not assist and did not resist.  She was scared and confused.  He had been a
mentor to her and had seemed almost god-like and because of that she had some
thought that it must be okay.”  It may have been part of Griffiths’ plan to
appear to be “god-like” to his victim, but the question is whether such a
“god-like” image can be attributed to anything intended by the Club, or was a
foreseeable element of its “enterprise”.  The answer, in my view, is no.  The
liability of the Club cannot be determined solely on the basis of the
subjective reaction of the victim.  There is no suggestion in the evidence that
an ordinary girl of Jody’s age and background, knowing the nature of Griffiths’
employment as an organizer of after-school recreation, would have considered
that he had “god-like” job-created status.  The need to relate the victim’s
impressions to some objective inducement, express or implied, by the employer
was noted in Armagas Ltd. v. Mundogas SA, [1986] 2 All E.R. 385 (H.L.),
at p. 393.  86                              
There is a natural tendency to want to impose vicarious liability for
virtually all instances of abuse where the employer is dealing with children
because of the inherent vulnerability of children.  Vulnerability is said to
justify a zero tolerance policy.  This reasoning is apparent in the present
case where the trial judge concluded, as stated, that “[i]f the scourge of
sexual predation is to be stamped out, or at least controlled, there must be
powerful motivation acting upon those who control institutions engaged in the
care, protection and nurturing of children” (para. 69).  Nevertheless, the way
in which this appeal was presented to us requires us to assume that the
employer here did everything a reasonable employer ought to have done in terms
of recruiting and supervising Griffiths, and in the design and conduct of its
programs of which he was Director.  While the vulnerability of children
provides the appropriate context in which the respondent’s enterprise is to be
evaluated, vulnerability does not itself provide the “strong link” between the
enterprise and the sexual assault that imposition of no-fault liability would
require.  Disposition
of the Appeal  87                              
The trial judge, upon being satisfied that the Club was liable under the
doctrine of vicarious liability, did not address the question of whether the
Club was also negligent (at para. 69) despite the fact that negligence was
specifically pleaded by the plaintiffs.  Also, the trial judge did not consider
the question of whether the Club owed a fiduciary duty to the plaintiffs and
hence did not consider that head of liability (at para. 66).  In the result,
the matter should be sent back to trial for a determination as to whether the
Club is liable under a fault-based cause of action, whether it be negligence or
other breach of duty, on the whole of the evidence.  The present appeal, based
as it is purely on the attribution of vicarious liability, should be
dismissed.  Appeal dismissed, L’Heureux-Dubé,
McLachlin and Bastarache JJ. dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Kendall, Penty &
Company, Kelowna, B.C. Solicitors for the respondent Boys’ and Girls’ Club of
Vernon:  Watson Goepel Maledy, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Conference of Catholic
Bishops:  Barnes, Sammon, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the intervener Wunnumin Lake First Nation:  Goodman
& Carr, Toronto.   