  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: de Montigny
v. Brossard (Succession), 2010 SCC 51, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 64 Date : 20101110 Docket
  : 32860  Between: Marcel
de Montigny, personally and in his capacity as heir and
liquidator of the succession of Liliane de Montigny, and
in his capacity as heir of the successions of Claudia and
Béatrice Brossard, Sandra de Montigny, personally and in her capacity as
heir and liquidator of the succession of Liliane de Montigny, and Karen
de Montigny, personally and in her capacity as heir and
liquidator of the succession of Liliane de Montigny Appellants and Succession
of the late Martin Brossard, represented by Roger
Brossard, its liquidator Respondent - and - Attorney
General of Quebec Intervener  Official English Translation  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Deschamps,
Fish, Abella, Charron and Cromwell JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 71) LeBel J. (McLachlin C.J. and Deschamps,
  Fish, Abella, Charron and Cromwell JJ. concurring)    de
Montigny v. Brossard (Succession), 2010
SCC 51, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 64  Marcel de Montigny, personally and in
his capacity as heir and liquidator of the succession of
Liliane de Montigny, and in his capacity as heir of the
successions of Claudia and Béatrice Brossard, Sandra de Montigny, personally and in
her capacity as heir and liquidator of the succession of
Liliane de Montigny, and Karen de Montigny, personally and in her
capacity as heir and liquidator
of the succession of Liliane de Montigny                             Appellants v. Succession of the late Martin Brossard,
represented by Roger Brossard,
its liquidator                                                                     Respondent and Attorney
General of Quebec                                                                         Intervener  Indexed as:  de
Montigny v. Brossard (Succession)  2010 SCC 51  File No.:  32860.  2010:  April 14; 2010:  November 10.  Present:  McLachlin C.J.
and LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Charron and Cromwell JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec              Damages — Quantum — Moral
prejudice — Spouse killing former spouse and their two children before
committing suicide — Relatives of victims bringing civil liability action
against murderer’s succession both personally and in their capacity as heirs
and liquidators of victims’ successions — Trial judge allowing personal damages
claim for solatium doloris and loss of moral support and dismissing action by
successions — Whether compensation for solatium doloris and loss of support
adequate.                     In April 2002, B
strangled his former spouse, drowned the couple’s two children, and then
committed suicide.  M, S and K later instituted an
action in civil liability, on their own behalf and as heirs and liquidators of
the victims’ successions, claiming compensatory and punitive damages from B’s
succession.  The trial judge denied the claim by
the successions for two reasons.  First of all, he concluded that compensation
claimed for pain, suffering and loss of expectation of life could be
transmitted to heirs only where the evidence showed that a sufficient period of
time had elapsed between the wrongful act and the death and that the victim had
actually felt pain.  The fact that the deaths of the victims in this case were
almost instantaneous meant that damages could not be awarded under this head. 
Because the trial judge took the view that punitive damages are incidental to
compensatory damages, he concluded that a right to punitive damages did not
become part of the victims’ patrimony that would be transmitted to their
heirs.  The judge added that the deterrent aspect of punitive damages no longer
applied in any event because B was deceased.  However, the judge allowed the
personal action of M, S and K and awarded them damages for solatium doloris
and loss of moral support.  The
Court of Appeal upheld the trial decision.              Held:  The
appeal should be allowed in part.              There is no reason to
intervene to vary the amounts awarded to M, S and K personally as compensation
for the moral prejudice they suffered as a result of B’s actions, because the
trial judge did not commit any palpable and overriding error in determining the
quantum of compensatory damages.  In this case, the
amounts awarded by the trial judge are well within the range of acceptable
compensation and seem reasonable, even if
the compensation levels for this type of prejudice remain conservative.  The fact that the trial
judge did not consider psychological prejudice separately from the other
aspects of the moral prejudice suffered by M, S and K is not in itself a
reviewable error in principle.  Here, the
judge properly considered the psychological prejudice
suffered by M, S and K in determining the compensation he awarded them.               Similarly, it is too narrow a
view of the role of punitive damages to say that there is no point in awarding
them where the person who committed an unlawful act is deceased.  That view
does not take account of the social utility of this form of judicial
intervention.  Article 1621 C.C.Q. recognizes the preventive
purpose of punitive damages.  Because of the exceptional nature of these
damages, the courts have been using them only for punishment and deterrence
(both specific and general) of conduct that is considered socially
unacceptable.  However, since denunciation contributes to the preventive
objective of art. 1621 C.C.Q. just as much as punishment and
deterrence, there is no reason to refuse to recognize denunciation as an
objective of punitive damages in Quebec civil law, especially where the issue
is respect for the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Charter.              In this case, awarding punitive damages
seems entirely appropriate in the circumstances to denounce the acts in
question and affirm the importance of the right to life.  The murders committed
by B were for the victims an unlawful interference with a right protected by
the Charter and were also a civil fault within the meaning of the law of
civil liability.  The interference was intentional because B intended to
deprive his victims of life at the time he acted.  Since B’s succession is
insolvent, a symbolic lump sum of $10,000, payable to the three successions and
to be shared among them equally, is sufficient to achieve the objective of
denunciation.  Since the Quebec law of succession allows the right of action
for punitive damages under the Charter to be transmitted to a person’s
heirs, M, S and K could bring this action by the successions on behalf of the
victims.  However, because there is no reason to believe that B intended to
interfere with the psychological inviolability of M, S and K or even that he
actually thought about the consequences of his actions for them, their personal
action for punitive damages cannot succeed. Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited   Act respecting the implementation of the reform of
the Civil Code, S.Q. 1992, c. 57, s. 423.   Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, s. 24(1) .      Authors Cited   Beaulne, Jacques.  Droit des successions, 4e
éd., d’après l’œuvre de Germain Brière.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur, 2010.  Dallaire, Claude.  “L’évolution des dommages
exemplaires depuis les décisions de la Cour suprême en 1996:  dix ans de
cheminement”, dans Développements récents en droit administratif et constitutionnel,
vol. 240.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 2006, 185.  Gardner, Daniel.  Le préjudice corporel, 3e
éd. Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 2009.  Ontario.  Law Reform Commission.  Report on
Exemplary Damages.  Toronto:  The Commission, 1991.  Pratte, Pierre.  “Les dommages punitifs:  institution
autonome et distincte de la responsabilité civile” (1998), 58 R. du B. 287.               APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal (Pelletier,
Bich and Côté JJ.A.), 2008 QCCA 1577, [2008] R.J.Q. 2015, [2008] J.Q. no 8007
(QL), 2008 CarswellQue 7957, affirming in part a judgment of Trudel J.,
2006 QCCS 1677, [2006] R.J.Q. 1371, 40 C.C.L.T. (3d) 109, [2006] Q.J. No. 2848
(QL), 2006 CarswellQue 14487.  Appeal allowed in part.               No one appeared for the
respondent.               Sébastien Grammond,
as amicus curiae.              English version of the judgment of the
Court delivered by  [1]                             
LeBel J. — This
appeal has as its backdrop a family tragedy.  On the morning of April 22,
2002, Martin Brossard entered the home of his former spouse, Liliane de
Montigny, strangled her and then drowned the couple’s two children, Claudia and
Béatrice, in the bathtub of the home they had all once shared.  He then hanged
himself, leaving a note that clearly explained the reasons for his actions. [2]                             
Since the tragedy, Marcel de Montigny, who is Liliane’s father and the
grandfather of Claudia and Béatrice, and Sandra and Karen de Montigny, who are
Liliane’s sisters and the children’s aunts, have been engaged in civil
proceedings against the murderer’s succession.  As heirs and liquidators of the
successions of Liliane, Claudia and Béatrice, and also on their own behalf,
they are claiming compensatory and punitive damages from Martin Brossard’s
succession. I.       Origin of the Case [4]                             
Liliane de Montigny and Martin Brossard were together for about
15 years, from 1986 to 2001, although they separated a few times during that
period.  They had two children:  Claudia, who was born in December 1997, and
Beatrice, who was born in October 2000.  In December 1999, they purchased land
in Brossard, a suburb south of Montréal.  They had a house built on the land
and took possession of it in June 2000.  They separated just over a year later,
in November 2001.  Liliane stayed in the family home with the children, while
Martin went back to live with his parents.  They agreed to
share custody of the children. [6]                             
When the police arrived, they found not only Martin’s body but also the
lifeless bodies of Liliane, Claudia and Béatrice.  Liliane was lying on her
back in the master bedroom and had marks on her neck.  The autopsy report
indicated that she had been strangled, possibly with the belt from her
bathrobe.  The two children were lying face down in the empty bathtub in the
upstairs bathroom.  The autopsy reports concluded that they had both died from
drowning.  The cause of Martin’s death was asphyxiation by hanging.  In its
report to the coroner, the police investigation division concluded that there
had been a triple murder followed by a suicide.  That conclusion was consistent
with the note left by Martin expressing despair over his breakup with Liliane. [7]                             
On July 3, 2002, Marcel, Sandra and Karen de Montigny appeared
before a notary to make a declaration of inheritance in Liliane’s succession
and designated themselves as liquidators of the succession.  The heirs did not
designate a liquidator for the successions of Claudia and Béatrice.  On
October 3, 2002, they commenced the action that is the subject of this
appeal in the Quebec Superior Court. II.      Judicial History A.     Quebec Superior Court, 2006 QCCS 1677 (CanLII) [8]                             
In the Quebec Superior Court, the plaintiffs brought an action in
damages against Martin Brossard’s succession.  The action had two parts, namely
a claim by the successions and a direct claim. [9]                             
There were two aspects to the action by the successions.  First,
the three plaintiffs, in their capacity as heirs and liquidators, claimed
compensation for the damage allegedly suffered by Liliane’s succession. 
Second, Marcel de Montigny did the same for the successions of Claudia and
Béatrice.  The case was heard by Clément Trudel J. [10]                         
On the first aspect, Trudel J. concluded that he could not award
the compensation claimed for Liliane’s pain, suffering and loss of expectation
of life.  That head of damages is transmitted to heirs only where the evidence
shows that a sufficient period of time elapsed between the wrongful act and the
death and that the victim actually felt pain.  However, it appeared that
Liliane, who became unconscious a few seconds after being attacked by Martin,
had not regained consciousness before she died.  Because her death was almost
instantaneous, Trudel J. refused to award damages under this head to the
succession.  He also denied the claim for reimbursement of her funeral expenses. [12]                         
Trudel J. applied the same reasoning to Marcel de Montigny’s claims
on behalf of the successions of young Claudia and Béatrice, which were the
second aspect he considered.  Since death by drowning is also almost
instantaneous, neither compensatory nor exemplary damages could have become
part of the young girls’ patrimony.  He therefore denied these heads of damages
for the same reasons as with Liliane’s succession.  However, he awarded the
successions half of the funeral expenses incurred as a result of the children’s
deaths. B.      Quebec Court of Appeal, 2008 QCCA 1577, [2008] R.J.Q. 2015
(Pelletier, Bich and Côté JJ.A.) [14]                         
Four aspects of Trudel J.’s decision were appealed to the Quebec
Court of Appeal.  The appellants’ appeal against the Brossard succession
related first to the quantum of compensation awarded to them personally for
pain and loss of moral support.  It also concerned the refusal to award
compensation to the successions for the victims’ suffering and loss of
expectation of life as well as the denial of exemplary damages.  Finally, the
appellants claimed full compensation for the funeral expenses incurred by the
successions. [15]                         
On the issue of the amount of compensation awarded to the plaintiffs for
solatium doloris and loss of consortium and servitium
(“loss of moral support”), Pelletier J.A., for a unanimous Court of
Appeal, found that Trudel J. had properly applied the principles
established by this Court in Augustus v. Gosset, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 268 (“Augustus”). 
Moreover, his assessment of the evidence did not warrant any intervention by
the Court of Appeal.  Pelletier J.A. added that the amounts awarded were
comparable to those awarded in other cases that bore some similarity to the
present one. [16]                         
The Court of Appeal found that the trial judge had not erred concerning
the victims’ right to be compensated for pain and suffering and loss of
expectation of life.  Since it was impossible to determine the sequence of
events, it could not be concluded that one of the victims could have suffered
as a result of being aware of another victim’s murder.  As well, the courts had
long refused to accept such claims where the victim dies almost instantaneously
or where the quantity of the time elapsed between the causal act and death does
not allow for a reasonable inference that the victim suffered any prejudice
separate from the death itself, as in this case. [17]                         
Next, the Court of Appeal held that Trudel J. had correctly refused
to award exemplary damages to the victims’ successions.  However, at the
hearing, the appellants had been given leave to amend their motion in order to
claim exemplary damages in their personal capacity as “indirect victims”. 
While this eliminated the objection based on the immediate victims’ lack of
recourse, the fact that exemplary damages can have no deterrent effect where
the wrongdoer is deceased was an issue, as it had been at trial.  According to
Pelletier J.A., this factor justified denying the claim for exemplary
damages: [translation] 
. . . assuming that a message must be sent to anyone who might be
tempted to do something similar to what Martin Brossard did . . .
such a warning would have no real impact. . . .  The level of despair
required to contemplate such extreme action means that it is illusory to think
that any deterrent effect can result from an award of punitive damages. 
[para. 37] [18]                         
With regard to funeral expenses, the Court of Appeal intervened to allow
the claims of the successions of Liliane, Claudia and Béatrice.  That aspect of
the decision is not in issue before this Court. III.    The Appeal to This Court Appointment of the Amicus Curiae [19]                         
After leave to appeal was granted in this matter, the appeal was set
down for hearing in the fall 2009 session.  However, the succession of the late
Martin Brossard gave notice of its withdrawal and this Court appointed an amicus
curiae, Sébastien Grammond.  I note that Mr. Grammond made a
considerable contribution to the proceedings through his factum and his input
during the hearing. IV.    Analysis A.     Issues [20]                         
There are two issues in this appeal: 1.                  Whether
the trial judge and the Court of Appeal committed a palpable and overriding
error in determining adequate compensation for solatium doloris and loss
of moral support; 2.                 Whether the death of a person who
commits intentional acts for which the victims could be awarded exemplary
damages precludes an award of exemplary damages against the person’s
succession.  Whether the admissibility of such a remedy then depends on the
existence of another head of damages.  B.      Positions
of the Parties                    (1)   Appellants’
Position [21]                         
On the first issue, the appellants argue, in light of the case law and
on the basis of the quality of their relationships with Liliane, Claudia and
Béatrice, the circumstances of the deaths and the consequences of the tragedy
for their own lives, that the quantum of damages awarded to them does not
constitute full and acceptable compensation for the prejudice they suffered. 
They add that the Quebec courts seem to view the amount awarded by this Court
in Augustus, the leading case on compensatory damages, as a cap on
compensation, and they submit that that amount, expressed in today’s dollars,
should be much higher than at the time it was established.  They therefore ask
this Court to substantially increase the compensation awarded to them under this
head by the courts below.                    (2)   Position
of the Amicus Curiae [23]                         
On the first issue, the amicus curiae is in favour of full
compensation for the prejudice suffered by the surviving members of the de
Montigny family, including psychological prejudice.  In his view, by accepting
only the concepts of solatium doloris and loss of moral support, the
trial judge and the Court of Appeal failed to compensate for that specific type
of prejudice and thus violated the principle of full compensation that
underlies civil liability.  He suggests that this Court reassess the moral
prejudice by taking full account of the psychological prejudice. [26]                         
Finally, the amicus curiae submits that an obligation to pay
punitive damages became part of Martin Brossard’s patrimony at the time he
killed his victims and was transmitted to his heirs with the rest of his
patrimony (art. 625 C.C.Q.).  Even if it is impossible to punish
the murderer, and even if an award of punitive damages against the murderer’s
succession is unlikely to deter people from committing similar acts, it is
important for this Court to denounce and indicate society’s disapproval of his
crime.  For that purpose, the amicus curiae suggests $1,000 as a
symbolic amount. C.     Compensation for Solatium Doloris and Loss of Moral Support [27]                         
This appeal reminds us once more of the delicate nature of
judges’ work.  In civil liability cases, judges sometimes have the difficult
task of quantifying the value of concepts as intangible as a person’s life,
physical inviolability or suffering.  In this area, where, by definition, the
exercise of reasoned discretion remains the rule, the judge must also give as
much priority as possible to following established judicial practice while
adapting it to the specific circumstances of each case.  Because of the
essential factual assessment required by this task, an appellate court must
take a highly deferential approach to varying the quantum of compensatory
damages awarded by the trial judge.  The “palpable and overriding error”
standard applies to findings and inferences of fact concerning the assessment
of such damages (Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235,
at paras. 10 and 25; H.L. v. Canada (Attorney General), 2005 SCC
25, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 401, at para. 53). [29]                         
However, the appellants are disputing the amounts awarded to them as
compensation for the moral prejudice they suffered.  In their opinion, those
amounts are so far removed from full compensation for that prejudice that their
determination was in itself a palpable and overriding error justifying
appellate intervention.  In support of their arguments, the appellants rely on
examples drawn from Quebec cases in which the facts, while not completely
identical to those of the instant case, are similar enough to form a basis for
comparison.  They submit that the Quebec courts still seem to wrongly view the
amount awarded by this Court in Augustus as a cap on compensation. 
Moreover, that cap would be much higher once adjusted.  I shall deal with this
argument first. [33]                         
The amicus curiae submits that Trudel J.’s error lies
instead in his failure to view psychological prejudice as a form of compensable
prejudice distinct from solatium doloris and loss of moral support, even
though, like them, it is included in what is referred to as “moral prejudice”. 
This argument is unfounded.  It can be seen from Trudel J.’s reasons that
he looked at all the factors that have to be considered in determining the
appropriate compensation. [35]                         
Contrary to the opinion of the amicus curiae, the fact that the
trial judge did not consider psychological prejudice separately from the other
aspects of the moral prejudice suffered by the appellants is not in itself an
error in principle that calls for intervention by this Court.  Such
intervention is justified only where the trial judge’s analysis of the facts of
the case is wrong or defective in light of the factors set out in Augustus,
which is not the case here.  In addition to the tragic circumstances of the
deaths and the family dynamics in the de Montigny family both before and after
the tragedy, Trudel J.’s analysis took into account the immediate and
subsequent emotional and psychological repercussions of the events on the lives
of Mr. de Montigny, Sandra and Karen.  He noted, for example, that
Sandra and Karen had [translation]
“succeeded quite well in managing the emotional consequences of the deaths,
surviving the loss, and assimilating it” (para. 111), whereas their
father  “had a hard time coping with the situation and moving on. . . . 
Although more private, [his pain] was nonetheless as intense, painful and
traumatic as theirs.  It will undoubtedly be hard for him to resign himself to
the loss of his daughter and two granddaughters” (para. 112).  These
comments, though concise, satisfy me that Trudel J. properly considered
the psychological prejudice suffered by the appellants in determining the
compensation he awarded them. [36]                         
Accordingly, in the absence of any palpable and overriding error, I find
that there is no reason for this Court to intervene to vary the amounts awarded
to the appellants as compensation for the moral prejudice they suffered as a
result of Martin Brossard’s actions.  While those amounts may seem relatively
low given the tragic circumstances that led to them being awarded, it should be
borne in mind that the process of quantifying this type of prejudice to arrive
at an abstract monetary value remains governed by the evidence submitted and by
judicial practice in this area.  As Pelletier J.A. noted, appellate judges
may not vary an amount awarded for moral prejudice at trial merely because they
themselves would have awarded a higher amount.  Despite all the sympathy one
may feel for the de Montigny family, the applicable legal rules require that
this first ground of appeal be dismissed. D.     Award of Exemplary Damages Where the Perpetrator of the
Intentional Wrong Is Deceased [37]                         
The appellants are also challenging the dismissal of the claim for
exemplary damages they brought against Martin Brossard’s succession, first in
their capacity as heirs of the successions of Liliane, Claudia and Béatrice and
then, on appeal, in their personal capacity.  As already discussed, there were
two reasons why that claim was dismissed.  First, relying on a line of judicial
and scholarly authority that refuses to recognize the autonomous nature of
exemplary damages, the judges below found that the fact that compensatory
damages could not be awarded to the victims’ successions in this case was an
insurmountable obstacle to the admissibility of a claim for exemplary damages
under s. 49 of the Charter.  As well, both the Superior Court and
the Court of Appeal stressed that the punitive and deterrent effects of
exemplary damages would be absent in this case because the wrongdoer had killed
himself immediately after committing his acts.  We shall now see that neither
of these reasons stands up to analysis and that this aspect of the appellants’
appeal is well founded. (1)      
Autonomous Nature of Exemplary Damages [39]                         
To determine whether an action for exemplary damages under s. 49,
para. 2 of the Charter was a civil liability action within the
meaning of s. 438 of the AIAOD, Gonthier J., for the majority,
considered the nature of and basis for such an action.  He concluded from his
analysis that the action remained subject to the general principles of civil
liability and therefore incidental in nature.  Its recognition presupposed the
admissibility and success of an action for compensatory damages.  In a
frequently quoted passage, he provided the following explanation: Such an action can only be incidental to a
principal action seeking compensation for moral or material prejudice.  The
second paragraph of s. 49 clearly states that in case of unlawful and
intentional interference with a protected right, “the tribunal may, in
addition, condemn the person guilty of it to exemplary damages” (emphasis
added).  This wording clearly shows that, even if it were admitted that an
award of exemplary damages is not dependent upon a prior award of compensatory
damages, the court must at least have found that there was an unlawful
interference with a guaranteed right.  Some wrongful conduct that gives rise to
civil liability will therefore be identified and further consideration given to
the intention of the person responsible.  It is the combination of unlawfulness
and intentionality that underlies the decision to award exemplary damages.  The
necessary connection with the wrongful conduct that gives rise to civil
liability leads one to associate the remedy of exemplary damages with the
principles of civil liability.  [Emphasis in original; para. 127.] [46]                         
For these reasons, the fact that no compensatory damages were awarded in
the instant case does not in itself bar the claim for exemplary damages made by
the appellants in their capacity as heirs of the successions of Liliane,
Claudia and Béatrice.  In my opinion, that claim was admissible.  However, as I
have already stated, according to the judgments of the Court of Appeal and the
Superior Court, the absence of compensatory damages was only one of two
obstacles to an award of exemplary damages, the second being that there was no
point in punishing or deterring a wrongdoer who had died after committing his
acts.  I shall therefore consider this question before determining the
appellants’ rights. (2)      
Objectives of Exemplary Damages [47]                         
While compensatory damages are awarded to compensate for the
prejudice resulting from fault, exemplary damages serve a different purpose. 
An award of such damages aims at expressing special disapproval of a person’s
conduct and is tied to the judicial assessment of that conduct, not to the
extent of the compensation required for reparation of actual prejudice, whether
monetary or not.  As Cory J. stated:  (Hill v. Church of Scientology of
Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130, at para. 196) [50]                         
It is too narrow a view of the role of punitive damages to say that
there is no point in awarding them where the person who committed an unlawful
act is deceased.  That view does not take account of the social utility of this
form of judicial intervention, which requires the courts to take a functional
approach that can help achieve all aspects of the preventive purpose assigned
to such damages by the legislature. [51]                         
In this regard, it is interesting to look at the functions of exemplary
damages in the common law, which are broader and which encompass but also go
beyond punishment and deterrence.  As far back as Wilkes v. Wood (1763),
Lofft. 1, 98 E.R. 489 (K.B.), exemplary damages were seen as having three
functions, namely punishment, deterrence and denunciation: Since that time,
there has been “a substantial consensus that coincides with Lord Pratt C.J.’s
view . . . that the general objectives of punitive damages are
punishment (in the sense of retribution), deterrence of the wrongdoer and
others, and denunciation” (Whiten v. Pilot Insurance Co., 2002 SCC 18,
[2002] 1 S.C.R. 595 (“Whiten”), at para. 68).  This was what
Binnie J. held following a comparative survey of the experience in other
common law jurisdictions as regards exemplary damages.  Exemplary damages were
found to have the same function under s. 24(1)  of the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms  in this Court’s recent decision in Ward (Vancouver
(City) v. Ward, 2010 SCC 27, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 28). [52]                         
As we have seen, denunciation was described by Cory J. as “the
means by which the jury or judge expresses its outrage at the egregious conduct
of the defendant” (Hill, at para. 196).  That outrage is expressed
through an award of a substantial or symbolic amount of money, often
accompanied by a declaration, which together are intended to convey the opinion
of the justice system concerning the particularly reprehensible nature of the
conduct in question.  In this sense, denunciation constitutes an objective
serving both the retributive and the utilitarian functions of the system of
exemplary damages.  The retributive function is served by the opprobrium
attaching to the person of the wrongdoer, which is in itself a form of
punishment for the wrongdoer’s conduct.  The utilitarian function for its part
is served by the preventive effect that such damages can have on the type of
conduct involved, which benefits society as a whole.  Denunciation also serves
a declaratory function, which it shares, to a lesser degree, with the general
deterrent objective of exemplary damages.  While the objectives of punishment,
deterrence and denunciation intersect to some extent in these functions, each
of them covers a different aspect of the role played by exemplary damages and
can therefore, in itself, justify an award of such damages. [53]                         
Since denunciation contributes to the preventive objective of
art. 1621 C.C.Q. just as much as punishment and deterrence, I see
no reason to refuse to recognize denunciation as an objective of exemplary
damages in Quebec civil law.  This approach is all the more appropriate where
the issue is respect for the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Charter,
a document that expresses the most fundamental values of Quebec society, as
stated forcefully in its preamble. [54]                         
However, care must be taken not to give exemplary damages a subsidiary
criminal justice role.  The fact that Martin Brossard cannot be punished for
his actions by the criminal justice system is not a determining factor in the
analysis.  The existence of a prior criminal conviction is, at most, one of the
factors to be considered in determining the quantum of exemplary damages, as explained
by the Ontario Law Reform Commission in a report on such damages: . . .
it would be incorrect to view punitive damages as a systematic response to the
shortcomings of criminal law.  The law of punitive damages is applicable to a
limited range of criminal conduct only, and it is applicable only in a limited
way.  The limits are not always consistent with a general theory of tort as a
supplement to criminal law.  The law of punitive damages intrudes not on to the
general criminal law, but only on to its exceptionally objectionable breaches. 
It is a requirement for punitive damages not only that the defendant commit a
tort advertently, but that the conduct be exceptional.  Moreover, punitive
damages are not an inducement to the general citizenry to enforce the criminal
law for profit.  The claim may be brought only by the victim of a tort, and
damages may be awarded only in reference to the conduct that affected the
victim.  In short, while
“punitive damages straddle the frontier between civil law (compensation) and
criminal law (punishment)” (Whiten, at para. 36), it must be borne
in mind that each of these systems has its own role to play.  One should not be
substituted for the other where one of them is unable to perform its specific
role, as in this case. [55]                         
In the case before us, the particularly serious and horrific nature of
the acts committed by Martin Brossard before he took his own life cannot be
disregarded.  He killed a woman and young children whom he was supposed to love
and protect.  Awarding exemplary damages seems entirely appropriate in the
circumstances to denounce those acts and affirm the importance of the right to
life. [56]                         
At this point in the analysis, only one issue remains, namely whether
the appellants are entitled to exemplary damages. (3)      
Right to Exemplary Damages [57]                         
Section 49, para. 2 of the Charter sets out two
conditions for awarding exemplary damages:  the act in question must be both
unlawful and intentional.  Since I have concluded that the absence of
compensatory damages does not preclude the payment of exemplary damages, I
shall first consider whether the appellants are entitled to such damages in
their capacity as heirs of the successions of Liliane, Claudia and Béatrice.  I shall then look at their personal claims. (a)
Action by the Successions To find that there has been unlawful interference, it must be shown
that a right protected by the Charter was infringed and that the
infringement resulted from wrongful conduct.  A person’s conduct will be
characterized as wrongful if, in engaging therein, he or she violated a
standard of conduct considered reasonable in the circumstances under the
general law or, in the case of certain protected rights, a standard set out in
the Charter itself . . . . [para. 116] [59]                         
In the present case, there can be no doubt about the unlawfulness
of the interference, which was also a civil fault within the meaning of the law
of civil liability.  The affirmation of the right to life in s. 1  of the Charter 
shows the fundamental importance of that right in Quebec society.  The
murders of Liliane, Claudia and Béatrice by Martin Brossard, whose civil
liability is not in issue, were the ultimate interference with their right to
life.  The first criterion under s. 49 is therefore
satisfied. [translation] 
six months ago, Liliane took from me all my dreams, everything I’d worked hard
for.  After completing our family, I will never accept that I’m no longer part
of your plans one year after our second daughter and our dream house.  You’ve taken
all my pride.  Like your arrogance and your indifference, I don’t think it was
the right attitude to adopt.  The same thing for the house.  We always said
we’d sell the house if we separated, but you lied to me about that too.  Do you
think I would have agreed to share my place in that house and especially in my
bedroom?  No, I won’t share my wife and especially not my children.  A
family is a father and a mother.  Fine, you don’t want that, Six months ago,
you made a choice.  You didn’t want me to come back.  Now it’s my turn.  I’m
pigheaded too.  Did I tell you it’s not human to do this to someone?  I didn’t
have the right to do what I did, but neither did you.  [Emphasis in original;
A.R., vol. II, at p. 160.] This note leaves no
doubt about the intentional nature of the interference with the lives of
Liliane, Claudia and Béatrice. [61]                         
For these reasons, the successions of Liliane de Montigny and Claudia
and Béatrice Brossard should be awarded exemplary damages for unlawful and
intentional interference with their right to life.  Awarding such damages
conveys the opinion of the justice system concerning the seriousness of these
acts and the need to denounce them as a violation of society’s most fundamental
values. [62]                         
Since Martin Brossard’s succession is insolvent, I consider a symbolic
lump sum of $10,000, payable to the three successions and to be shared among
them equally, sufficient to achieve the objective of denunciation in this
case.  Although moderate, this amount, which is not purely symbolic, emphasizes
the gravity attached by the justice system to unlawful interference with the
three victims’ right to life.  I would also note that it is not a matter here
of punishing or deterring the wrongdoer, who is deceased, but of setting an
amount that sends a message of social denunciation. [63]                         
Before ending on this point, I should say a few words about whether the
right of action for exemplary damages under the Charter may be
transmitted to the victims’ heirs.  Insofar as we have found that the victims’
actions for exemplary damages are admissible, the Quebec law of succession
allows the rights of action to be transmitted to their heirs. 
Article 625, para. 3 C.C.Q. provides that the heirs of a
victim of unlawful interference are seised of the right of action resulting
from that breach.  The heirs may therefore bring this action by the
successions: 625.  The heirs are seised, by
the death of the deceased or by the event which gives effect to the legacy, of
the patrimony of the deceased, subject to the provisions on the liquidation of
successions. . . . The heirs are seised of the rights of action of the deceased against
any person or that person’s representatives, for breach of his personality
rights. Moreover,
art. 1610 C.C.Q. confirms that the right to damages, including
punitive damages, resulting from a breach of a personality right may be
transmitted to a person’s heirs: 1610.  The right of a creditor
to damages, including punitive damages, may be assigned or transmitted. This rule does not apply where the right of the creditor results
from a breach of a personality right; in such a case, the right of the creditor
to damages may not be assigned, and may be transmitted only to his heirs. (See Baudouin and Deslauriers, at
pp. 361 and 414.) [64]                         
In short, there is no doubt that the appellants, in their capacity as
heirs, are entitled to receive the amount determined above. (b) Personal
Action for Exemplary Damages [65]                         
At this stage, the question of whether the appellants are personally
entitled to exemplary damages is purely academic.  The awarding of a lump sum
of exemplary damages to the three successions is sufficient to fulfil the
objective of denunciation of this form of damages, which is the only one
relevant here, as I noted earlier.  Unlike compensatory damages, exemplary
damages attach not to the prejudice suffered by the victims but to the person
of the wrongdoer and the wrongdoer’s conduct, which the court seeks to punish,
deter or denounce.  However, since the amicus curiae raises this issue
in his factum, I consider it necessary to discuss it briefly. [66]                         
In the circumstances of this case, the appellants could have
brought two types of personal actions, one as the direct victims of prejudice
and one as the indirect victims of interference with the right to life of
Martin Brossard’s victims.  In my opinion, both actions would
have failed. (i)     
Action as Direct Victims . . .
there will be unlawful and intentional interference within the meaning of the
second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter when the person who
commits the unlawful interference has a state of mind that implies a desire or
intent to cause the consequences of his or her wrongful conduct, or when that
person acts with full knowledge of the immediate and natural or at least
extremely probable consequences that his or her conduct will cause.  This test
is not as strict as specific intent, but it does go beyond simple negligence. 
Thus, an individual’s recklessness, however wild and foolhardy, as to the
consequences of his or her wrongful acts will not in itself satisfy this test.  [69]                         
Here, there is no reason to believe that Martin Brossard intended to
interfere with the appellants’ psychological inviolability or even that he
actually thought about the consequences of his actions for them.  The
appellants are not mentioned in the note he left setting out his motivations. 
The note indicates instead that all the rage and sorrow that led Martin
Brossard to commit his acts arose out of his breakup with Liliane and the fact
that she had started seeing another man.  The connection between his feelings
and the other members of the de Montigny family remains too tenuous to justify
awarding exemplary damages to them.  The impact of the murders of Liliane,
Claudia and Béatrice on them is only cruel collateral damage in this tragedy. 
Such a personal action by the appellants could not have succeeded. (ii)   
Action as Indirect Victims [70]                         
The other way the appellants personally claimed exemplary damages was as
indirect victims.  Indeed, the Court of Appeal gave them leave to amend their
motion to institute proceedings in order to make such a claim.  It is
sufficient to note that the admissibility of this claim raised insurmountable
problems.  If the appellants could not claim exemplary damages as direct
victims, the intentionality required by s. 49 of the Charter also
prevented them from doing so as indirect victims, since such victims could not
have been directly targeted by the wrongdoer.  In any event, the application of
the intentionality requirement makes any claim for exemplary damages presented
by a claimant who is merely an indirect victim inadmissible. V.     Conclusion [71]                         
For the reasons set out above, I would allow the appeal in part with
costs throughout and would award the appellants, in their capacity as heirs of
the successions of Liliane de Montigny and Claudia and Béatrice Brossard,
$10,000 in exemplary damages plus interest at the legal rate from the date the
proceedings were instituted (art. 1618 C.C.Q.).                     Appeal
allowed in part, with costs.                       Solicitor for the
intervener:  Attorney General of Quebec, Québec.                      Solicitor appointed by
the Court as amicus curiae:  Sébastien Grammond, Ottawa.   