Laflamme v. Prudential-Bache Commodities Canada Ltd., [2000]
1 S.C.R. 638  Placements Armand Laflamme Inc.                                                  Appellant  v.  Jules Roy and Prudential-Bache Commodities Canada Ltd.          Respondents  Indexed as:  Laflamme v. Prudential-Bache
Commodities Canada Ltd.  Neutral citation:  2000 SCC 26.  File No.:  26659.  1999:  November 2; 2000: May 3.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec  Civil responsibility -- Securities dealers --
Portfolio manager -- Failure to comply with mandate -- Mismanagement of
portfolio of securities -- Point in time when manager’s liability ends --
Obligation of client to mitigate damages -- Quantum of damages.  Mandate -- Portfolio manager -- Scope of mandate
and point in time when it ends -- Obligation of client to mitigate damages. L sold his business and, for tax reasons, transferred
the proceeds to the appellant company,  98 percent of the shares of which he
owned.  He entrusted the management of the money to the respondent R, a
securities broker.  L and his family had no experience in investments.  In
April 1988, R left his brokerage firm and joined the respondent Prudential-Bache
and arranged the transfer of the appellant’s portfolio to his new employer.  In
June, L learned from his auditor that R was managing the portfolio on margin
without his knowledge and that a number of the investments were speculative,
when the primary purpose of the investments was supposed to have been to
provide L, who was nearly 60 years old, with a retirement fund.  In July and
November, L’s daughter advised R by letter to limit stock market investments,
to make safe investments and to stop engaging in margin transactions.  On May
3, 1989, R and the L family met to discuss the management of the portfolio.  On
May 5, contrary to the suggestions attributed to R, the appellant wrote to him
advising him to sell certain shares in batches and postponed a decision
relating to other shares for a month.  However, it did not subsequently provide
any instructions concerning those shares.  In the fall of 1989, the price of
the shares held by the appellant fell and, in March 1990, it closed its account
and sustained major losses.  L and the appellant then commenced an action for
damages against the respondents, claiming that those losses had been sustained
as a result of their faults.  The trial judge found that the respondents were
entirely liable and ordered them to pay $12,232.55 to L and
$1,466,141.08 to the appellant.  The Court of Appeal allowed the
respondents’ appeal in part.  Unlike the trial judge, who used April 1990 to
determine the amount of the appellant’s accumulated losses, the Court of Appeal
used June 5, 1989, the end of the one-month period specified in the letter of
May 5, since as of that date the appellant had sufficient information to decide
to close its account and thus mitigate its damages.  The court reduced the
total damages awarded to the appellant to $70,723.79.  Held: The appeal should be allowed.  The liability of the respondents was not in issue.  R
failed to comply with the conduct required of a prudent and diligent manager,
in that he failed to construct an organized and diversified portfolio, carried
out transactions that were inconsistent with the client’s general instructions,
acquired speculative securities and failed to have regard to his client’s
investment objectives. For the most part, the legal relationship between a
client and a portfolio manager is governed by the rules of mandate. As a
mandatary, R also failed to deal fairly and honestly with his client, as he was
expected to do, by failing to comply with the L family’s specific instructions
concerning the amounts to be invested in the stock market and the immediate
cessation of transactions on margin. The only issue which arises is the point
in time when the respondents’ liability ceased.  The events of May 1989 did not change the object
of the mandate between L and the respondents, and R continued to be subject to
an ongoing management obligation.  The Court of Appeal erred when it intervened
on this ground and substituted its own interpretation of the facts for the
trial judge’s interpretation, absent patent error on his part. There was
nothing to indicate that the parties considered changing the mandate by
terminating discretionary management. The trial judge rejected the
interpretation of the letters sent by the L family as indicating that they were
gradually taking control of the management of their portfolio, and on the
whole, he believed the appellant’s witnesses.  The degree of discretion that a
dealer enjoys in managing a portfolio may vary, and there is nothing to prevent
the scope of that discretion being limited or the client being involved in the
portfolio’s management from time to time.  Intervention of that sort by the
client is possible without it amounting to a change in the object of the
mandate or to a revocation of the mandate.  The conduct of R following receipt
of the letter of May 5 is not consistent with a change to or revocation of the
management mandate since the account statements show that he bought and sold a
number of securities without instructions from the appellant.  In fact, there
was nothing to indicate that R advised the L family regarding the effect of any
such change in the object of the mandate on their respective obligations, as he
should have done.  The only possible conclusion is thus that R continued to manage
the portfolio on a discretionary basis despite the letter of May 5.  In any
event, even if we were to accept that the object of the mandate had been
changed from discretionary management to non-discretionary management, this
would not mean that the respondents had no liability.  Despite any such change
in the object of the mandate, R is still responsible for the injury resulting
from the faults he committed.  Thus, absent any fault on the part of the
appellant or a third party, the damages in the instant case were the direct
result of the mismanagement of the portfolio by R, and accordingly, even if it
were accepted that the letter operated to change or revoke the management
mandate, R is still liable, since the faults were committed prior to the letter. 
The respondents’ liability cannot end merely because the object of the mandate
was changed or the appellant opted to take over control of the management of
its portfolio.  The trial judge was correct in holding April 1990 to
be the end of the assessment period since the L family were not negligent when
they failed to intervene earlier in the respondents’ management in the hope of
minimizing the losses.  The trial judge noted the state of mind and the
knowledge of the members of the L family.  They held onto securities in
reliance on assurances given by R, whom they trusted.  The losses caused by the
bad advice and grossly negligent management by R cannot be laid at their doorstep.
Absent any patent error on the part of the trial judge, the Court of Appeal
erred in blaming the appellant for failing to take measures to mitigate the
damages.  It cannot be concluded from the evidence in the record that the
appellant’s behaviour, in failing to liquidate or withdraw its portfolio in the
spring of 1989, was not what a reasonably prudent and diligent person would
have done in the same circumstances.  The appellant is entitled to compensatory damages
because of the wrongful conduct of the respondents.  The total amount of the
damages is made up of the losses incurred by the appellant and the profits of
which it was deprived.  Those damages must be assessed for the period from
April 1988, the date on which the portfolio was transferred, to April
1990. The findings of the trial judge cannot be restored in their entirety. The
trial judge erred when he added the commissions and interest to the quantum of
damages assessed by the expert, since those amounts had already been included
by the expert in his calculation of damages.  The respondents are jointly and
severally ordered to pay the appellant the amount of $924,374, plus interest at
the legal rate from the date of service and the additional indemnity.  Cases Cited  Distinguished:  Bazinet
v. Wood Gundy Inc., [1997] R.R.A. 273; referred to:  Hodgkinson
v. Simms, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 377; Rothschild v. Duffield, [1950] S.C.R.
495; Beatty v. Inns, [1953] Que. Q.B. 349; Mines v. Calumet
Investments Ltd., [1959] C.S. 455; Proulx v. Société de placements &
Co., [1976] C.A. 121.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Civil
Code of Lower Canada, arts. 1024, 1073, 1074,
1701, 1709, 1710, 1735, 1756.  Civil Code of  Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64,
arts. 1434, 1479, 1611, 2130, 2139, 2176, 2182.  Regulation respecting
securities, (1983) 115 G.O. II, 1269, s. 232
[am. (1996) 128 G.O. II, 560, s. 25], 234.1 [ad. (1988) 120 G.O. II, 2396,
s. 19], 235 [repl. (1985) 117 G.O. II, 2297, s. 59].  Securities Act, R.S.Q., c. V-1.1, ss. 5 [am. 1984, c. 41, s. 2], 161.    Authors Cited  Baudouin, Jean-Louis, et
Patrice Deslauriers.  La responsabilité civile, 5e éd. 
Cowansville:  Yvon Blais, 1998.  Beaudoin, Lise I.  Le contrat
de gestion de portefeuille de valeurs mobilières:  nature juridique, rôle des
règles de l’administration du bien d’autrui et obligations des parties. 
Cowansville:  Yvon Blais, 1994.  Fabien, Claude.  “Les règles du
mandat”.  Extraits du Répertoire de droit -- Mandat -- Doctrine --
Document 1.  Montréal:  Chambre des notaires du Québec, 1986.  L’Heureux, Nicole.  “La révocation
d’un agent et le statut d’intermédiaire de commerce” (1977), 18 C. de D.
397.  Lemoyne, Raymond D., et Georges
R. Thibaudeau.  “La responsabilité du courtier en valeurs mobilières au
Québec” (1991), 51 R. du B. 503.  Pétel, Philippe.  Les
obligations du mandataire.  Paris:  Litec, 1988.  Québec.  Commission des valeurs
mobilières.   Instructions générales québécoises Q-9, s. 57.  Savatier, René.  “Les contrats de
conseil professionnel en droit privé”, D. 1972.chron.137.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[1998] R.J.Q. 765, [1998] Q.J. No. 828 (QL), allowing in part the respondents’
appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court, [1996] R.J.Q. 2694, [1996] Q.J.
No. 1400 (QL). Appeal allowed.  Serge Létourneau and Odette
Jobin-Laberge, for the appellant.  Edward E. Aronoff and Sophie
Crevier, for the respondents.  English version of the judgment of the Court delivered
by 1                                  
Gonthier J. — The issue in
this case relates to the extent of the liability of a securities dealer acting
as a portfolio manager.  More specifically, the case relates to the point in
time when that liability ceases.  1.  Facts  2                                  
In June 1987, when he was about 60 years of age, Armand Laflamme and his
brother sold the door and window business they owned.  Armand Laflamme’s share
of the proceeds was $2,200,000, which he transferred to the appellant company,
Placements Armand Laflamme Inc., 98 percent of the shares of which he
owned.  He was supposed to have received $5,000,000, representing one half of
the selling price of $10,000,000, but as a result of financial difficulties
experienced by the company the balance of the selling price could not be paid. 
The appellant is a company established for tax purposes to receive the
proceeds of the sale of Armand Laflamme’s shares.  3                                  
In April 1987, Armand Laflamme accompanied by his son Benoît,
met with the respondent, Jules Roy, who was at that time a securities dealer
with the firm of Burns Fry, to discuss investments.  The purpose of these
investments was primarily to provide him with a retirement fund.  Armand
Laflamme had only a grade four education, and his son Benoît had no experience in
portfolio management.  The son, who had not completed Secondary V, handled
personnel in the family’s plant.  On May 19, 1987, the respondent Roy
opened an account for the appellant company and obtained Armand Laflamme’s
signature on a number of complex forms.  Mr. Laflamme signed the forms in
blank, and Roy filled them out himself later.   5                                  
On July 15, 1988, Suzanne Laflamme, Armand’s daughter, wrote
to Roy advising him to limit stock market investments to $500,000 — [translation]  “not all in high risk” —
and to invest the rest of the money in safe investments.  She stated that [translation] “[n]aturally, we will no
longer use the line of credit”.  Over the next few months, the position of the
portfolio deteriorated, while interest on the line of credit, and Roy’s
commissions, increased.  On November 10, 1988, another letter was
sent to Roy setting the amount to be invested in the stock market at $750,000
and stating that the investments were to be diversified and to include
approximately $200,000 in risk investments.  This letter repeated the
intention to stop using the line of credit and asked that the shares be sold
when it was possible to do so without a loss, in order to reinvest the proceeds
in safe investments.  6                                  
On May 3, 1989, the Laflamme family and Roy met at Le Bouvier
restaurant to discuss the management of the portfolio, and more specifically
the Campeau and Quaker State shares held in the portfolio.  On
May 5, 1989, contrary to the suggestions attributed to Roy that these
shares not be sold, the appellant decided to sell the Quaker State shares in
batches and to postpone a decision relating to the Campeau shares for a month. 
However, the appellant did not subsequently provide any instructions concerning
those shares.  7                                  
In the fall of 1989, the price of the shares held by the appellant fell,
with the result that the value of the portfolio dropped significantly.  On
March 2, 1990, the appellant closed its account with the respondent
Prudential-Bache, and sustained major losses at that time.  8                                  
The appellant and Armand Laflamme then commenced an action for damages
against the respondents, claiming that these losses had been sustained as a
result of their faults.  2.  Decisions  Superior Court of Quebec, [1996] R.J.Q. 2694   10                              
At the beginning of his analysis, Lebrun J. made a finding concerning
the credibility of the witnesses and unhesitatingly accepted the testimony of
the witnesses for the plaintiff, the appellant in this Court.  In his opinion,
Armand Laflamme and his two children [translation]
“had been led into an adventure in which gross negligence if not deception were
key factors” (p. 2701).  On this point, he wrote (at p. 2701):  [translation]  The
explanations given by the Laflamme children concerning their relations with the
defendant Roy are credible and lead to only one conclusion — that they were all
persons unfamiliar with the stock market and their conversations with the
defendant Roy were information sessions, and that they could never have given
informed consent or approved the many risky and irresponsible transactions
carried out by the defendant Roy without regard for his regulatory and legal
obligations.  In defence, reliance was placed on several letters
the Laflamme family sent to the defendant, in an attempt to prove that they
were knowledgeable individuals who were giving the defendant orders.  This
interpretation is not persuasive.  It is clear from the letters to Roy, the
dealer, that his clients were mystified by the “play” of the stock market, that
they had only a minimal understanding of the transactions carried out on their
behalf by the defendant, that it was their accountant and auditor who made them
aware, when preparing the financial statements, of the mess that the defendant
was making of things.   12                              
Relying, inter alia, on the obligations that rest on the dealer
pursuant to the rules of the Montréal stock exchange, Lebrun J. found that the
respondent Roy had failed to fulfill his basic obligation to know his client by
[translation] “totally [ignoring]
the plaintiff’s objective, which was to establish a retirement fund for himself
after a lifetime of hard work” (p. 2701).  On the question of the scope of
Roy’s obligation to provide advice, he stated that the obligation was
particularly broad in view of Mr. Laflamme’s lack of knowledge concerning
investments.  13                              
He accordingly found that the respondents were entirely liable and
listed the [translation] “quite
unmistakable and clearly proved” faults of the dealer, Roy, which he
characterized as gross faults (at p. 2703):  1.    Failure to be properly knowledgeable about
his client’s situation; 2.    Failure to act in accordance with the
client’s objectives;  3.    Failure to adequately inform the client
concerning the nature, return on and risks of the investments;  4.    Failure to comply with the client’s specific
instructions;  5.    Failure to deal with his client in good
faith and in accordance with good practice;  6.    Extremely large numbers of transactions for
the purpose of increasing commissions;  7.    Failure by the defendant company to exercise
proper supervision;  8.    Clear conflict of interest with [Roy’s]
alleged supervisor, [Claudio] Vecchio, who received a 50 percent share of the
defendant’s commissions.  14                              
On the question of quantum, Lebrun J. adopted the report prepared by the
expert, Dorval, stating that the method used to establish the plaintiffs’
losses was in accordance with the provisions of arts. 1073 and 1074 C.C.L.C.
and the principle established in Hodgkinson v. Simms, [1994] 3 S.C.R.
377.  He therefore found the respondents jointly and severally liable to pay to
Armand Laflamme $12,232.55, and to the appellant company $1,466,141.08.  The
latter amount consists of the quantum of $1,078,420 established by Dorval, to
which Lebrun J. added Roy’s commissions of $111,812.15 and interest on the
margin account totalling $275,908.93, [translation]
“these amounts being recoverable in view of the evidence that they were
acquired illegally and in breach of rules which are matters of public order”
(p. 2704).  Court of Appeal of Quebec, [1998] R.J.Q. 765  15                              
On March 16, 1998, the Court of Appeal allowed the respondents’ appeal
in part and reduced the total damages awarded to the appellant company to
$70,723.79.  16                              
On the issue of the respondents’ liability, Letarte J.A., writing
for the Court of Appeal, expressed the view that the trial judge had instructed
himself properly as regards the nature of the faults committed by Roy. 
However, in the opinion of Letarte J.A., the Laflamme family had gradually
become capable of managing their portfolio, and he felt that this should be
identified as the point where the causal connection between the faults
committed by the respondents and the damage suffered by the appellant company
was broken.  He identified the following errors as justifying intervention by
the Court of Appeal (at p. 771):  [translation]  a)    the calculation by the trial judge
took into account the Burns-Fry period, which the parties had agreed to
exclude;  b)    that calculation ignored the change
in the discretionary nature of the portfolio’s management during the period
under consideration;  c)    by establishing the total loss as of
the date on which the portfolio was closed in April 1990 he failed to take into
account the respondent’s obligation to mitigate the damages by closing the
account earlier;  d)    the findings in the Dorval report
relating to the accumulated losses already included the commissions and
interest on the margin account;  e)    the amount of the losses did not take
into account lost profits.   [translation]  Between
the transfer and the letter directing that the account be closed, on March 2,
1990, a number of facts could have prompted the Laflamme family to respond
earlier.  By the spring of 1989 they had sufficient information on the stock
market transactions and were aware of the status of their portfolio, and their
confidence in Roy was beginning to be seriously eroded.  For one thing, the accountant, Martineau, had
warned them of the danger of investing in speculative securities using an
ever-growing line of credit.  These hesitations, and even questions, went on for
several months before the Laflamme family decided to give their instructions to
the appellants, in short, to take control of their stock market transactions
themselves.  At what point in time were the Laflamme family
capable of realizing that it was desirable for them to sever all ties with the
appellants and call them to account?  On the evidence, this point at least had
to come during the period following the meeting at Le Bouvier restaurant in
May 1989.  As regards the period prior to this, I must rely on the
findings of the trial judge regarding the circumstances that affected their
capacity to make an informed decision in this respect.  [Emphasis in original.]   [translation]  With
respect, I am of the opinion that the Laflamme family’s loss of confidence in
Roy developed gradually over a period beginning with the meeting on
May 3, 1989, and continuing to the end of the period for thinking
matters over referred to in the letter of May 5, 1989 and that at the
end of that period, the respondent was sufficiently well informed to decide to
close the account and stop the haemorrhage.  I must therefore find that the
final date, in terms of calculating the respondent’s accumulated loss, was June
5, 1989.  20                              
The Court of Appeal accordingly varied the trial decision and fixed the
total award at $70,723.79, representing the lost value of the portfolio ($23,963)
and the lost profit ($46,760.79).  3.  Analysis   22                              
The issue is rather the scope of the mandate and the time over which
that mandate extended, and the associated duty to mitigate damages.  A.  Law      26                              
Thus, the manager makes most of the decisions relating to the portfolio
and the make up of the portfolio.  The scope of his management authority and
the exercise of his discretion will, however, depend on any restrictions that
are imposed by law or agreement.  In particular, the agreement may expressly
circumscribe the manager’s authority and discretion, for instance by giving the
client the option of confirming certain transactions.  Such limitations may
also be implicit in the client’s investment objectives or circumstances.   28                              
As in the case of any mandate, the mandate between a manager and his
client is imbued with the concept of trust, since the client places his trust
in the manager — the mandatary — to manage his affairs.  The very definition of
mandate in art. 1701 C.C.L.C. conveys this concept.  As one author
has written, the word “confie” (“commits”, in the English version)
implies a degree of trust, on the part of the person granting the mandate, in
the person receiving it.  This element of trust explains, for instance, the
mandator’s authority to revoke the mandate at any time (art. 1756 C.C.L.C.;
art. 2176 C.C.Q.).  This spirit of trust is reflected in the weight
of the obligations that rest on the manager, which will be heavier where the
mandator is vulnerable, lacks specialized knowledge, is dependent on the
mandatary, and where the mandate is important.  The corresponding requirements
of fair dealing, good faith and diligence on the part of the manager in
relation to his client will thus be more stringent.  29                              
The content of the obligations that rest on the manager will vary with
the object of the mandate and the circumstances.  One of the most fundamental
of these obligations is that the manager exercise reasonable skill and all the
care of a prudent administrator (art. 1710 C.C.L.C.).  The conduct
expected is not that of the best of managers, nor the worst.  Rather, it is the
conduct of a reasonably prudent and diligent manager performing similar
functions in an analogous situation.  Thus the portfolio manager’s conduct must
[translation] “be analysed having
regard to his role as a specialist in this kind of transaction, and to the
practices of each profession” (L’Heureux, supra, at p. 425).  The Regulation
respecting securities, (1983) 115 G.O. II, 1269, further defines this
obligation by requiring that in his relations with his client the manager use
“the care that one might expect of an informed professional placed in the same
circumstances” (s. 235).  He must also deal in good faith, honestly and
fairly with his clients (s. 234.1).  30                              
The mandate also imposes an obligation for the manager to inform his
client and, in certain circumstances, a duty to advise him.  The obligation to
inform, now codified in art. 2139 C.C.Q., requires that the
manager, as mandatary, inform the mandator of the facts and of the progress of
his management.  Professor Claude Fabien summarizes the object of this
obligation as follows (“Les règles du mandat”, in Chambre des notaires du
Québec, Extraits du Répertoire de droit — Mandat — Doctrine
— Document 1  (1986), No. 127):  [translation]  The
purpose of this obligation is to avoid the mandator doing things that are
inconsistent, or to enable him to change his instructions or react to the
circumstances.  This obligation also implies that the mandatary will remain in
contact with the mandator to allow communication in both directions.  The
mandatary’s obligation to inquire from the mandator in the event of doubt
concerning his instructions or authority could also be included.  [References
omitted.]   [translation]  Plainly,
a mandator using the services of a professional as an intermediary in his
relations with third parties expects a great deal from that intermediary.  It
is not merely a matter of performing a legal act in his absence, since such an
outcome could in most cases be achieved by means of modern telecommunications. 
The mandator also wishes to have his interests better taken care of than
they would have been had he acted directly.  This is the reason for the
existence of certain professional mandataries such as insurance brokers or
freight forwarding agents. [Emphasis in original; references omitted.]  32                              
For the same reasons, a securities portfolio manager is also subject to
this duty.  33                              
The duty to provide advice requires that the manager make his knowledge
and expertise available to the client, and that he use them better to serve the
client’s interests in light of the client’s objectives.  However, the duty to
provide advice is not the same as the obligation to inform, the substance of
the latter being more objectively quantifiable. As Pétel says, supra, at
pp. 155-56, [translation] “advice
is not just any kind of information.  It is directed information, designed to
guide its recipient toward a decision consistent with his interests”.  This
duty relates not only to the risks associated with certain initiatives, but
also to the very nature of the matters agreed to between mandatary and
mandator, especially where the mandator is a lay person.  Thus, the duty to
advise extends to everything involved in the mandate to manage the portfolio,
including the consequences for the client of any change in the object of the
mandate.  The manager being subject to an ongoing obligation to manage, this
duty continues as long as the object of the mandate given by the client to the
manager remains unchanged and could even survive the termination of the mandate
(art. 1709 C.C.L.C.; art. 2182 C.C.Q.).  B.  Application to the Facts  35                              
As noted earlier, the actual liability of the respondents is not in
issue.  The Superior Court and the Court of Appeal agree that they have
incurred liability through their actions.  The respondents have not appealed
those findings to this Court.  36                              
I agree with the findings of the trial judge in that regard.  The faults
committed by the respondent Roy are apparent from the record.  He failed to
comply with the conduct required of a prudent and diligent manager, in that he
failed to construct an organized and diversified portfolio, carried out
transactions that were inconsistent with the client’s general instructions,
acquired speculative securities and failed to have regard to his client’s
investment objectives.  As a mandatary, the respondent Roy also failed to deal
fairly and honestly with his client, as he was expected to do.  There could be
no clearer illustration of that breach than his failure to comply with the
Laflamme family’s instructions concerning the amounts to be invested in the
stock market and the immediate cessation of transactions on margin.  37                              
The issue which arises is the point in time when the respondents’
liability ceased.  That point in time may be decisive, in view of the nature of
the damages in this case, which resulted not from losses caused by an easily
singled out act, such as an unauthorized transaction or the failure to act on
the client’s instructions to buy or sell a particular security, but rather from
the on-going mismanagement of a portfolio whose value fluctuates continuously
with the prices of the securities of which it is made up.  The point at
which the causal connection was broken may then have a major impact on the
value of the portfolio, and consequently on the quantum of damages.  38                              
One of the grounds on which the Court of Appeal intervened was that the
respondents’ liability should have ended on June 5, 1989.  According
to Letarte J.A., the trial judge’s calculation of the damages ignored the
change in the discretionary nature of the management of the portfolio.  He also
held that by basing the determination of the amount of the loss on the date on
which the account was closed, in April 1990, Lebrun J. erred by failing to
take into account the appellant’s duty to mitigate its damages.  (i)  Change in Object of the Mandate    41                              
With respect, the intervention by the Court of Appeal on this issue
seems unwarranted.  No patent error by the trial judge that would justify
reassessment of the evidence was identified.  The principle that an appellate
court must exercise deference with respect to a trial judge’s findings of fact
has been clearly established by this Court.  La Forest J. reiterated
that principle in Hodgkinson v. Simms, supra, at pp. 425-26:   42                           
Despite the fact that the Court of Appeal indicated that it agreed with
the trial judge’s findings, it erred by nevertheless drawing its own
conclusions concerning the intentions of the Laflamme family, the
interpretation of the letter of May 5, and the object of the mandate.  43                              
The trial judge clearly rejected the interpretation of the letters sent
by the Laflamme family as indicating that they were gradually taking control of
the management of their portfolio.  In his view, those letters showed that the
Laflamme family [translation]
“were mystified by the ‘play’ of the stock market, that they had only a minimal
understanding of the transactions carried out on their behalf by the defendant,
that it was their accountant and auditor who made them aware, when preparing
the financial statements, of the mess that the defendant was making of things”
(p. 2701).  More specifically, concerning the letter of July 15, 1988, Lebrun
J. pointed out that, in the three experts’ opinions, that letter [translation] “contained numerous
contradictions, and demonstrated an obvious lack of knowledge on the part of
the person who signed it, as well as unequivocal proof of the need for safe
investments of members of the Laflamme family concerned” (pp. 2697-98).  44                              
Nor, would I add, with respect, do the facts support the Court of
Appeal’s interpretation of the letter of May 5.  The Court placed great weight
on the events of May 1989, to conclude that this was a turning point in
relations between the parties.  However, the testimony of the parties
concerning the meeting on May 3, 1989, at Le Bouvier restaurant
were contradictory, as the Court of Appeal noted (at p. 773):  [translation]  Roy’s
description of the meeting on May 3 was flatly contradicted by the
Laflamme family, whom the trial judge believed “without the slightest
hesitation”.  Roy claims to have strongly suggested that the Campeau shares be
sold, despite the objections of the Laflamme family.  They maintain exactly the
opposite: Roy painted a glowing picture of huge profits for them, and added
that he was keeping the same shares in his father’s portfolio, and that he was
even considering buying them himself: “. . . you won’t lose anything . . .”.  45                              
While he did not make a specific finding concerning the events of
May 1989, Lebrun J. did make a general finding concerning the credibility
of the witnesses.  On the whole, he believed the Laflamme family.  46                              
There is nothing to indicate that the parties stopped to consider
changing the mandate by terminating discretionary management.  In that case,
Roy would have been obliged to inform the Laflamme family, who were not
knowledgeable investors, of the effects of this change on the management of the
account, to ensure that an informed decision was made.  This stems from his
obligation to act in good faith.  He would then also have been required to
advise them concerning the implications of that decision and, at the very
least, tell them clearly that they alone would now be responsible for all
aspects of management of the portfolio.  In fact, the Laflamme family remained
under the impression that Roy was still handling their affairs.  47                              
Thus, in the circumstances, the letter of May 5 was not an express
or implied revocation of the management mandate given to the respondents nor a
change in its object or their obligations.  As we have seen, the degree of
discretion that a dealer enjoys in managing a portfolio may vary.  There is
nothing to prevent the scope of that discretion being limited or the client
being involved in the portfolio’s management from time to time.  Intervention
of that sort by the client is possible without it amounting to a change in the
object of the mandate or to a revocation of the mandate.  In view of the length
of the relationship between the parties, the Laflamme family’s lack of
knowledge concerning securities markets and investment management, and the size
of the portfolio and role of the mandatary, much more would have been required
in the instant case in order for there to have been an implied change to or
revocation of the management mandate.  48                              
I would also add that the conduct of the respondent Roy following
receipt of the letter of May 5 is not consistent with such an
interpretation of the letter’s effect.  Not only was there no communication
between the parties subsequent to that letter, but quite a number of
transactions were in fact carried out by Roy relating to the appellant’s
portfolio.  The respondents claim that only 18 administrative transactions were
carried out, such as cashing matured government bonds and performing
obligations incurred by way of options.  However, the account statements in the
record show that, while he did so less frequently, the respondent Roy bought
and sold a number of securities without instructions from the appellant. 
During the hearing in this Court, the respondents in fact had some difficulty
explaining these transactions.  The only possible conclusion is thus that Roy
continued to manage the portfolio on a discretionary basis despite the letter
of May 5.   50                              
Accordingly, the discussions of May 1989 did not change the object
of the mandate between the Laflamme family and the respondents, and Roy, the
dealer, continued to be subject to an ongoing management obligation.  The Court
of Appeal erred when it intervened on this ground and substituted its own
interpretation of the facts for the trial judge’s interpretation, absent patent
error on his part.  (ii)  Mitigation of Damages  51                              
The Court of Appeal and the respondents also state that the Laflamme
family ought to have acted earlier to mitigate the damages resulting from
mismanagement of the portfolio.  The Laflamme family did nothing after the
letter of May 5, 1989.  Should they have taken action?  Did they have
an obligation to terminate the mandate and change the investments?  52                              
Civil law imposes an obligation on a creditor to mitigate damages.  This
obligation, which is now codified in art. 1479 C.C.Q., requires
that a creditor avoid aggravating the risk [translation]
“by taking the measures that would have been taken, in the same circumstances,
by a reasonably prudent and diligent person” (Baudouin and Deslauriers, supra,
No. 1256).  The specific circumstances of each situation must therefore be
considered in assessing what conduct is expected of a creditor.  53                              
In the case of injury resulting from mismanagement of a securities
portfolio, a flexible approach must be taken in determining what constitutes a reasonable
period of time for the client to act and mitigate the damages.  In particular,
regard must be had to the client’s level of experience and knowledge of
investments, and to the complexity of the situation.  54                              
I would add that the sense of trust that is characteristic of a contract
of mandate also has a significant impact on the state of mind of a client who
is the victim of a fault committed by a manager.  In this case, that trust lay
in the belief acquired in the professional merit of the manager, as a result of
which a client, especially one who is not knowledgeable, may be unable or at
least reluctant to believe that the manager is incompetent.  Both that trust
and the confusion resulting from a loss of trust will make it particularly
difficult for the victim to take charge of the situation.  Awareness of the
extent of the injury dawns more slowly.  This situation, which the manager
himself has created by representing himself as a professional worthy of trust,
must be taken into account before blaming the victim for any want of diligence
in mitigating damages, especially since the measures to be taken were not
obvious and responsibility for taking or advising those measures rested
primarily on the respondents, as knowledgeable dealers and managers.  A number
of options were available: transfer the portfolio to another manager, sell the
securities held, or hold onto them in the hope that they would go up in value. 
Obviously, it is easy to identify the right course of action in hindsight.  At
the time however the decision was one that called for an assessment of highly
complex risks, and that involved risks of its own.  The Laflamme family held
onto the securities.  Should they be faulted for that?  In the circumstances,
we must conclude that they are not to blame.  55                              
Liquidating or reorganizing the portfolio would not have been an easy
task for the Laflamme family.  Playing the stock market requires a thorough
knowledge of finance, economics and the dynamics of securities markets. 
Professionals make their careers, and sometimes even lose them, by their choice
of timing of securities transactions.  In this case, the Laflamme family were
not dealing with one investment, or a few investments, that they should or
should not have disposed of.  On the contrary, the portfolio, which was Armand
Laflamme’s retirement fund, was composed of a number of securities on both the
Canadian and American markets.  It was made up of shares, warrants, call
options, put options, mutual funds, debentures and government bonds —  in
short, a range of sometimes highly sophisticated financial instruments.  We
should not forget the complexity of the situation facing the Laflamme family.  56                              
In order to prevail on this issue, the respondents had to show that the
Laflamme family were negligent when they failed to intervene in the
respondents’ management earlier in the hope of minimizing the losses.  The
trial judge noted the state of mind and the knowledge of the Laflamme family,
who held onto securities in reliance on assurances given by the respondent Roy,
whom they trusted.  The losses caused by the bad advice and grossly negligent
management by Roy cannot be laid at their doorstep.  It is reasonable to assume
that an average investor faced with similar circumstances would have been
indecisive and hesitant when faced with the various options:  selling the
securities and taking the loss, holding onto them and hoping that they would go
back up in value, or transferring the account to another manager.  Nor was any
evidence tendered to suggest that, on the information available to them at the
time, any of these options would have been beneficial.  For all these reasons,
the Laflamme family cannot be faulted for failing to take further measures in
the hope of minimizing the losses.  Those losses were sustained as a result of
mismanagement by the respondents, which, as the trial judge found, continued
until the account was closed.  57                              
The respondents cited the decision of the Quebec Court of Appeal in Bazinet
v. Wood Gundy Inc., [1997] R.R.A. 273.  That decision is not applicable
here.  In that case, the investor had made an investment on the basis of
incomplete information provided by the dealer.  One year later, concerned about
the mediocre performance of his investment, he got the straight facts from
another dealer with the same brokerage firm, who told him that it was in fact a
highly speculative investment.  Nonetheless, he held onto the securities.  In
the opinion of the Court of Appeal, the investor then had to bear the adverse
consequences of holding onto the securities with full knowledge of the risk. 
The nature or termination of a management mandate or the measures to be taken
were not at issue, but rather, a risk assumed with full knowledge of the
situation, resulting from holding onto an investment that was not in compliance
with the instructions given at the outset.  58                              
Absent any patent error on the part of the trial judge, the Court of
Appeal erred in blaming the appellant for failing to take measures to mitigate
the damages.  It cannot be concluded from the evidence in the record that the
appellant’s behaviour, in failing to liquidate or withdraw its portfolio in the
spring of 1989, was not what a reasonably prudent and diligent person would
have done in the same circumstances.  59                              
Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, I believe that the Court of
Appeal erred in holding June 5, 1989, to be the end of the damage
assessment period.  The trial judge committed no error in holding April 1990
to be the end of the assessment period.  C.  Quantum of Damages  60                              
The appellant is entitled to compensatory damages because of the
wrongful conduct of the respondents.  The total amount of the damages is made
up of the losses incurred by the appellant and the profits of which it was
deprived (art. 1073 C.C.L.C.; art. 1611 C.C.Q.).  For
the foregoing reasons, those damages must be assessed for the period from
April 1988, the date on which the portfolio was transferred from Burns Fry
to the respondent company, to April 1990.   62                              
The appellant agrees that the trial judge erred when he added the
commissions and interest to the quantum of damages assessed by Dorval.  Those
amounts were included by Dorval in his calculation of damages, so they should
not have been added.  For that reason, we cannot restore the findings of the
trial judge in their entirety.  63                              
The appellant submitted an analysis of the performance of its portfolio
for the relevant period.  That analysis shows, inter alia, the total
principal amount initially transferred to the respondent company, the monthly
return and the total accumulated losses, and takes into account the value of
withdrawals from the account.  It also shows the weighted rates of return and
the market value of the portfolio if a passive investment strategy had been
followed.  That analysis is based on the Dorval report, which was accepted by
Lebrun J., and on which he relied in calculating the damages.  Based on that
analysis, the appellant is seeking damages in the amount of $924,374,
representing the loss it sustained and the profit of which it has been
deprived.  Absent a counter-analysis or objections to that analysis by the
respondents, I accept the amount determined by the appellant.  4.  Disposition  64                              
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of
the Court of Appeal in this case, restore the judgment of the Superior Court in
part, find the respondents jointly and severally liable to pay to the appellant
the amount of $924,374, plus interest at the legal rate from the date of
service and the additional indemnity, with costs in all courts, including
expert witness fees.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Lavery, de Billy, Québec.  Solicitors for the respondents:  Mendelsohn Rosentzveig
Shacter, Montréal.    