 The Syndicat national des employés de Fédération des affaires sociales (C.S.N.) and the Confederation of National Trade Unions (C.N.T.U.)          Appellants  v.  The Public Curator, Rémi Lussier, and the Public Curator in the person of Nicole Fontaine, in her capacity as curator ex officio of Honorine Abel                                                  Respondents  and  The Attorney General of Quebec                                                     Mis
en cause   File No.:  24511.  1996:  May 2; 1996:  October 3.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec        Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.  (1) Rules of evidence in class actions  The provisions of Book Nine of the Code of Civil
Procedure relating to class actions have not changed the rules of evidence
in civil matters in Quebec.  Like the other rules of evidence, proof by
presumptions of fact, provided they are sufficiently serious, precise and
concordant, is therefore applicable to this type of action.  Moreover,
art. 1241 C.C.L.C. does not change the rules of evidence in
relation to class actions.  This provision deals only with the consequence of
the judgment on a class action in terms of the presumption of res judicata.  In this case, it cannot be concluded that the trial
judge relied on the statutory provisions applicable to class actions to create
a legal presumption of similarity in assessing the moral prejudice suffered by
the patients.  Rather, he sought to find an element of damage common to
everyone, and only after reviewing the evidence as a whole did he find enough
evidence to be able to infer that there were serious, precise and concordant
presumptions that all the patients had at least suffered discomfort.  Besides
relying on presumptions of fact, he also took into account the evidence as a
whole, including the testimony, inter alia that of expert witnesses, in
reaching the conclusion that all the elements of civil liability (fault,
prejudice and causal connection) had been established on the balance of
probabilities.  Since the trial judge committed no error of law and no error in
the conclusions he drew from the evidence, the Court of Appeal was correct not
to intervene.  (2)  Moral prejudice  Quebec civil law supports the conception that the
right to compensation for moral prejudice is not conditional on the victim’s
ability to profit or benefit from monetary compensation.  This objective
characterization of moral prejudice is more consistent with the fundamental
principles of civil liability than the subjective conception.  In Quebec, the
primary function of the rules of civil liability is to compensate for
prejudice.  This objective requires that there be compensation for the loss
suffered because of the wrongful conduct, regardless of whether the victim is
capable of enjoying the substitute pleasures.  In order to characterize the
nature of the moral prejudice for purposes of compensation, the purely subjective
conception thus has no place in the civil law, since the reason that damages
may be recovered is not because the victim may benefit from them, but rather
because of the very fact that there is a moral prejudice.  The victim’s
condition or capacity to perceive are irrelevant in relation to the right to
compensation for the moral prejudice.  With respect to the evaluation of the moral prejudice,
although the functional approach does not apply in Quebec civil law to the
determination of the right to moral damages, it is nonetheless relevant,
together with the conceptual and personal approaches, when it comes to the
calculation of such damages.  In Quebec civil law, these three approaches to
calculating the amount necessary to compensate for moral prejudice apply
jointly and thereby encourage a personalized evaluation of the moral
prejudice.  With respect to the calculation of compensation, the trial judge’s
decision was sound.  He took into account a panoply of factors that included
all of the conceptual, personal and functional approaches, and the quantum of
the moral damages he awarded was the result of a meticulous examination of the
evidence.  Since the appellants did not demonstrate any error in this regard,
the Court of Appeal rightly declined to intervene to vary the trial judgment
with respect to this head of damages.  (3)  Exemplary damages  The prejudice in the nature of temporary discomfort
suffered by the hospital’s patients, which the trial judge characterized as “minor
psychological distress”, does not amount to interference with the right to
personal inviolability guaranteed by s. 1  of the Charter .  The
common meaning of the word "inviolability" suggests that the
interference with that right must leave some marks, some sequelae which, while
not necessarily physical or permanent, exceed a certain threshold.  The
interference must affect the victim’s physical, psychological or emotional
equilibrium in something more than a fleeting manner.  The evidence does not establish
in this case that the patients suffered any permanent prejudice giving rise to
psychological or medical sequelae.  Although the discomfort suffered by the patients was
transient, however, it constituted interference with the safeguard of their
dignity, despite the fact that these patients might have had no sense of
modesty.  The right to the safeguard of personal dignity guaranteed in
s. 4 of the Charter addresses interferences with the fundamental
attributes of a human being which violate the respect to which every person is
entitled.  The right to personal dignity, unlike the concept of inviolability,
does not require that there be permanent consequences in order for interference
with that right to be found.  In considering the situation of the mentally
disabled, the nature of the care that is normally provided to them is of
fundamental importance.  The low level of awareness that some patients had of
their environment may undoubtedly influence their own conception of dignity,
but when dealing with a document such as the Charter, it is more
important that we turn our attention to an objective appreciation of dignity
and what that requires in terms of the necessary care and services.  The
numerous and varying inconveniences engendered by the illegal strikes not only
constituted a moral prejudice under the general rules of civil liability, but
also interfered with the right guaranteed by s. 4 of the Charter.  The second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter
provides that in case of unlawful and intentional interference with a right
recognized by the Charter, a tribunal may condemn the person guilty of
it to exemplary damages.  There is unlawful interference with a right protected
by the Charter where the infringement of that right results from
wrongful conduct.  A person’s conduct will be characterized as wrongful if he
or she violates a standard of conduct considered reasonable in the
circumstances under the general law or, in the case of certain protected
rights, a standard set out in the Charter itself.  For unlawful
interference to be characterized as intentional, the result of the wrongful
conduct must be desired.  There is thus unlawful and intentional interference
within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 when the person who
commits the unlawful interference has a state of mind that implies a desire or
intent to cause the consequences of his or her wrongful conduct, or when that
person acts with full knowledge of the immediate and natural or at least
extremely probable consequences that his or her conduct will cause.  This test
is not as strict as specific intent, but it does go beyond simple negligence. 
In addition to being consistent with the wording of s. 49, this
interpretation of the concept of  “unlawful and intentional interference” is in
keeping with the preventive and deterrent role of exemplary damages, which
suggests that only conduct the consequences of which were either intended or
known by the person who committed the unlawful interference, and which therefore
could have been avoided, should be punished by an award of such damages.  In
this case, the Court of Appeal was correct in concluding that the interference
with the right to personal dignity was “unlawful” since the prejudice suffered
by the patients was caused by conduct in the nature of a fault within the
meaning of art. 1053 C.C.L.C., and “intentional” because those
responsible for it intended the consequences of the fault they committed.  The
appellants backed the illegal strikes and, apparently, on the evidence as a
whole, orchestrated and incited them.  The pressure that the appellants wanted
to bring to bear on the employer inevitably involved disrupting the services
and care normally provided to the hospital’s patients, and necessarily involved
intentional interference with their dignity.  Even where unlawful and intentional interference
exists, the award and the quantum of exemplary damages remain discretionary. 
However, this discretion is not absolute.  It is guided by various factors that
have been developed by the courts and are now codified in art. 1621 C.C.Q. 
In this case, the Court of Appeal’s decision to award exemplary damages is
consistent with the established criteria.  With respect to the calculation of
the appropriate amount, since the Court of Appeal committed no error of
principle, the quantum of the joint and several award of exemplary damages must
be upheld.  The punitive and deterrent function of exemplary damages does not
prevent the appellants from being condemned jointly and severally to pay them.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited   Act to
amend the Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms,
S.Q. 1982, c. 61, s. 1.    Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64,  arts. 1457, 1474, 1621, 2803, 2811,
2846, 2848, 2849, 2860.    Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, G.A. Res. 217 A (III), U.N. Doc. A/810, at
 71 (1948).  Authors Cited    Chartier, Yves.  La réparation
du préjudice dans la responsabilité civile.  Paris:  Dalloz, 1983.  Ducharme, Léo.  Précis de la
preuve, 4e éd.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur, 1993.  Ferland, Denis, et Benoît Emery.  Précis
de procédure civile du Québec, vol. 2, 2e éd.  Cowansville,
Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1994.  Gardner, Daniel.  L'évaluation
du préjudice corporel.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1994.  Josserand, Louis.  Cours de
droit civil positif français, t. II, 3e éd.  Paris:  Librairie
du Recueil Sirey,  1939.  Jutras, Daniel.  “Pretium et
précision” (1990), 69 Can. Bar Rev. 203.  Le Roy, Max.  L'évaluation du
préjudice corporel, 12e éd. Paris:  Litec, 1993.  Mazeaud, Léon et Henri, et Jean
Mazeaud.  Leçons de droit civil, t. 2, 8e éd. par François
Chabas.  Paris:  Éditions Montchrestien, 1991.  Ogus, A. I.  “Damages
for Lost Amenities: for a Foot, a Feeling or a Function?” (1972), 35 Modern
L. Rev. 1.  Ontario.  Law Reform Commission.  Report
on Exemplary Damages.  Toronto:  The Commission, 1991.  Perret, Louis.  “De l'impact de la
Charte des droits et libertés de la personne sur le droit civil des contrats et
de la responsabilité au Québec” (1981), 12 R.G.D. 121.  Petit Robert 1.  Paris:  Le Robert,  1989, “dignité”, “intégrité”.  Planiol, Marcel, et Georges
Ripert.  Traité pratique de droit civil français, t. 6,  2e  éd. 
Paris:  L.G.D.J., 1952.  Roy, Pauline.  “La difficile
intégration du concept de dommages exemplaires en droit québécois”, dans Responsabilité
civile et les dommages (en constante évolution).  Toronto:  Canadian
Institute, 1990.  Roy, Pauline.  Les dommages
exemplaires en droit québécois:  instrument de revalorisation de la
responsabilité civile, 1995 (thèse de doctorat en droit, Université de
Montréal, Montréal).   Starck, Boris.  Obligations,
vol. 1, 4e éd. par Henri Roland et Laurent Boyer.  Paris: 
Litec, 1991.  Viney, Geneviève.  L'indemnisation
des victimes d'accidents de la circulation.  Paris:  L.G.D.J., 1992.  Wéry, André.  “L'évaluation judiciaire
des dommages non pécuniaires résultant de blessures corporelles:  du
pragmatisme de l'arbitraire?”, [1986] R.R.A. 355.   Clément Groleau and Thierry
Bériault, for the appellants.  Denis Sauvé and Pierre
Deschamps, for the respondents.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by   2.                            As a
preliminary matter, I shall reproduce the relevant statutory provisions and
review the facts and judgments.  I.  Applicable Statutory Provisions  3.                            The provisions
that are relevant to the question of the rules of evidence that apply to class
actions are, first, arts. 1205, 1238 and 1241 of the Civil Code of Lower
Canada ("C.C.L.C."), which provide:  1205.  Proof may be made by writings, by testimony, by
presumptions, by the confession of the party or by his oath, according to the
rules declared in this chapter and in the manner provided in the Code of Civil
Procedure.  1238.  Presumptions are either established by law or arise from
facts which are left to the discretion of the courts.  1241.  The authority of a final judgment (res judicata)
is a presumption juris et de jure; it applies only to that which has
been the object of the judgment, and when the demand is founded on the same
cause, is between the same parties acting in the same qualities, and is for the
same thing as in the action adjudged upon.  In the case of a class action
provided for by Book Nine of the Code of Civil Procedure, the judgment deciding
questions of law or of fact dealt with collectively has authority as res
judicata between the parties and all members of the group who have not
requested exclusion from the group.  These provisions must be analysed in the light of arts. 1031 and
1045 C.C.P., in the section on class actions, which read as follows:  1031.  The
court orders collective recovery if the evidence produced enables the
establishment with sufficient accuracy of the total amount of the claims of the
members; it then determines the amount owed by the debtor even if the identity
of each of the members or the exact amount of their claims is not established.  1045.  The
court may, at any stage of the proceedings in a class action, prescribe
measures designed to hasten their progress and to simplify the proof, if they
do not prejudice a party or the members; it may also order the publication of a
notice to the members when it considers it necessary for the preservation of
their rights.  4.                            The issue of
exemplary damages brings in ss. 1 , 4 and 49 of the Charter, which read
as follows:  1.  Every
human being has a right to life, and to personal security, inviolability and
freedom.  He also possesses juridical
personality.   4.  Every
person has a right to the safeguard of his dignity, honour and reputation.   49.  Any
unlawful interference with any right or freedom recognized by this Charter
entitles the victim to obtain the cessation of such interference and
compensation for the moral or material prejudice resulting therefrom.  In case of unlawful and
intentional interference, the tribunal may, in addition, condemn the person
guilty of it to exemplary damages.  II.  Factual Background     8.                            The relief
claimed specified that the respondent was seeking $300 per day as compensatory
damages for each of the 703 patients, which damages were caused by the loss of
access to the care and services normally provided, this being an interference
with their right to security, inviolability and dignity (for a total of
$6,959,700).  In addition, the respondent claimed $150 per day for each patient
as exemplary damages under the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter,
contending that the interference with their rights was unlawful and intentional
within the meaning of that paragraph (for a total of $3,479,850).  III.  Judgments  Superior Court  9.                            Lesage J. of
the Superior Court of Quebec, District of Frontenac, disposed of all the
interlocutory motions from the time the claim was commenced.  On February 26,
1987, he allowed a motion for particulars in part (art. 168(7) C.C.P.),
but denied the portion of the application relating to the health of the
patients, as noted in their medical records.  On August 5, 1987, the Quebec
Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal brought by the appellants from that
decision, and on January 25, 1988 this Court dismissed the application for
leave to appeal, [1988] 1 S.C.R. xiv.  On June 17, 1988, the trial judge
made an order striking out allegation 24 from the defences, which had relied on
art. 1022 C.C.P. in seeking to have the judgment authorizing
the instituting of the class action set aside.  10.                          By final
judgment dated December 6, 1989, [1990] R.J.Q. 359, Lesage J. allowed the
respondent’s action in part.  He dealt first with the appellants’
objection under art. 1022 C.C.P., which he rejected.  He then
examined the evidence relating to the fault committed by the appellants.  He
concluded that the appellants had committed a civil fault by provoking,
participating in or inciting the events of October and November 1984.  These
two aspects of the trial judgment were not challenged in this Court; the sole
question in respect of the appellants’ civil liability relates to the
prejudice.  11.                          The evidence
establishing that the patients of the Hospital suffered prejudice as a result
of the work stoppages included, inter alia, the testimony of the people
who replaced the striking employees and of expert witnesses.  Because of their
mental disabilities, none of the patients was able to testify.  The evidence
before the trial judge related mainly  to the care usually provided at the
Hospital in comparison to the care received during the illegal strikes.  12.                          After an
exhaustive review of the evidence, the judge concluded, first, that the
representative, Honorine Abel, had the necessary capacity to suffer moral
prejudice, and second, that she did in fact suffer not insecurity, but
discomfort, that is, [translation]
"a feeling perceived by an individual who is subjected to conditions that
interfere with his or her physical or psychological welfare" (p. 390).   14.                          Lastly, the
trial judge declined to award exemplary damages under the Charter since
in his view that remedy was not available, having regard to the nature of the
prejudice.  In addition, he found that personal security, a right that is
protected by s. 1  of the Charter , had not been violated in this
instance since the security involves a physical, and not a moral, dimension. 
Moreover, he found that the patients suffered no interference with their
dignity, within the meaning of s. 4 of the Charter, since in his
eyes the mentally disabled persons in question had no sense of modesty.   Court of Appeal (Nichols,
Tourigny and Fish JJ.A.)   17.                          On March 1,
1990, the Court of Appeal dismissed the appellants’ application to join the
Attorney General of Quebec in order to challenge the constitutionality of the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure concerning the class action
procedure.   19.                          The appellants
argued, first, that the trial judge, relying on the provisions that apply to
class actions, changed the rules of evidence in order to evaluate the prejudice
suffered, in that, in their view, he created a legal presumption of similarity
of prejudice for the benefit of the members of the group.  The court
rejected that argument and stated  rather that the trial judge had used the
mechanism of the presumption of fact, a method of proof permitted in a civil
action.  20.                          Furthermore, the
majority of the court was of the opinion that the provisions relating
specifically to class actions had not changed the rules of evidence, and
therefore that they applied to such an action in the same manner as in any
civil action.  Nichols J.A., who was in the minority on this point, found that
the rules of evidence in class actions differ substantially from the rules that
are ordinarily applicable.  The source of that change, in his view, may be
found in art. 1241 C.C.L.C., which provides that questions of law
and of fact may be dealt with collectively for the purposes of class actions. 
According to his approach, once prejudice to the members of the group is
established with certainty, it is not necessary to rely on sufficiently
serious, precise and concordant presumptions in order to reach the result at
which the trial judge arrived.  21.                          With respect to
the assessment of the evidence, the court dismissed the argument that the
testimony of the patients themselves was essential to establish the existence
of the moral prejudice of discomfort.  The court was of the opinion that there
was more than sufficient evidence to establish that all of the patients of the
Hospital were deprived of the care and services made necessary by their
particular situation, which constitutes a prejudice which is foreseeable and
certain.   23.                          On the question
of the evaluation of the moral prejudice, the court rejected the approach
suggested which, in its view, was based on what is called the functional
approach, a common law concept incompatible with the fundamental principles of
the civil law.  The court was of the opinion that, in civil law, compensation
is owed not to secure substitute pleasures for the victim, but rather to make
up for the objective loss suffered by the victim.  24.                          In terms of the
calculation of moral damages, the court found that the trial judge did not err
in law and that, while the amount of the compensation awarded was high, it was
not patently disproportionate or unreasonable.  Thus, the Court of Appeal
upheld the quantum of compensatory damages as determined at trial.   26.                          With respect to
the intentional nature of the interference with a protected right, under the
provisions of the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter, the
majority of the Court of Appeal first examined that Court’s own decisions on
this point and also the case law of the common law provinces and of the United
States.  The majority was of the opinion that [translation] "[i]n order for the interference to be
intentional, it must have been committed in circumstances that indicate a
determined intent to cause the damage resulting from the violation.  The
conduct of the person who commits the prejudicial act must have been wilful,
knowing and deliberate" (p. 2804).  In this instance, the appellants
allegedly engaged in malicious conduct, exhibited [translation] "knowing indifference" and adopted an
attitude absolutely contrary to the ordinary standards of morality and decency. 
In the opinion of Tourigny J.A., even were it to be admitted that there had
been interference with a protected right, that interference did not have the
intentional character required by the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter.   IV.  Analysis  28.                          This case raises
important questions which must be analysed in the specific context of the
Quebec civil law system, as Beetz J. noted in Rubis v. Gray Rocks Inn Ltd.,
[1982] 1 S.C.R. 452, at p. 468, a case which also dealt with the
principles of civil liability.  As I mentioned at the outset, these questions
relate to (1) the rules of evidence that apply to class actions, (2) the
evaluation of moral prejudice, and (3) the awarding of exemplary damages under
the Charter.  A. Rules of Evidence in Class Actions  29.                          The appellants
contend that, although the legislator did not change the ordinary rules of
evidence in adopting the chapter relating to class actions, under the statutory
provisions that apply to class actions there can be no reliance on, inter
alia, a presumption of similarity with respect to the prejudice suffered by
the patients.  They further argue that the evidence, and, in particular, the
proof by presumptions of fact on which they suggest the trial judge based his
findings, does not establish that the patients of the Hospital experienced the
prejudice of discomfort.  30.                          Although the
appellants’ objection relates primarily to proof by presumptions, it indirectly
raises the issue of the application of the general rules of civil evidence to
class actions; I will dispose of this issue first, and then discuss proof by
presumptions as well as the assessment of the evidence in the case at bar.  (1)  Rules of Evidence and
Class Actions  31.                          The basic
principle of evidence in civil matters is that the party who wishes to exercise
a right has the burden of proving the facts which support his or her claim:
art. 1203 C.C.L.C. (then in force (now art. 2803 of the Civil
Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64 ("C.C.Q.")))
provides that "[t]he party who claims the performance of an obligation
must prove it".  In an action in civil liability such as the case at bar,
the plaintiff must prove a fault, a prejudice and a causal connection, on the
balance of probabilities.  A plaintiff may use several methods of proof, which
are listed in art. 1205 C.C.L.C.: writings, testimony, presumptions
and confessions.  (The Civil Code of Québec reiterates these methods in
art. 2811 and adds proof by production of material things.)    34.                          For his part,
Nichols J.A. suggested that the rules of evidence in respect of class actions
had been changed in that, in his view, the second paragraph of art. 1241 C.C.L.C.
created an exceptional method of proof which was not contemplated by the
traditional civil law.  He was of the opinion that, in view of the power to
deal collectively with the questions of fact and law for which that article
makes provision, the plaintiffs in a class action would not have to prove the
individual prejudice suffered by each of the members of the group; it would
only have to be established, having regard to the evidence as a whole, that
there was a common prejudice.  35.                          I find it
difficult to attribute this scope to art. 1241 C.C.L.C., which
apparently only deals with the consequence of the judgment on a class action in
terms of the presumption of res judicata.  I would note in passing that
art. 2848 C.C.Q., which is the successor to art. 1241 C.C.L.C.,
does not reiterate the expression "questions of law or of fact dealt with
collectively", on which Nichols J.A. relied.  Furthermore, Professor
Royer, supra, also declines to view art. 1241 C.C.L.C. as
changing the rules of evidence in relation to class actions (at p. 515):  [translation] 
The rules relating to class actions and article 1241 C.C.L.C. are not, in our
opinion, exceptions to the rule stated in the doctrine and the case law
concerning the characteristics of a presumption of fact. This should also be
the case a fortiori under the Civil Code of Québec. The
legislator has now codified the rule found in the doctrine and the case law, in
article 2849 C.C.Q.  Furthermore, the legislator has created no exception
in the case of class actions, unlike what was done in the case of the authority
of res judicata, in which the rule previously stated in
article 1241 C.C.L.C. has been preserved.  36.                          In short, the
implementation of the class action scheme set out in Book Nine of the Code
of Civil Procedure has not, in my view, changed anything in the traditional
rules of evidence that apply to civil matters in Quebec and the appellants
appear to agree with this.  The thrust of their argument is rather directed
against proof by presumptions.  (2)  Proof by Presumptions  37.                          Proof by
presumptions, which is also referred to as indirect or circumstantial proof, is
fully recognized in the civil law tradition.  In Quebec, as in France, two
types of presumptions are recognized: presumptions established by the
legislator, which are legal presumptions, and those left to the
discretion of the courts, which are presumptions of fact.  In Précis
de la preuve (4th ed. 1993), Professor Léo Ducharme defines them as follows
(at p. 173):  [translation] 
In other words, it is an intellectual process by which the existence of an
unknown fact is determined by induction from known facts.  When the induction
results from the law, there is a legal presumption; when the court itself makes
the induction, there is a presumption of fact.  38.                          Under
art. 1238 C.C.L.C. (now art. 2846 C.C.Q.), the
legislator has left the task of assessing the probative value of presumptions
of fact to the courts.  This judicial discretion, however, is not absolute.  In
Quebec, the courts have restricted the admissibility of presumptions of fact to
those which are sufficiently serious, precise and concordant: see Montreal
Tramways Co. v. Léveillé, [1933] S.C.R. 456; Longpré v. Thériault,
[1979] C.A. 258; Commission des droits de la personne du Québec v. Montréal
(Communauté urbaine de), [1987] R.J.Q. 2024 (C.A.); La Garantie, Cie
d’assurance de l’Amérique du Nord v. Massicotte, [1988] R.R.A. 16 (C.A.);
and La Concorde, Cie d’assurances générales v. Doyon, [1989] R.R.A. 52
(C.A.).  In 1994, the legislator codified the test set out in the case law and
incorporated it in art. 2849 C.C.Q.  39.                          For the reasons
I have already stated, there is no doubt that these rules of proof by
presumptions apply to class actions in the same way as they do to any other
civil action, just as any other rule of civil evidence also applies to class
actions.  The legislator has made no distinction in this respect.  The only
provisions that are specific to class actions and which might, according to the
appellants, have some bearing on the rules of evidence are those listed in Book
Nine of the Code of Civil Procedure.  For example, art. 1031 C.C.P. provides
that the court may order collective recovery if the evidence establishes with
sufficient accuracy the total amount of the claims of the members.  Article
1045 C.C.P., for its part, allows a court in a class action to prescribe
measures designed to hasten the proceedings and to simplify the proof, if they
do not prejudice a party or the members of the group.  These articles
merely adapt the applicable rules of evidence to class actions, because of the
unique nature of such actions.  They do not change the ordinary rules of
evidence so as to exempt class actions.  In my opinion, such a change would
require much clearer provisions.  40.                          The appellants
further contend that the trial judge wrongly relied on a legal presumption
of similarity in respect of the moral prejudice suffered by the members of the
group.  As Nichols J.A. pointed out, that interpretation does not do
justice to the analysis done by the trial judge, who was careful to underscore
the need to establish the three elements of civil liability (fault, prejudice
and causal connection) and based his conclusions on the evidence presented
using a variety of methods, including the testimony of people who replaced the
employees who had walked out and of expert witnesses.  Lesage J. wrote (at p. 391):  [translation] 
In a class action, the representative’s action is not always taken as the
model.  The representative is acting for all of the members of the group, but
the court may conclude that certain classes of members suffered a different
prejudice, and even authorize each member to assert his or her claim
individually.  At that point, we have to ask whether, based on the evidence
adduced, it would be possible to reach a conclusion with respect to all or some
of the members of the group that is different from the conclusion reached in
respect of Honorine Abel.  We must ask whether the members of the group
suffered momentary sequelae, insecurity or discomfort as a result of being
deprived of care.  [Emphasis added.]  41.                          One cannot
therefore conclude that the trial judge relied on the statutory provisions
applicable to class actions to create a legal presumption of similarity in
assessing the prejudice suffered.  In my opinion, Nichols J.A. correctly
described the process followed by the trial judge (at p. 2784):  [translation] 
When the trial judge spoke of a "presumption of similarity", he did
not use a presumption of law but rather looked at it as an objective toward
which his analysis of the evidence was leading.  He never drew the conclusion
that all the patients had suffered the same prejudice because the
representative of the group had herself suffered discomfort.  Rather, he
sought to find an element of damage common to everyone, and only after
reviewing the evidence as a whole did he find enough evidence to be able to
infer that there were serious, precise and concordant presumptions that all the
patients had at least suffered discomfort.  If we consider that no member of
the group was capable here of expressing himself or herself to describe the
subjective prejudice he or she felt, the necessary conclusion is that, in the
circumstances, proof by presumptions was the most appropriate method of proof
for establishing the existence of such prejudice.  [Emphasis added.]  42.                          I agree with
Nichols J.A. on this point and I would add that the trial judge did not rely
solely on presumptions of fact, but also took into account the evidence as a
whole, including that of witnesses and expert witnesses, in reaching his
conclusions.  43.                          We must now
consider whether the Court of Appeal was correct in affirming the trial judge’s
conclusion that the disruption of the care and services provided to the
patients of the Hospital caused them the moral prejudice of discomfort.  (3)  The Evidence  44.                          The appellants
argued at length in this Court that the evidence adduced at trial did not
permit the judge to conclude that prejudice had been suffered by each of the
members of the group covered by the class action.  In other words, the
appellants invited this Court to reassess the trial judge’s findings of fact
and to reconsider all of the evidence presented at trial, which was long and
laborious.    47.                          Professor
Ducharme, supra, at p. 200, is of the view that this principle must
be tempered when proof is made by way of presumptions of fact.  I am not
certain that this distinction between the various methods of proof can be
made.  In my view, the inductive exercise required by presumptions of fact, at
least where, as here, they are simply one element of proof among others, opens
the way to a subjective assessment of the evidence as a whole and of the
circumstances surrounding the presentation of the evidence, on the same basis
as the testimony.  Accordingly, an appellate court should refrain from
intervening to reverse the conclusions drawn by the trial judge on the basis of
presumptions of fact, unless the trial judge has made some palpable and
overriding error.  48.                          The first point
in the instant case is that the trial judge applied the law properly, so that
he was able to draw conclusions based on serious, precise and concordant
presumptions of fact established by the evidence (as I noted earlier, the judge
relied not only on these presumptions, but also and mainly on viva voce
evidence, including expert testimony).  The second point is that a review of
all of the evidence presented at trial, particularly in a context as complex as
is found in this case, shows that the trial judge did an exceptional job of
assessing and weighing the evidence and I find no error therein of the type
that would allow an appellate court to intervene.  The excerpts from the
evidence cited by the appellants represent only that portion of the evidence
that is favourable to them.  In fact, those passages are interwoven into a body
of evidence that paints a much more objective picture of the situation which
prevailed at the time of the illegal strikes, and of the consequences of that
situation for the patients.  It is also significant that the court which heard
the initial appeal also, unanimously, declined to reconsider the trial judge’s
findings of fact.  49.                          I am, therefore,
of the view that the trial judge’s findings of fact that the patients of the
Hospital had suffered the prejudice of discomfort because of the illegal work
stoppages, must be upheld.  50.                          Lastly, the
appellants argued that the rule of the best evidence — which is set out in
art. 1204 C.C.L.C. (now art. 2860 C.C.Q.) — was not
followed in that the trial judge did not examine each patient’s medical
records.  In a decision dated February 26, 1987, although he allowed the motion
for particulars under art. 168(7) C.C.P. in part, the trial judge
declined to grant the request for particulars concerning the condition of each
patient as noted in their medical records.  The appellants appealed that judgment;
the appeal was dismissed and the application for leave to appeal was denied by
this Court.  51.                          Without
expressing an opinion as to whether there is res judicata (Fraternité
des policiers de la Communauté urbaine de Montréal Inc. v. City of Montreal,
[1980] 1 S.C.R. 740), I would immediately note that a medical record is not, as
the appellant contends, the best evidence.  In fact, these documents are only
admissible as an exception to the rule excluding hearsay evidence (Royal
Victoria Hospital v. Morrow, [1974] S.C.R. 501).  In any event, I agree
with the trial judge for the reasons cited by him: that the patients’ records
were not relevant in this case because, inter alia, the assertion that
the patients did not suffer identical damage does not justify, before final
judgment, a motion for particulars concerning the damage suffered by each
patient individually.  (4)  Conclusion  52.                          In conclusion, I
am of the view that this Court should not intervene in relation to the first
issue, that is, the question of the rules of evidence applicable and applied to
class actions.  The majority in the Court of Appeal was correct to conclude
that proof by sufficiently serious, precise and concordant presumptions of fact
applied to class actions in the same manner as it applies to any other civil
matter, and that the inferences drawn therefrom by the trial judge were not
vitiated by any error of law or fact.  53.                          Moreover, the
Court of Appeal did not err in affirming the judgment of first instance in
which, after a meticulous examination of the whole of the evidence, including
the testimony of people who replaced the striking employees and of expert
witnesses, the trial judge concluded that the elements of civil liability
(fault, prejudice and causal connection) had been established on the balance of
probabilities and that the patients of the Hospital had suffered the prejudice
of discomfort because of the illegal strikes.  The second question before this
Court relates to the compensation for that moral prejudice.  B.  Moral Prejudice  54.                          The appellants
contend that the Court of Appeal was wrong to affirm the decision of the trial
judge, who had declined to apply the "functional" approach which, in
their view, must govern compensation for moral prejudice.  According to them,
the patients of the Hospital could not receive compensation in the amount
awarded since they were unable, because of their mental condition, to take any
satisfaction therefrom.  The appellants further argued that the quantum of
moral damages awarded was patently excessive in the circumstances of this case.   56.                          In order to
clarify the issue surrounding the evaluation of moral damages in Quebec law and
to assess the parties’ respective arguments in relation to the functional
approach, it would be appropriate to begin by reviewing the case law and the
doctrine on this point.  (1)  Case Law and Doctrine    58.                          In Lindal v.
Lindal, Dickson J. added that the quantum of damages awarded to compensate
for moral prejudice depends not only upon the seriousness of the harm, but also
upon the satisfaction that the compensation may bring to the victim.  He stated
(at p. 637):   He even suggested, although he did not decide the point, that a
permanently unconscious plaintiff might be entitled to no moral damages.    But he adds:  The existence of these substitute pleasures,
however, may undoubtedly comprise one of the elements that may be taken into
account in evaluating the prejudice, even though it is not the purpose of that
evaluation.  [Emphasis added.]  60.                          Unlike Professor
Baudouin, Professor Daniel Gardner, in L’évaluation du préjudice corporel
(1994), concludes that what is called the functional approach is consistent
with civil law principles and is therefore applicable in Quebec civil law (at
p. 162):  [translation] 
227 — Conformity with the rules of the civil law.  Does the
functional approach correspond to the rules of compensation that are applied in
a civil law system?  In other words, is this a case in which the common law and
the civil law differ radically, so that it would be impossible to apply the
solution proposed by the Supreme Court in Quebec?  The answer is no, although
there are some who would not share this opinion.   In our opinion, there is
therefore no legal reason that militates in favour of rejecting the functional
approach in Quebec law.  We must simply avoid setting it up on the same level
as a genuine legal rule.  [Italics in original;
underlining added.]  61.                          In my opinion,
the debate concerning the application of the functional approach in Quebec is
much more apparent than real and seems to be based on the fact that the various
approaches in this field come into play at several levels of the examination of
moral prejudice in civil liability: see D. Jutras, "Pretium et
précision" (1990), 69 Can. Bar Rev. 203.  62.                          The main problem
underlying compensation for moral prejudice is how to assign a cash value to a
qualitative loss.  The various theories that have been advanced in the field
essentially relate to two aspects: (1) the justification for the right to
compensation for moral damage and (2) the method of calculating moral damage. 
I shall briefly discuss each of these aspects of compensation for moral
prejudice, more specifically in relation to the functional approach.  (2)  Justification for the
Right to Compensation for Moral Damage  63.                          Moral prejudice
has been defined as including loss of enjoyment of life, esthetic prejudice,
physical and psychological pain and suffering, inconvenience, loss of
amenities, and sexual prejudice.  Why should the victim be compensated for a
prejudice which is, strictly speaking, irreparable?  It is undeniable,
nonetheless, that moral prejudice is a real prejudice.  64.                          There is now express
provision for compensation for moral prejudice in the Civil Code of Québec,
art. 1457 of which sets out the general principle of civil liability:  1457.  Every person has a duty to abide by the rules of conduct
which lie upon him, according to the circumstances, usage or law, so as not to
cause injury to another. Where he is endowed with reason
and fails in this duty, he is responsible for any injury he causes to another
person and is liable to reparation for the injury, whether it be bodily,
moral or material in nature.  [Emphasis added.]   66.                          In France, most
authors adopt the compensatory approach to justify indemnifying a victim of
moral prejudice: see, inter alia, Planiol and Ripert, Traité pratique
de droit civil français (2nd ed. 1952), vol. 6, at p. 754; L.
Josserand, Cours de droit civil positif français (3rd ed. 1939), vol. II,
at p. 262; Mazeaud and Chabas, Leçons de droit civil (8th ed.
1991), t. 2, vol. 1, at p. 406; and B. Starck, Obligations (4th ed.
1991), vol. 1, at p. 69.  Although, in my view, this compensatory
conception is broader, it does to some extent overlap the functional approach. 
In Lindal v. Lindal, supra, at p. 636, Dickson J. explained
that the functional approach does not attempt  to set a value on lost happiness, [but] attempts to
assess the compensation required to provide the injured person with reasonable
solace for his misfortune.  Money is awarded, not because lost faculties
have a dollar value, but because money can be used to substitute other
enjoyments and pleasures for those that have been lost.  [Emphasis added.]          [translation] 
I well understand, and this cannot be seriously disputed, that a person who is
the victim of an accident has a legal claim, when the person’s condition
creates the sad prospect of facing a shortened life, of dragging out a wretched
existence, full of infirmities, physical pain and moral anguish and worry. 
This is the basis on which, if the evidence so warrants, a claim for damages
such as the claim submitted for our consideration may and must be based, since
at that point a right which may be evaluated in money has arisen, and is
part of the victim’s patrimony under the provisions of art. 607 of the
Civil Code.  [Emphasis in original.]  The purely subjective conception of the right to have the moral
prejudice remedied would be totally inconsistent with this principle, since the
deceased victim is obviously not capable of enjoying the substitute benefits
which the moral damages awarded may secure.   (3)  Method of Calculating
Moral Damages  72.                          In calculating
compensation, moral prejudice may be addressed in three different manners
which, as we shall see, are much more often complementary than opposite: see
A. I. Ogus, "Damages for Lost Amenities: for a Foot, a Feeling or a
Function?" (1972), 35 Modern L. Rev. 1; and A. Wéry,
"L’évaluation judiciaire des dommages non pécuniaires résultant de
blessures corporelles: du pragmatisme de l’arbitraire?", [1986] R.R.A.
355.  These are the conceptual, personal and functional approaches, which we
shall examine briefly in turn.    75.                          Secondly, at the
opposite end of the spectrum from the conceptual approach, the personal
approach to calculating moral damages makes it possible to determine the
compensation that corresponds specifically to the loss suffered by the victim. 
As Wéry wrote, supra, at p. 357, this approach [translation] "assigns no objective
value to the organs of the human body but rather seeks to evaluate, from a
subjective point of view, the pain and inconvenience resulting from the
injuries suffered by the victim".   77.                          Lastly, the
third method of calculating moral damages, adopted as applicable in the factual
circumstances of the trilogy Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., supra,
Arnold v. Teno, supra, and Thornton v. Board of School
Trustees of School District No. 57 (Prince George), supra, and in Lindal
v. Lindal, supra, refers to the functional approach.  As
Dickson J. explained in Andrews, this approach seeks to calculate the
“physical arrangements which can make [the injured person’s] life more
endurable . . . accepting that what has been lost is incapable of
being replaced in any direct way” (p. 262).   79.                          This being said,
it is apparent from the case law and literature in Quebec that, in terms of
calculating compensation for moral prejudice, the three methods of evaluation
described supra interact, leaving the courts considerable latitude so
that they can reach a reasonable and equitable result.  Professor Gardner, supra,
stated, correctly in my view, the basic rule that applies in this field (at
p. 173):    81.                          Consequently, I
am of the opinion that the functional approach, as defined in the trilogy and
in Lindal v. Lindal, supra, is appropriate in Quebec civil law,
not for the purpose of determining the right to compensation for moral damage,
but rather with respect to calculating the amount of moral damages.  82.                          In the case
before us, consequently, the Court of Appeal was correct to reject the
appellants’ argument that the condition of the patients of the Hospital, or
their capacity to perceive, was of some relevance in this case.  Moreover, in
terms of the calculation of moral damages, the trial judge properly took into
account a panoply of factors in this respect, considerations that included all
of the conceptual, personal and functional approaches.  This being said, was
the quantum of moral damages awarded appropriate?  (4)  The Quantum of Moral
Damages  83.                          The appellants
contended that the compensation awarded by the trial judge in this respect was
patently excessive.  The respondent, for his part, stressed that while the
quantum of moral damages appeared to the Court of Appeal to be generous, it was
certainly not considered to be unreasonable to the point that the intervention
of that court was warranted.  84.                          The test for the
intervention of an appellate court in this field is very strict and gives
preference to the evaluation done by the trier of fact, as set out in Andrews
v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., supra, at p. 235:  Let me say in introduction what
has been said many times before, that no appellate court is justified in
substituting a figure of its own for that awarded at trial simply because it
would have awarded a different figure if it had tried the case at first
instance.  It must be satisfied that a wrong principle of law was applied,
or that the overall amount is a wholly erroneous estimate of the damage; Nance
v. B.C. Electric Railway Co. [[1951] A.C. 601].  [Emphasis added.]  85.                          Contrary to the
appellants’ arguments, the subjective nature of moral prejudice does not in
itself constitute grounds for intervening.  This Court has in fact pointed this
out on several occasions (see the trilogy and Snyder v. Montreal Gazette
Ltd., supra) and, as I mentioned earlier, because of the nature of
the prejudice, the quantum of moral damages cannot be determined exactly.  86.                          In the case at
bar, the moral damages awarded by the trial judge were the result of a
meticulous examination of the evidence and the appellants have demonstrated no
error in this respect.  The evidence must be examined as a whole, and not by
quoting passages out of context.  Nor have the appellants demonstrated any
error on the part of the trial judge, and in my view the Court of Appeal
rightly declined to intervene to vary the trial judgment with regard to this
head of damages.  87.                          Lastly, we must
dispose of the appellants’ argument that no compensation should be allowed
since, it seems, the moral damages awarded will not increase the victims’
patrimony.  Given that most patients of the hospital receive social assistance
when they own less than $1,500, the appellants argued that the compensation
will deprive them of that assistance and will in fact only benefit the
government.  This argument must be rejected at once, since, as long as there is
no duplication in compensation, courts should not have regard to the effect of
an award of damages on the recipient’s patrimony.  In addition, such an
analysis would be merely hypothetical in most cases.  88.                          Consequently,
this Court should not intervene with regard to the issue of compensation for
the moral prejudice.  On the other hand, the trial judge did not award
exemplary damages and the Court of Appeal concluded that he had erred on that
point.  It is this question that remains to be examined.  C.  Exemplary Damages under the Charter  89.                          The trial judge
declined to award exemplary damages under the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter
since, in his view, the nature of the prejudice did not make this remedy
available.  The majority of the Court of Appeal believed, in contrast, that the
numerous and varying inconveniences engendered by the strikes not only
constituted a compensable moral prejudice under the general rules of civil
liability (art. 1053 C.C.L.C.), but directly interfered with the
fundamental rights guaranteed by ss. 1  and 4 of the Charter, thereby
making available the exemplary remedy contemplated in the second paragraph of s. 49.  90.                          The appellants
objected to the manner in which the majority of the Court of Appeal
characterized the facts, and contended that that court erred in finding that
there had been an unlawful and intentional interference with the inviolability
and dignity of the patients of the Hospital.  Under this heading, we must
examine two aspects of the decision of the Court of Appeal: whether there has
been an unlawful interference with a right guaranteed by the Charter,
and whether that interference was intentional.  (1)  Unlawful Interference    .  .  .  Moreover, not only does the nature
of this human rights and freedoms legislation call for a large and liberal
interpretation, but s. 53 of the Charter also provides that “[i]f
any doubt arises in the interpretation of a provision of the Act, it shall be
resolved in keeping with the intent of the Charter”.  This provision has been
relied upon to ensure that statutes are interpreted in a manner consistent with
the rights guaranteed in the Charter:  see Thibault v. Corporation
professionnelle des médecins du Québec, supra; and Syndicat
national des employés de l’Institut Doréa (C.S.N.) v. Conseil des services
essentiels, [1987] R.J.Q. 925 (Sup. Ct.); see also Côté, [The
Interpretation of Legislation in Canada (2nd ed. 1991)], at p. 311.  92.                          The two
provisions that we must construe are ss. 1  and 4 of the Charter, which I
shall reproduce here for ease of reference:  1.  Every
human being has a right to life, and to personal security, inviolability and
freedom.  He also possesses juridical
personality.  4.  Every
person has a right to the safeguard of his dignity, honour and reputation.   94.                          In the
discussion that follows, I shall attempt to provide some guidance as to the
interpretation of the concepts of "inviolability" and
"dignity" and to determine whether those rights were violated in the
case at bar.  (a) Personal Inviolability  95.                          Section 1  of the
Charter  guarantees the right to personal "inviolability".  The
majority of the Court of Appeal was of the opinion, contrary to the trial
judge’s interpretation, that the protection afforded by s. 1  of the Charter 
extends beyond physical inviolability.  I agree.  The statutory amendment
enacted in 1982 (see An Act to amend the Charter of Human Rights and
Freedoms, S.Q. 1982, c. 61, in force at the time this cause of action
arose) which, inter alia, deleted the adjective "physique",
in the French version, which had previously qualified the expression "intégrité"
(inviolability), clearly indicates that s. 1 refers inclusively to physical,
psychological, moral and social inviolability.  The question is rather one of
determining what the concept of "inviolability" must be understood to
mean.  96.                          The Petit
Robert 1 (1989) defines the word "intégrité" as follows,
at p. 1016: [translation]
"1 (1530).  Condition of a thing that has remained intact.  See
Intégralité, plénitude, totalité.  The integrity of a whole, of an
entire thing.  Integrity of a work.  "The integrity of the organism is
essential to the manifestations of consciousness" (Carrel).  The integrity of the
territory.  REM.  Integrity is more qualitative than integrality,
which is generally reserved for that which is measurable".  Having regard
to this definition, the Superior Court made the following comments in Viau
v. Syndicat canadien de la fonction publique, [1991] R.R.A. 740, at
p. 745:  [translation] 
When applying this concept to persons, we find that it is a threshold of moral
damages below which there is no interference with personal inviolability.  This
threshold will be exceeded when the interference has left the victim less
complete or less intact than he or she previously was.  This diminished
condition must also be of some lasting, if not permanent nature.  [Emphasis
added.]  97.                          This approach to
the interpretation of the concept of inviolability set out in s. 1  of the Charter 
appears to me to be appropriate.  The common meaning of the word
"inviolability" suggests that the interference with that right must
leave some marks, some sequelae which, while not necessarily physical or
permanent, exceed a certain threshold.  The interference must affect the
victim’s physical, psychological or emotional equilibrium in something more
than a fleeting manner.  Moreover, the objective of s. 1, as it is worded,
makes it much more similar to a guarantee of inviolability of the person and,
accordingly, to protection against the certain consequences of the violation.  98.                          The evidence in
this case, as the trial judge pointed out, did not establish that the patients
of the Hospital suffered any permanent prejudice giving rise to psychological
or medical sequelae: that is, it did not establish that the patients’ condition
deteriorated in any noticeable way as a result of the strike.  Rather, the
trial judge concluded that there had been prejudice in the nature of temporary
discomfort, which he characterized as [translation]
"minor psychological distress".  Despite the fact that the majority
of the Court of Appeal reached the opposite conclusion, I find it difficult in
the circumstances to see anything in the trial judge’s characterization of the
prejudice, which I accept as proved, that amounts to interference with the
right to personal inviolability guaranteed by s. 1  of the Charter .  (b) Personal Dignity   100.                        In addition to
being a right specifically protected by s. 4 of the Charter, dignity is,
having regard to the preamble to the Charter, a value that underlies the
rights and freedoms guaranteed therein:  Whereas all human beings are equal
in worth and dignity, and are entitled to equal protection of the law;  See also article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
G.A. Res. 217 A (III), U.N. Doc. A/810, at  71 (1948), which provides that
all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and in rights.   102.                        The concept of
"dignity" has been explored in the context of the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms .  In the opinion of the appellants, given that the
decisions under the Canadian Charter  refer to "human dignity"
and the Quebec Charter refers only to "dignity", we cannot
draw any analogy between these two concepts.  This argument is without any
merit.  Section 4 of the Quebec Charter provides that "[e]very person
has a right to the safeguard of his dignity" (emphasis added).  The
dignity to which s. 4 refers cannot be anything other than "personal
dignity", that is, in other words "human dignity".  103.                        The concept of
human dignity was interpreted in R. v. Morgentaler, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30,
which dealt with the right to life, liberty and security of the person, a right
guaranteed by s. 7  of the Canadian Charter .  Madam Justice Wilson provided
the following definition of that right (at p. 166):  The idea of human dignity finds
expression in almost every right and freedom guaranteed in the Charter. 
Individuals are afforded the right to choose their own religion and their own
philosophy of life, the right to choose with whom they will associate and how
they will express themselves, the right to choose where they will live and what
occupation they will pursue.  These are all examples of the basic theory
underlying the Charter, namely that the state will respect choices made
by individuals and, to the greatest extent possible, will avoid subordinating
these choices to any one conception of the good life. See also Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2
S.C.R. 1130, at p. 1179, per Cory J.  104.                        In Commission
des droits de la personne du Québec v. Lemay, supra, the Quebec
Human Rights Tribunal correctly, in my view, stated the essence of the right to
the safeguard of personal dignity (at p. 1972):  [translation] 
Consequently, every human being has intrinsic value which makes him or her
worthy of respect.  For the same reason, every human being is entitled to
recognition of the rights and freedoms of the person and to the fully equal
exercise thereof.  [Emphasis added.]  105.                        Having regard to
the manner in which the concept of personal "dignity" has been
defined, and to the principles of large and liberal construction that apply to
legislation concerning human rights and freedoms, I believe that s. 4 of the Charter
addresses interferences with the fundamental attributes of a human being which
violate the respect to which every person is entitled simply because he or she
is a human being and the respect that a person owes to himself or herself.  106.                        Moreover, in my
opinion, because of the underlying concept of respect, the right to personal
dignity, unlike the concept of inviolability, does not require that there be
permanent consequences in order for interference with that right to be found. 
Thus, even a temporary interference with a fundamental attribute of a human
being would violate s. 4 of the Charter.  This interpretation is also
based on the nature of the other rights protected by s. 4 -- honour and
reputation: noscitur a sociis.  It is not necessarily a requirement, in
order for there to be a violation of these guarantees, that there be permanent
effects, although the effects may be permanent.   108.                        This being said,
the fact that some patients have a low level of awareness of their environment
because of their mental condition may undoubtedly influence their own
conception of dignity.  As Fish J.A. observed, however, when we are dealing
with a document of the nature of the Charter, it is more important that
we turn our attention to an objective appreciation of dignity and what that
requires in terms of the necessary care and services.  In the case at bar, I
believe that the trial judge’s findings of fact indicate, beyond a shadow of a
doubt, that, although the discomfort suffered by the patients of the Hospital
was transient, it constituted interference with the safeguard of their dignity,
a right guaranteed by s. 4 of the Charter, despite the fact that, as the
trial judge noted, these patients might have had no sense of modesty.   110.                        What now remains
to be determined is whether the interference with the right to personal dignity
was also intentional, so that the exemplary remedy set out in the second
paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter would be available.  (2)  Intentional
Interference   112.                        The first
approach treats unlawful and intentional interference under the second
paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter, inter alia, as if it were
gross fault, as that concept is traditionally defined in the civil law (see,
for example, art. 1474 C.C.Q.).  In West Island Teachers’
Association v. Nantel, [1988] R.J.Q. 1569 (C.A.), Chevalier J. (ad hoc)
proposed the following definition of the concept of intentional interference
(at p. 1574):  [translation]
Unlawful interference with one of the rights recognized by the Charter is a
delict.  In order to be intentional, it must be committed in circumstances
which indicate a determined intent to cause the damage resulting from the
violation.  That intent may take a number of forms.  It could appear from a
finding that the fault committed is gross to the point that the mind cannot
imagine that the person who committed it could have failed to realize from the
outset that it would produce the harmful consequences that resulted from it. 
Fault is also intentional if it is the result of wild and foolhardy
recklessness in disregard for the rights of others, with full knowledge of the
immediate and natural or at least extremely probable consequences that his or her
action will cause to the victim.  [Emphasis added.]   [translation] 
The legislator’s use of the adjective "intentional" seems to me to
indicate that the legislator did not intend to refer simply to gross fault, but
on the contrary, required that the intended, conscious and deliberate nature
of the act committed be shown.  Thus, it is the minds of the persons who
committed the fault that must be scrutinized in order to assess this second
criterion.  The evidence shows that there was a calculated, firm intention
to harm the respondents. . . . [Emphasis added.]      Having regard to this context, I
do not believe that section 49 paragraph 2 of the Charter leaves any room
for the introduction of the concept of recklessness which the trial judge seems
to have applied.  [Emphasis added.]  115.                        To clarify this
issue, it is essential to situate the Charter concepts of unlawful
interference and unlawful and intentional interference in relation to the
traditional concepts of civil liability, namely fault, prejudice and causal
connection.   117.                        Unlike an award
of compensatory damages, an award of exemplary damages under the second
paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter depends not on the extent of the
prejudice resulting from the unlawful interference, but on the intentional
nature of that interference.  Since, as stated above, unlawful interference
is the result of wrongful conduct that infringes a Charter right, it is
therefore the result of that conduct that must be intentional.  In
other words, for unlawful interference to be characterized as “intentional”,
the person who committed the interference must have desired the consequences
that his or her wrongful conduct would have.     I shared the same view (at para. 21):  [I]t is clear that the purpose of awarding exemplary
damages is not to compensate, but is related to the law’s role of punishment
and deterrence. . . .   120.                        Having regard to
the case law and the doctrine in Quebec and in the common law on this question
and, even more importantly, in accordance with the principles of large and
liberal interpretation of legislation concerning human rights and freedoms
together with the objective of exemplary remedies (i.e., punishment and
deterrence), I believe that a relatively permissive approach should be
encouraged in Quebec civil law when effect is to be given to the expression
"unlawful and intentional interference" for the purposes of the
exemplary damages contemplated in the Charter.  121.                        Consequently,
there will be unlawful and intentional interference within the meaning of the
second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter when the person who
commits the unlawful interference has a state of mind that implies a desire or
intent to cause the consequences of his or her wrongful conduct, or when that
person acts with full knowledge of the immediate and natural or at least
extremely probable consequences that his or her conduct will cause.  This test
is not as strict as specific intent, but it does go beyond simple negligence. 
Thus, an individual’s recklessness, however wild and foolhardy, as to the
consequences of his or her wrongful acts will not in itself satisfy this test.   123.                        In the case
before us, the majority of the Court of Appeal was of the opinion that [translation] "[i]n order for the
interference to be intentional, it must have been committed in circumstances
that indicate a determined intent to cause the damage resulting from the
violation" (p. 2804).  That does not constitute an error of law,
since the intent to cause the prejudice, under the test proposed supra,
constitutes intentional interference within the meaning of the Charter.  124.                        Relying on the
findings of fact made by the trial judge, which it considered to have been
proved, the majority of the Court of Appeal held that the appellants’ conduct
in the course of the illegal strikes of October and November 1984 constituted
intentional interference within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 of
the Charter.  I am in complete agreement with this conclusion.  The
appellant unions backed the illegal strikes and, apparently, on the evidence as
a whole, orchestrated and incited them.  In fact, as the trial judge noted, Luc
Painchaud and Pierre Létourneau, two of the appellants’ representatives, were
conspicuously involved in the conduct of the illegal walkouts, to the full knowledge
of the leaders of the appellant unions.  Moreover, the pressure that the
appellants wanted to bring to bear on the employer inevitably involved
disrupting the services and care normally provided to the patients of the
Hospital, and necessarily involved intentional interference with their dignity.  125.                        Secondly, the
appellants challenged both the appropriateness of awarding exemplary damages
and the quantum of damages awarded.  As the appellants properly contended,
exemplary damages are not automatically awarded under the Charter
whenever there has been unlawful and intentional interference with a protected
right.  The legislator has allowed judges discretion in this regard, as
indicated by the use of the expression "may" in the second paragraph
of s. 49 of the Charter.  In addition, as the Court of Appeal pointed
out, that discretion extends to the determination of the appropriate amount, in
order to achieve the purposes for which the exemplary damages are awarded, that
is, to punish the offender and set an example for society.  126.                        However, the
discretion enjoyed by courts in respect of awarding exemplary damages and of
the quantum of such damages is not absolute.  It is guided and circumscribed by
various factors that have been developed by the courts: see, inter alia,
West Island Teachers’ Association v. Nantel, supra; Samuelli
v. Jouhannet, [1994] R.J.Q. 152 (Sup. Ct.); and Roy v. Patenaude,
[1994] R.J.Q. 2503 (C.A.).  These criteria, by which the courts must be guided,
have been codified in art. 1621 C.C.Q., which reads as follows:  1621.  Where the awarding of punitive damages is provided for by law, the
amount of such damages may not exceed what is sufficient to fulfil their
preventive purpose.  Punitive damages are assessed in
the light of all the appropriate circumstances, in particular the gravity of
the debtor’s fault, his patrimonial situation, the extent of the reparation for
which he is already liable to the creditor and, where such is the case, the
fact that the payment of the damages is wholly or partly assumed by a third
person.  127.                        In the case at
bar, although the Court of Appeal did not at the time have the benefit of
art. 1621 C.C.Q., it is apparent from its reasons that its decision
on both the appropriateness of awarding exemplary damages and the quantum of
those damages was correct, that is, it is consistent with those criteria and
with the case law.  The relevant factors on which the majority of the court
relied include the conduct of the party at fault, the prejudice suffered, the
quantum of compensatory damages awarded to the victims, the preventive,
deterrent and punitive aspect of the damages, the profit realized by the party
who committed the interference and that party’s financial resources.  It added
that in class actions, the number of victims and their special vulnerability
must also be taken into consideration.  Applying those tests to the case before
it, the court held that the appellants should be condemned to pay the sum of
$200,000 as exemplary damages.  128.                        That conclusion
satisfies the appropriate criteria and is amply supported by the evidence in
the record, which establishes, inter alia, that despite the injunctions,
fines and terms of imprisonment imposed on the appellants’ members, they
continued to conduct themselves unlawfully and to disrupt the care and services
necessary to the patients of the Hospital.  I would note in passing that
other forms of punishment imposed on the person who committed the interference
should not automatically be a bar to awarding exemplary damages, or reduce the
quantum of such damages.  The Court of Appeal was divided on this point in Papadatos
v. Sutherland, [1987] R.J.Q. 1020; art. 1621 C.C.Q. does not
settle this issue since the factors listed therein are not exhaustive.  I
believe that it would in fact be possible to argue that the other punishments
imposed on the person who committed the interference are sufficient, in terms
of meeting the objective of exemplary damages, for such damages to be refused,
or to justify reducing them; I make no definitive finding on this point,
however, since it is sufficient for me to say, for the purposes of the case at
bar, that this is by no means the situation here.  129.                        Finally, it is
useful to note that the rule which requires that appellate courts show
deference in respect of the calculation of compensatory damages also applies mutatis
mutandis to exemplary damages -- particularly since the award of such
damages is discretionary: that is, that a "wrong principle of law was
applied, or that the overall amount is a wholly erroneous estimate of the
damage" (Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., supra, at
p. 235).  In the case at bar, having found that the trial judge had erred
in law, the majority in the Court of Appeal was correct to intervene and award
exemplary damages, having regard to the evidence.  Moreover, with respect to
the calculation of the appropriate amount, the majority of the Court committed
no error of principle, and accordingly the quantum of exemplary damages must be
upheld.  130.                        Before
concluding, a number of subsidiary arguments presented by the appellants must
be disposed of.  First, they challenged the legality of the order of the Court
of Appeal that the exemplary damages be remitted to the Public Curator, in his
capacity as curator, to be used for the benefit of current and future patients
of the Hospital.  In their view, the damages should have been paid
personally to the members of the group covered by the class action.  Moreover,
they challenged the decision of the Court of Appeal that interest on the
exemplary damages should start to run as of the date of the judgment in the
first instance.  Having regard to art. 46 C.C.P., which allows the
judge to make such orders as are necessary, and art. 1056c C.C.L.C.
(in force at the time of these proceedings), which deals with interest on
damages (and which, in my opinion, applies to exemplary damages), these
arguments have no merit.  131.                        Lastly, the
appellants contended that, because of the punitive and deterrent function of exemplary
damages under the Charter, the condemnation could not be joint and
several.  I see nothing that would prevent joint and several liability
operating here, as it does in respect of other kinds of damages.  First, all
the appellants participated in the unlawful and intentional interference with
the right of the patients of the Hospital to their dignity.  Second, a joint
and several debtor may demand that his or her codebtors pay their respective
shares of the total debt, under art. 1117 C.C.L.C. (in force at the
time).  In my opinion, this disposes of these subsidiary arguments, which are
devoid of merit.  V.  Conclusion  132.                        To summarize, on
the question of the rules of evidence that apply to class actions, the
provisions of Book Nine of the Code of Civil Procedure have not changed
the rules of evidence in civil matters and, in particular, proof by
presumptions of fact, provided that such presumptions are sufficiently serious,
precise and concordant, applies to class actions.  Since the trial judge
committed no error of law and no error in the conclusions he drew from the
evidence on this point, the Court of Appeal was correct not to intervene.   134.                        With respect to
the exemplary damages contemplated in the Charter, this remedy will be
available when there is unlawful interference with a right protected by the Charter,
which right is to be largely and liberally defined, and when the interference
is intentional, that is, the person responsible for it intended the
consequences of the fault he or she committed.  On the facts, the Court of
Appeal was correct to conclude that the appellants had unlawfully interfered
with the patients’ dignity, a right that is guaranteed by s. 4 of the Charter,
and that the interference was intentional within the meaning of the second
paragraph of s. 49.  This Court should not intervene on this point, nor in
respect of the quantum of the joint and several award of damages under this
head.  135.                        For these
reasons, I would dismiss the appeal, with costs in all courts.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Groleau &
Associés, Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondents:  Sauvé,
Guillot, Montréal.    