Edwards v. Law Society of Upper Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 562,
2001 SCC 80  John Edwards and Nancy Edwards on behalf of themselves and with leave of the court on behalf of the Class herein described                                                                         Appellants  v.  The Law Society of Upper Canada                                                               Respondent  and  The Attorney General for Ontario and the Ontario Securities Commission                                                              Interveners  and  Palmer Mills, Beverly Hoover and James Thomas Leslie Mills, Executors of the Estate of John T. Murray Mills, Deceased, Sisto Consultants Inc., Maurice Carr, Jasper Naude, John Davison, Marilyn Davison, Arlene Woolcox, Jasbir Gill, Sisto Finance Inc., Camm-Tex International Inc. and Sisto Finance N.V.                              (Defendants)  Indexed as:  Edwards v. Law Society of Upper Canada  Neutral citation:  2001 SCC 80.  File No.:  28108.  2001:  June 20; 2001:  November 16.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Major,
Bastarache, Binnie, Arbour and LeBel JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario  Torts -- Negligence -- Duty of care -- Statutory regulators
-- Law Society -- Misuse of solicitor’s trust account -- Funds in gold delivery
fraud being paid into law firm’s trust account -- Law Society starting
investigation after being informed by solicitor that his trust account was used
in unorthodox manner -- Whether Law Society owes duty of care to persons who
deposit money into a solicitor’s trust account in respect of losses resulting
from misuse of account.  The appellants represent a class of individuals who
were allegedly victimized by a gold delivery fraud.  A selling agent encouraged
the appellants to purchase gold and, pursuant to a “Gold Delivery Contract”, to
pay the funds to a solicitor’s trust account.  The appellants later learned
that although over US$9 million had been given in trust to the solicitor for
the delivery of the gold, no mines existed and no gold was ever produced.  The
respondent Law Society commenced an investigation after receiving a letter from
the solicitor regarding the unorthodox use of his trust account.  The
appellants claimed that once the respondent knew that the account was being
used improperly, it had a duty to ensure that the solicitor operated his trust
account according to the regulations or alternatively to warn them that it had
chosen to abandon its supervisory jurisdiction.  The motions judge allowed the
respondent’s motion to strike for failure to disclose a cause of action.  The
Court of Appeal upheld that judgment.  Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.  The companion case of Cooper outlines the
approach in assessing whether a duty of care will be recognized in a given
case.  When this test is applied, no prima facie duty of care arose
between the respondent and the appellants, who deposited money into a
solicitor’s trust account as participants in a third-party business promotion. 
This case does not fall within, nor is it analogous to, any category of cases
in which a duty of care has previously been recognized.  Furthermore, this is
not a case in which a new duty of care should be recognized.  The Law
Society Act does not impose a private law duty of care on the respondent on
the facts of this case.  While  the Act ensures the protection and compensation
of clients as members of the public,  the appellants, or the members of the
Class they represent, were not “clients” of the solicitor in the traditional
sense.  Finally, the immunity given to benchers or officials by s. 9 of
the Act precludes any inference of an intention to provide compensation in
circumstances that fall outside the lawyers’ professional indemnity insurance
and the lawyers’ fund for client compensation.  In any event, even if there
were a prima facie duty of care on the part of the respondent to the
appellants, that duty of care would have been negated by residual policy
considerations outside the relationship of the parties.  Cases Cited  Followed:  Cooper v.
Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79; referred
to:  Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Kamloops
(City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; French v. Law Society of Upper
Canada (1975), 61 D.L.R. (3d) 28; Voratovic v. Law Society of Upper
Canada (1978), 20 O.R. (2d) 214; Calvert v. Law Society of Upper Canada
(1981), 32 O.R. (2d) 176; Lee v. Law Society of Upper Canada, [1994]
O.J. No. 1468 (QL); Carnegie v. Rasmussen Starr Ruddy (1994), 19 O.R.
(3d) 272; R.D. Belanger & Associates Ltd. v. Stadium Corp. of Ontario
Ltd. (1991), 5 O.R.  (3d) 778; Hunt v. Carey Canada Inc., [1990] 2
S.C.R. 959; Hercules Managements Ltd. v. Ernst & Young, [1997] 2
S.C.R. 165.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Law Society Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.8, ss. 9, 27, 33, 51, 60, 61.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Court of Appeal for
Ontario (2000), 48 O.R. (3d) 329, 188 D.L.R. (4th) 613, 133 O.A.C. 286, 1
C.C.L.T. (3d) 193, 46 C.P.C. (4th) 30, [2000] O.J. No. 2085 (QL), dismissing
the appellants’ appeal from a decision of the Ontario Court (General Division)
(1998), 37 O.R. (3d) 279, 156 D.L.R. (4th) 348, 19 C.P.C. (4th) 43, 41 C.C.L.T.
(2d) 241, [1998] O.J. No. 132 (QL).  Appeal dismissed.  David E. Wires, Karen E.
Jolley and Lisa D. La Horey, for the appellants.  W. Ross Murray,
Q.C., and M. Christine Fotopoulos, for the respondent.  Sara Blake, for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario.  Neil Finkelstein and Johanna M.
Superina, for the intervener the Ontario Securities Commission.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by   I.  Facts  2         
The appellants, John and Nancy Edwards, represent a class of individuals
who were allegedly victimized by a gold delivery fraud.  In 1989 the appellants
met Arlene Woolcox, who encouraged them to purchase gold from Sisto Consultants
Inc.  Pursuant to a “Gold Delivery Contract”, Woolcox and other selling agents
advised the appellants that their funds were to be paid to the Palmer Mills
client trust account and would be held in trust by Mills.  The appellants paid
over US$300,000 in bank drafts to the trust account, which they financed by the
sale of a portion of their business and a second mortgage on their home.  The
bank drafts were to be held for 90 days, at the end of which the plaintiffs
would receive the gold for which they had contracted.  Despite repeated
requests, the gold did not materialize.  The plaintiffs later learned that
although US$9,074,061.70 had been given in trust to Mills for the delivery of
the gold, no mine existed and no gold was ever produced to satisfy the delivery
requirements of the Gold Delivery Contracts.  By May 15, 1990, only
US$109,247.39  remained in the trust account.  This amount was seized by the
Ontario Securities Commission.  3         
As in Cooper, supra, the particulars of the alleged fraud
are not at issue in this appeal; what is at issue is the role of the Law
Society in allegedly failing “to take any effective steps to ensure that Mills
was operating his trust account in the prescribed manner”.  The Law Society
entered the fray when, in 1989, Mills wrote them a letter regarding the
unorthodox use of his own trust account.  Based on this disclosure, the Law
Society commenced an investigation.  The appellants claim that once the Law
Society knew the account was being used improperly, the “Law Society had a duty
to ensure that Mills operated his trust account according to regulations or
alternatively to warn the plaintiffs and the Class that it had chosen to
abandon its supervisory jurisdiction”.  4                                  
In the appellants’ view, the Law Society breached its duty of care by failing
“to take any effective steps to ensure that Mills was operating his trust
account in the prescribed manner”.  The appellants allege, in particular, that
the Law Society:  (a)  made a decision to investigate allegations of irregularities in
the trust account of Palmer Mills but failed to contact Mills to ask for an
opportunity to review his books of account, compare the accounts with the
Society’s trust accounting regulations or the Public Trustee and freeze the
trust account pending notification of the beneficiaries of the account;  (b)  failed to properly investigate facts which, if true, appeared to
establish Mills’ breach of the Law Society trust accounting regulations when it
knew or ought to have known that Mills had been reported to the Law Society
approximately 12 months earlier for alleged breach of trust accounting
regulations;  (c)  failed to require Mills to present his trust accounting records
for examination and review;  (d)  failed to warn beneficiaries of the trusts of which Mills was
trustee that there were grounds for investigating the books of account of the
Palmer Mills trust account;  (e)  failed to make a determination that there was reasonable cause to
believe that Mills was or may be guilty of misconduct in connection with the
trust funds in his possession or under his control and that his trust accounts
were being used to facilitate a fraud on the plaintiffs and Class members;  (f)  having failed to make the determination that there was reasonable
cause to believe that Mills was or may be guilty of misconduct in connection
with the trust funds in his possession or under his control, failed to take the
necessary steps to ensure that the trust funds were not paid out or dealt with
by Mills without leave of a judge of the Ontario Court (General Division);  (g)  failed to take any other interim measures pending completion of
its investigation to ensure that Mills did not dissipate the trust funds of the
plaintiffs and the Class before completion of the investigation;   (i)  failed to warn the beneficiaries that Mills had a conflict of
interest in representing their interests and that their interests were not
represented notwithstanding Mills’ undertaking.  The appellants
also named selling agents, Mills (who has since died) and other defendants in
their statement of claim.  II.  Judgments  A.  Ontario
Court (General Division) (1998), 37 O.R. (3d) 279   B.  Ontario
Court of Appeal (2000), 48 O.R. (3d) 329    For
substantially similar reasons as the British Columbia Court of Appeal in Cooper,
therefore, Finlayson J.A. dismissed the appeal.  III.  Issues  7                                  
1.    Does the Law Society of Upper Canada owe a duty of care to persons
who deposit money into a solicitor’s trust account in respect of losses
resulting from misuse of the account?  2.                If there is such a duty, are
there grounds rooted in policy which would limit or negate the finding of a
duty?  IV.  Analysis  8         
The companion case of Cooper outlines the approach in assessing
whether a duty of care will be recognized in a given case.  Specifically, Cooper
revisits the Anns test and clarifies the express policy components to be
considered at each stage.  9         
At the first stage of the Anns test, the question is whether the
circumstances disclose reasonably foreseeable harm and proximity sufficient to
establish a prima facie duty of care.  The focus at this stage is on
factors arising from the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant,
including broad considerations of policy.  The starting point for this analysis
is to determine whether there are analogous categories of cases in which
proximity has previously been recognized.  If no such cases exist, the question
then becomes whether a new duty of care should be recognized in the
circumstances.  Mere foreseeability is not enough to establish a prima facie
duty of care.  The plaintiff must also show proximity — that the defendant was
in a close and direct relationship to him or her such that it is just to impose
a duty of care in the circumstances.  Factors giving rise to proximity must be grounded
in the governing statute when there is one, as in the present case.  10     
If the plaintiff is successful at the first stage of Anns such
that a prima facie duty of care has been established (despite the fact
that the proposed duty does not fall within an already recognized category of
recovery), the second stage of the Anns test must be addressed.  That
question is whether there exist residual policy considerations which justify
denying liability.  Residual policy considerations include, among other things,
the effect of recognizing that duty of care on other legal obligations, its
impact on the legal system and, in a less precise but important consideration,
the effect of imposing liability on society in general.  V.  Application
of the Test  11     
The appellants submitted that the Law Society of Upper Canada, as the
governing body of the self-regulated legal profession in Ontario, owed a duty
of care to persons who deposited money into a solicitor’s trust account in
respect of losses resulting from misuse of that account.  Applying the test
expressed in the companion appeal of Cooper, we disagree.  For
substantially the reasons advanced by the Court of Appeal, per Finlayson
J.A., we find that this is not a proper case in which to find a duty of care.  12     
Examining the first branch of the Anns test, whether there
presently exists a duty of care, we conclude that this case does not fall
within nor is it analogous to any category of cases in which a duty of care has
previously been recognized.  13     
The next question is whether this is a situation in which a new duty of
care should be recognized.  In order to satisfy this requirement, the plaintiff
must show foreseeability and proximity.  An examination of the governing
statute, the Law Society Act, does not reveal any legislative intent to
expressly or by implication impose a private law duty on the Law Society in the
facts of this case.  It is noteworthy that, as Finlayson J.A. observed, it was
not expressly alleged that the appellants, or any members of the class that
they propose to represent, were “clients” of Mills in the traditional sense. 
Instead, the appellants alleged that the duty of the Law Society went beyond a
concern for the protection of clients in the traditional sense and extended to
the public in general.  14     
With reference to the Act, it is apparent that the Law Society regulates
the legal profession.  Specifically, its responsibilities include the admission
standards of the profession (beginning at s. 27), the continuing education of
its members (s. 60) and the formulation and enforcement of a code of
professional ethics.  The appellants argued that a private law duty of care to
persons who deposit moneys into a solicitor’s trust account, as members of the
public, can be inferred from the Law Society’s statutory public interest
mandate.  In particular, it is alleged that the Law Society’s investigative and
disciplinary powers over its members (beginning at s. 33), ground this duty to
persons such as the appellants in the present case.  We disagree.  The Law
Society Act is geared for the protection of clients and thereby the public
as a whole, it does not mean that the Law Society owes a private law duty of
care to a member of the public who deposits money into a solicitor’s trust
account.  Decisions made by the Law Society require the exercise of
legislatively delegated discretion and involve pursuing a myriad of objectives
consistent with public rather than private law duties.  15     
Safeguards, in addition to a private law duty of care, exist to ensure
the protection and compensation of clients as members of the public.  These
safeguards are expressly provided by the Legislature as a means to compensate
for economic loss.  Examples include a public insurance and/or compensation
scheme funded by the profession itself.  In this case, the Law Society
maintains a Compensation Fund (see s. 51) to compensate for losses sustained as
a result of dishonesty by lawyers.  The Lawyers’ Professional Indemnity Company
provides insurance for claims by clients against their lawyers for negligence
(see s. 61).  16     
Finally, and perhaps most indicative of the Legislature’s intent, the
Act provides statutory immunity in s. 9 of the Act which read:  9.  No action or other proceedings for
damages shall be instituted against the Treasurer or any bencher, official of
the Society or person appointed in Convocation for any act done in good faith
in the performance or intended performance of any duty or in the exercise or in
the intended exercise of any power under this Act, a regulation or a rule, or for
any neglect or default in the performance or exercise in good faith of any such
duty or power.  17     
Section 9 precludes any inference of an intention to provide
compensation in circumstances that fall outside the lawyers’ professional
indemnity insurance and the lawyers’ fund for client compensation.  18     
We conclude that no prima facie duty of care arose between the
Law Society and the appellants who deposited money into a solicitor’s trust
account, not as clients but as participants in a third person business promotion.  19     
In light of this conclusion, it is unnecessary to examine the second
stage of the Anns test.  However, had we found the existence of a prima
facie duty of care at stage one, such duty of care would have been negated
by residual policy considerations outside the relationship of the parties. 
This was the conclusion in Cooper and this case is indistinguishable.  20     
In the result the judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal is affirmed
and the appeal is dismissed with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  McCague, Wires, Peacock,
Borlack, McInnis & Lloyd, Toronto.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Borden Ladner Gervais,
Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General for
Ontario:  The Attorney General for Ontario, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Ontario Securities
Commission:  Blake, Cassels & Graydon, Toronto.   