ter Neuzen v. Korn, [1995] 3
S.C.R. 674  Kobe ter Neuzen          Appellant  v.  Dr. Gerald Korn          Respondent  and  Association of Transfused Hepatitis C
Survivors, the Canadian Hospital Association and the Canadian Red Cross Society                                                      Interveners  Indexed as:  ter Neuzen v.
Korn  File No.:  23773.  1995:  February 2;
1995:  October 19.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                         Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.                     Per La Forest, Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory,
McLachlin and Iacobucci JJ.:  It is well settled that physicians have a
duty to conduct their practice in accordance with the conduct of a prudent and
diligent doctor in the same circumstances.  In the case of a specialist, such
as a gynaecologist and obstetrician, the doctor's behaviour must be assessed in
light of the conduct of other ordinary specialists, who possess a reasonable
level of knowledge, competence and skill expected of professionals in Canada, in
that field.  The conduct of physicians must be judged in the light of the
knowledge that ought to have been reasonably possessed at the time of the
alleged act of negligence.  It was not possible for a jury acting judicially to
have found that, in 1985, the respondent ought to have known of the risk of HIV
by AI.  While conformity with common practice will generally exonerate
physicians of any complaint of negligence, there are certain situations where
the standard practice itself may be found to be negligent.  However, this will
only be where the standard practice is fraught with obvious risks such that
anyone is capable of finding it negligent, without the necessity of judging
matters requiring diagnostic or clinical expertise.  The question as to whether
the trier of fact can find that a standard practice is itself negligent is a
question of law to be determined by the trial judge irrespective of the mode of
trial.  The first aspect of the negligence claim was not one that the jury
could decide without the aid of expert evidence.  Accordingly, the trial judge
erred in inviting them to do so.                      The Information
Sheet provided by the respondent did not amount to a warranty that the donor
would not be homosexual or a drug abuser.  There is no indication that there
was any intention on the part of either party that there should be contractual
liability in respect of the statement in the Information Sheet.  Moreover, it
appears that the appellant did not raise this issue in either court below.                     In order for the Sale
of Goods Act to apply, a contract must be primarily for the purpose of
selling goods.  If the sale of a good is merely incidental to what is primarily
a contract for services, then the statute will not imply a warranty.  Assuming
that there was in fact a sale of semen between the appellant and respondent, it
cannot be contended that the contract was one primarily for the sale of semen
such as to attract the application of the Sale of Goods Act.  Apart from
the Act, a court must consider whether a common law warranty of fitness and
merchantability should be implied into the contract which includes services as
well as the provision of materials.  However, such a warranty will not be implied
in all circumstances.  The court must examine the specific nature of the
contract and the relationship between the parties in order to assess whether it
was the intention of the parties that such a warranty be implied.  Courts must
be very cautious in their approach to implying contractual terms.  A rationale
for implying warranties in contracts of goods and services is that a supplier
of goods generally has recourse against the manufacturer under the Sale of
Goods Act as a result of the statutory conditions imposed.  While it is
true that the primary purpose of the implied warranty is to hold the supplier
of goods liable notwithstanding the absence of negligence, different
considerations apply in the context of the medical profession than in the ordinary
commercial context.  The doctor cannot trace the liability back to the initial
manufacturer.  Moreover, it must be recognized that biological products such as
blood and semen, unlike manufactured products, carry certain inherent risks. 
It would be inappropriate to imply a warranty of fitness and merchantability in
the circumstances of this case.  Moreover, any warranty would simply be to take
reasonable care.    Cases Cited  By Sopinka J.                       Referred to:  Gray v. Alanco Developments Ltd.
(1967), 61 D.L.R. (2d) 652; Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130; Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., [1978] 2
S.C.R. 229; Thornton v. Board of School Trustees of School District
No. 57 (Prince George), [1978] 2 S.C.R. 267; Arnold v. Teno,
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 287.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited  Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 298, s. 6.  Sale
of Goods Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 370, ss. 17, 18.  Authors Cited   Charles, W. H. R. 
Charles Handbook on Assessment of Damages in Personal Injury Cases, 2nd
ed.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1990.  Fleming,
John G.  The Law of Torts, 7th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1987.  Fridman, G. H. L. 
Sale of Goods in Canada, 2nd ed.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1979.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (1993), 81 B.C.L.R. (2d) 39,
103 D.L.R. (4th) 473, [1993] 6 W.W.R. 647, 29 B.C.A.C. 1, 48 W.A.C. 1, 16
C.C.L.T. (2d) 65, setting aside the jury's verdict, which found the respondent
negligent and awarded damages to the appellant, and ordering a new trial. 
Appeal dismissed.                     Sandra J.
Harper and Kathleen
Birney, for the appellant.                     Christopher E.
Hinkson, Q.C.,
and M. Lynn McBride, for the respondent.                      Written submissions
only by Daniel A. Webster, Q.C., for the intervener the
Canadian Hospital Association.                     Written submissions
only by Peter K. Boeckle and Anil Varma, for the intervener
the Canadian Red Cross Society.  //Sopinka J.//                     The judgment of La
Forest, Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin and Iacobucci JJ. was delivered by  1                 Sopinka
J. -- This appeal raises issues concerning the liability of the
respondent physician for conducting an artificial insemination ("AI")
procedure which resulted in his patient, the appellant, contracting the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus ("HIV") through the infected semen of the
donor.  Specifically, this Court must address whether the respondent physician
could be found negligent, notwithstanding conformity with standard medical
practice, and whether the trial judge erred in instructing the jury that the
prevailing standard of practice could itself be found to be negligent.  2                 As well, this appeal also raises
for consideration the issue of whether the implied conditions under the Sale
of Goods Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 370, are applicable in the present
circumstances or whether there exists an implied warranty at common law that
the semen would be of merchantable quality and fit for its purpose.  3                 Finally, this appeal requires
the Court to consider whether the rough upper limit for non-pecuniary damages,
established by this Court in Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd.,
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 229, ought to have been applied by the jury in the present
case.  First, it must be decided whether the trial judge erred in failing to
charge the jury on the rough upper limit.  If the trial judge was not in error,
this Court must decide whether the damages awarded for non-pecuniary loss,
which far exceeded the upper limit established in Andrews, ought
nonetheless to be adjusted in accordance with those principles.  4                 I should note that the
interveners HIV-T Group (Blood Transfused) and Canadian Association of
Transfused Hepatitis C Survivors also raised the issue of whether the medical
profession ought to be held liable for the distribution of defective products,
such as semen, based on a theory of strict liability in tort.  This approach
has been used in some American cases.  However, I am in agreement with the
respondent that this is not the appropriate case to address this important
issue which could have far-reaching implications for the medical profession and
the Canadian system of public health insurance in general.  The appellant did not
raise this issue in her pleadings at trial, nor at the Court of Appeal.  Thus,
the issue has been raised for the first time at this Court by the interveners. 
In these circumstances, the applicability of strict liability in tort is best
left for another day.  I.  Facts  5                 The facts and the evidence of
the expert witnesses at trial were thoroughly summarized in the reasons of the
Court of Appeal.  I do not intend to review the evidence of each expert
individually again in these reasons.  However, in order to resolve this appeal,
it is necessary to review the relevant facts in some detail and highlight some
of the key aspects which emerge from the evidence.  6                 The respondent is an
obstetrician and gynaecologist and has practised AI since 1974.  The appellant
was a psychiatric nurse.  She participated in the respondent's AI program from
1981 until January 21, 1985, during which time she underwent about 35 AI
procedures.  It was agreed that the appellant became infected by HIV as a
result of the AI procedure on January 21, 1985.  The respondent did not warn
the appellant of the risk of HIV infection resulting from the AI procedure
(also referred to as "the risk").  7                 The first report of HIV in
female sex partners of men with AIDS appeared in early 1983.  At that time,
heterosexual intercourse was seen as a potential source of infection.  However,
there was no link between AI and HIV.  In December 1983, for the first time,
the risk of contracting AIDS was related to blood transfusions.  In October
1983, an important letter was published by Dr. Mascola in the New England
Journal of Medicine suggesting that there was a risk of transmitting
sexually transmitted diseases ("STDs") through AI.  However, this
prestigious journal was not widely read by gynaecologists and the respondent
did not read this letter.  It appears that Dr. Mascola was the first person in
the world to express a concern about the possibility of transmitting HIV
through AI.  The first documented case in the world of HIV transmission through
AI was published in the lay media in July 1985 and in a medical journal in
September 1985.  None of the obstetric literature mentioned AI as a mode of
transmission of HIV and no article summarized the disease risks of AI before
1986.  8                 The evidence reveals that the
knowledge about HIV was rapidly growing in the period of 1984-85; however, it
was still quite limited and confusing in the early days.  Generally, research
scientists and health care officials in the AIDS field were expected to be more
up to date on medical developments concerning HIV than clinical practitioners
and the general medical community.  In 1984, the Elisa test was developed in
the United States which enabled doctors to test for HIV in blood and tissues. 
However, as of January 21, 1985, there was no test available for the detection
of HIV in semen or blood in Canada.  The Elisa test did not become available in
Canada until later in 1985.  Therefore, it was impossible to test the semen of
donors for HIV at the time the appellant became infected.  9                 At this time, it was widely
believed that HIV was an STD; however, it was hoped that the atraumatic AI
procedure was free of risk.  It was believed that the small abrasions caused by
intercourse were necessary in order for the virus to get into the bloodstream. 
Thus, in late 1984, a possibility of the transmission of HIV through
heterosexual intercourse was known, but AI was not seriously considered to put
anyone at risk of being infected.  10               Some of the experts testified that
an analogy could be drawn between Hepatitis B and HIV, since both were STDs. 
It was not until late 1986 that it was recognized that Hepatitis B could be
transmitted by AI and it was common ground that there were no published reports
of Hepatitis B transmissions by AI until the fall of 1987.  11               In mid-1984, four babies in
Australia were found to have acquired AIDS by blood transfusions.  Since it was
known that the Elisa test would eventually be available for clinical use, this
led to a ministerial decree to impose a moratorium on all body fluid and tissue
transfers.  As a result, all AI clinics were closed at this time, although this
was not supported by the whole medical profession in Australia.  This event was
not widely publicized in North America and the respondent, as well as the
general medical community in North America, were unaware of the closures in
Australia until later in 1985.  Apparently, there was little exchange of
medical information on the subject of HIV between Australia and North America. 
In September 1985, an article in the British medical journal Lancet
revealed that four Australian women had contracted HIV from AI.  When the
respondent learned of this he immediately discontinued his AI program and
recommended that his donors and the appellant be tested.  12               The American Fertility Society
published guidelines for the use of semen donor insemination for the first time
in 1986 and these guidelines were revised in 1988.  The new guidelines
recommended the use of frozen semen only, which is stored for at least six
months.  Blood samples for HIV antibodies are taken at the time of semen
donation and six months later.  The semen is only to be used if both samples are
HIV negative.  These guidelines were not published by the American Center for
Disease Control until February 1988.  The respondent did not start testing for
Hepatitis B until sometime in 1987-88, when the guidelines were issued.  13               Although the respondent knew that
HIV could be transmitted by heterosexual sex, as well as through blood
transfusions, he was not aware that HIV could be transmitted by AI until July
1985, when he heard about the experience in Australia.  None of the medical
publications he read prior to January 1985 nor any of the medical meetings he
attended suggested that there was a risk of contracting HIV through AI.  The
respondent did not read Dr. Mascola's letter which appeared in the New
England Journal of Medicine.  He did not make any connection between the
fact HIV was an STD and the possibility that it could be passed on through AI
since there was nothing recorded to this effect.  14               There was expert evidence that the
respondent's AI practice was in keeping with general practices across Canada. 
Specifically, his AI practice of recruitment and screening of donors and semen
accorded with standard practice across Canada.  The respondent used only fresh
semen prior to January 1985.  He personally interviewed all his donors instead
of using a questionnaire.  In the interview, the respondent obtained a complete
medical history of the prospective donor including whether the donor was heterosexual
or homosexual.  The respondent rejected homosexuals because he considered that
they had practices that could potentially transmit certain diseases to
recipients.  The respondent also inquired into the levels of sexual activity
since active donors were more likely to be exposed to STDs.  15               The respondent also conducted a
general physical examination.  He tested for gonorrhoea, syphilis and other
bacteria and conducted blood and semen tests for Rh blood factor.  Other than
on a random basis, there was no repeat testing of semen nor re-interviewing of
donors.  Of the 28 active donors used by the respondent in his AI practice,
only the donor whose semen was administered to the appellant was infected by
HIV.  That donor had been asked whether he was heterosexual or homosexual and
he replied that he was heterosexual.  After the donor tested HIV positive, he
told the respondent that he was bisexual.  16               At trial, the trial judge
instructed the jury that it was open to find the respondent negligent on the
basis that he failed to comply with the standard medical practice at that
time.  Alternatively, the trial judge stated that the jury could find that the
approved practice itself was negligent.  17               With respect to the sale of goods
issue, the trial judge instructed the jury to first determine whether the
contract between the parties was primarily one for goods or primarily for
services.  If it was primarily for goods, then the Sale of Goods Act
applied.  However, the jury held that the contract was primarily one for
services and therefore the Act did not apply.  The trial judge also instructed
the jury that aside from the Act, they had to consider whether there was a
warranty at common law.  However, in this context, the trial judge stated that
any common law warranty would simply amount to the same thing as negligence. 
In other words, under the common law warranty in a contract for medical
services, the respondent undertakes to meet the standards of a reasonably
competent person practising in his field.  The doctor does not warrant that the
services will be effective.  18               In the result, the jury found the
respondent negligent.  However, it is unknown on what basis the jurors reached
their decision.  The damages awarded by the jury totalled $883,800, including
$460,000 for non-pecuniary damages.  On appeal, however, the verdict of the
jury was set aside and the Court of Appeal ordered a new trial on the issue of
liability as well as damages: (1993), 81 B.C.L.R. (2d) 39, 103 D.L.R. (4th)
473, [1993] 6 W.W.R. 647, 29 B.C.A.C. 1, 48 W.A.C. 1, 16 C.C.L.T. (2d) 65.  II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  Sale
of Goods Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 370:                     17.  Where there is a contract for the
sale of goods by description, there is an implied condition that the goods
shall correspond with the description.  If the sale be by sample, as well as by
description, it is not sufficient that the bulk of the goods correspond with
the sample if the goods do not also correspond with the description.                     18.  Subject to this Act and any statute
in that behalf, there is no implied warranty or condition as to the quality or
fitness for any particular purpose of goods supplied under a contract of sale,
except as follows:  (a)where
the buyer, expressly or by implication, makes known to the seller the
particular purpose for which the goods are required, so as to show that the
buyer relies on the seller's skill or judgment, and the goods are of a
description which it is in the course of the seller's business to supply,
whether he is the manufacturer or not, there is an implied condition that the
goods are reasonably fit for such purpose; except that in the case of a
contract for the sale of a specified article under its patent or other trade
name, there is no implied condition as to its fitness for any particular
purpose;  (b)where
goods are bought by description from a seller who deals in goods of that
description, whether he is the manufacturer or not, there is an implied
condition that the goods shall be of merchantable quality; but if the buyer has
examined the goods there is no implied condition as regards defects which such
examination ought to have revealed;  (c)an
implied warranty or condition as to quality or fitness for a particular purpose
may be annexed by the usage of trade; and  (d)an
express warranty or condition does not negative a warranty or condition implied
by this Act unless inconsistent with it.  III.  Judgment of Court of Appeal
(1993), 81 B.C.L.R. (2d) 39  19               After a review of the evidence,
including an exhaustive review of the evidence of standard practice, the court
noted that the law was well established that "physicians are required to
conduct themselves at least in accordance with the standard of their
professional peers, but they are not expected to guarantee the success of their
procedures or the perfect safety of their patients" (p. 61).  20               With respect to the negligence
claim, the Court of Appeal distinguished between two aspects of the defendant's
practice:  (1)the
conduct of the AI procedure which reflected the current state of knowledge as
to the risk of transmission of HIV involved in the use of that procedure;  (2)               the screening and
follow-up of donors.  21               With respect to the first aspect
of the case, the court stated (at p. 67):                     Thus,
it is apparent that for the Defendant to be found liable on this part of the
case, it would be necessary for the jury to be satisfied that the Defendant
failed to have the knowledge and understanding expected in accordance with the
standards of his profession.  That, of course, was a question for the jury,
and it was essential that the jury be carefully instructed upon the standard
they should apply in deciding whether the Defendant was guilty of negligence. 
[Emphasis added.]  22               The court doubted that it could
reasonably be found that the defendant was negligent in using fresh semen.  It
found, however, that the instructions to the jury were deficient in that the
trial judge instructed the jury that it was open for them to find the general
practice itself was negligent.  In this regard, the court stated (at
p. 73):  The
only proper instruction to be given on at least a part of the case was that the
jury should decide whether the Defendant conducted himself as a reasonable
physician would in similar circumstances.  In our judgment, that required the
jury to confine itself to prevailing standards of practice.  The Court of Appeal also stated (at p.
74):                     It
was not possible on the evidence for the jury to find that it was negligent of
the Defendant not to have known of the risk of HIV by AI and that he should
have ceased performing AI.  That was the principal argument of the Plaintiff
and it may be the ground upon which the jury based its finding of negligence. 
If that is the case the verdict cannot stand.  23               With respect to the second aspect
of the defendant's practice relating to the screening and follow-up of donors,
the Court of Appeal stated (at p. 69):                     What
is more significant is that the Defendant made specific enquiries about
homosexuality, not out of concern about HIV or AIDS, but because he regarded
such persons as higher risks for the more common STDs.  As a result of his
initial enquiry, he felt confident in assuring the Plaintiff that her donor was
not a homosexual person.  A follow-up interview, or closer questioning, may
or may not have disclosed that the donor was bisexual.                                                                      ...                     Keeping
in mind that infection in a donor could be a "day-to-day" thing as
described by Dr. Mascola, and that lifestyle changes can occur quickly, it
was necessary for the jury to consider whether the Defendant's screening
procedures were deficient.  Again, of course, it was essential that the
jury be given a proper instruction on the principles governing such matters. 
[Emphasis added.]  24               With respect to the instructions
on this aspect, the Court of Appeal stated (at p. 73):                     On
the other part of the case, relating to the screening of donors, and follow-up
interviews, the case is not so clear because less scientific questions are
involved.  In addition, we have identified some overlap between the two parts
of the case.  Screening homosexual persons out of an AI program because of
their believed greater risk of infection was recognized by the Defendant as a
desirable aim.  The elimination of this particular donor for any reason would
have protected the Plaintiff from HIV.  It must be remembered, however, that it
was impossible to guarantee safety because an inaccurate answer or a changed
lifestyle after one or more follow-up interviews could have left the Plaintiff
exposed to infection.  There is no evidence suggesting that donors should be
interviewed by the responsible physician before every donation.                     On
the other hand, if the jury found that the Defendant breached this duty of care
to the Plaintiff then she may have an actionable claim against the Defendant
because a defendant cannot always escape liability even though he does not
foresee all the specific harm his patient may suffer from such a breach.  25               The court concluded that it was
impossible to determine whether the jury found the respondent negligent on the
first or second aspects of the defendant's practice.  On the evidence, it was
not available to the jury to find that the respondent ought to have known of
the risk of HIV by AI.  However, the trial judge charged the jury in this
manner and it may have been the basis upon which the jury found negligence. 
Therefore, the verdict could not stand.  A new trial was ordered on the issues
other than those based on the first aspect of the case.  26               With respect to the sale of goods
issue, the court assumed without deciding that there was a sale of semen.  The
trial judge instructed the jury to decide whether the contract between the
parties was primarily for the sale of a good or whether it was a contract for
services.  Since the jury decided that it was not a sale of goods, the Sale
of Goods Act did not apply.  The court held that there was evidence upon
which a jury could conclude that the arrangement was primarily one for
professional services.  27               However, that did not resolve the
issue of whether there should be an implied warranty at common law for the
provision of medical services which included a good.  The jury did not decide
this issue because the trial judge instructed the jury that the warranty
essentially amounted to the same thing as negligence.  The court did not wish
to go as far as to say that a physician would only be liable in warranty at
common law if there was negligence in failing to detect or remove a defect in
the good.  Instead, the court was of the view that this was not a proper case
for the implication of a warranty.  In its opinion, it is a question of fact in
each case whether the circumstances are sufficient to exclude common law
warranties.  It therefore dismissed this claim.  28               The court next considered the
respondent's argument that the award of $460,000 for non-pecuniary damages, in
excess of the rough upper limit prescribed by the Supreme Court of Canada, was
inordinately high.  It held that it was reasonable for the trial judge not to
have instructed the jury on a rough upper limit when neither counsel had asked
for such a charge.  However, this did not mean that the appellant's damages
should not be properly assessed in light of the jurisprudence.  Relying on Lindal
v. Lindal, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 629, the court concluded (at p. 87):                     While
recognizing that the [appellant's] injuries are markedly different in kind from
those under consideration in the trilogy, we cannot conclude that the principle
adopted by the Supreme Court of Canada, aimed at controlling the social burden
of damage awards, should not be applied in this case.  It follows, in our view,
that the [appellant's] non-pecuniary damages cannot exceed the adjusted rough
upper limit.  29               It was held that, although the
trial judge did not err in his instruction to the jury, if the damages exceed
the rough upper limit, the Court of Appeal must correct the award in conformity
with the governing principles.  Since there was to be a new trial on liability,
the court was of the view that there should also be a new trial ordered on the
question of damages generally.  IV.  Issues  1.Did
the Court of Appeal err in holding that the trial judge ought not to have
charged the jury that, even if the respondent conformed to standard medical
practice, it was open to the jury to find that the prevailing medical practice
with respect to the AI procedure was negligent?  2.Did
the Court of Appeal err in rejecting the appellant's claim based on a warranty
under the Sale of Goods Act?  3.Did
the Court of Appeal err in holding that a warranty of quality or fitness should
not be implied under the common law, in the circumstances of this case?  4.Did
the Court of Appeal err in holding that the rough upper limit on non-pecuniary
damages applies in the present case?  5.If
the rough upper limit of non-pecuniary damages applies in the present case,
must the jury be instructed accordingly or should it be left to the Court of
Appeal to adjust a jury award which exceeds the limit?  V.  Analysis  A.  Professional Negligence  30               I agree with the Court of Appeal
that there are two aspects to the claim of professional negligence:  (1)breach
of duty arising from the failure to be aware of the risk of HIV infection
through the use of AI; and  (2)breach
of duty with respect to the screening and follow-up of donors.  31               The alleged departures from the
applicable standard of care were:  (1)in
respect of the first aspect, failure to discontinue the practice of AI or, in
the alternative, to warn the patients of the risk;  (2)in
respect of the second aspect, the failure to adequately screen donors so as to
eliminate those in a high risk category with relation to the transmission of
STDs and to re-interview donors periodically to detect changes in lifestyle. 
There is also the claim that frozen semen rather than fresh semen should have
been used.  32               In order to properly address the
issues relating to professional negligence, it is useful to consider what were
the matters which the jury was obliged to decide.  In each aspect of the claim
the jury was bound to consider whether the evidence established that a standard
of practice existed.  If the answer was in the affirmative, the next question
was whether the defendant conformed to that practice.  An affirmative answer to
this question would result in a finding of no negligence in favour of the
respondent unless the jury was entitled to consider and hold that the standard
practice was itself below the required legal standard and that conduct below
that standard constituted negligence.  Similarly, if the jury found that no
standard practice was established by the evidence, the appellant would have
failed to prove her case unless the jury was entitled to fix the standard
without the necessity of expert evidence.  Finally, if the respondent failed to
comply with the standard of care established by the evidence or by the jury, in
the absence of or insufficiency of evidence, then the respondent would be found
to be negligent.                     (1)  Standard of
Care and Evidence of Standard Practice  33               It is well settled that physicians
have a duty to conduct their practice in accordance with the conduct of a
prudent and diligent doctor in the same circumstances.  In the case of a
specialist, such as a gynaecologist and obstetrician, the doctor's behaviour
must be assessed in light of the conduct of other ordinary specialists, who
possess a reasonable level of knowledge, competence and skill expected of
professionals in Canada, in that field.  A specialist, such as the respondent,
who holds himself out as possessing a special degree of skill and knowledge,
must exercise the degree of skill of an average specialist in his field:  see Wilson
v. Swanson, [1956] S.C.R. 804, at p. 817, Lapointe v. Hôpital Le Gardeur,
[1992] 1 S.C.R. 351, at p. 361, and McCormick v. Marcotte, [1972] S.C.R.
18.  34               It is also particularly important
to emphasize, in the context of this case, that the conduct of physicians must
be judged in the light of the knowledge that ought to have been reasonably
possessed at the time of the alleged act of negligence.  As Denning L.J.
eloquently stated in Roe v. Ministry of Health, [1954] 2 All E.R. 131
(C.A.), at p. 137, "[w]e must not look at the 1947 accident with 1954
spectacles".  That is, courts must not, with the benefit of hindsight,
judge too harshly doctors who act in accordance with prevailing standards of
professional knowledge.  This point was also emphasized by this Court in Lapointe,
supra, at pp. 362-63:  ...
courts should be careful not to rely upon the perfect vision afforded by
hindsight.  In order to evaluate a particular exercise of judgment fairly, the
doctor's limited ability to foresee future events when determining a course of
conduct must be borne in mind.  Otherwise, the doctor will not be assessed
according to the norms of the average doctor of reasonable ability in the same
circumstances, but rather will be held accountable for mistakes that are
apparent only after the fact.  No issue is taken with this
proposition which was applied both in the trial judge's charge to the jury and
by the Court of Appeal.  35               The Court of Appeal, after a
thorough review of the evidence, held that it was not possible for a jury
acting judicially to have found that, in 1985, the respondent ought to have
known of the risk.  This is a power to review a jury verdict which a court of
appeal clearly possesses.  See Vancouver-Fraser Park District v. Olmstead,
[1975] 2 S.C.R. 831.  I agree with this finding and can find no basis upon
which it can be questioned.  Indeed my review of the evidence leads to the same
conclusion.  The evidence of standard practice on the first aspect of the case
was based entirely on the state of knowledge required of the reasonable
practitioner in 1985 and it would have been equally impossible for a jury
acting judicially to have found that, given the state of knowledge, the
reasonable practitioner ought to either have discontinued AI or warned the
patients of the risk.  It having been admitted that the respondent continued AI
and did not warn his patients, there was no issue concerning his conformity
with the standard practice.  36               The appellant, therefore, can only
support a favourable finding on this aspect of the case on the basis that the
jury was entitled to find that the standard established by the evidence itself
departed from that of a prudent and diligent physician and that the respondent,
in failing to conform with a higher standard, was guilty of negligence.  This
raises the issue as to the correctness of the trial judge's charge to the jury to
the effect that the jury was so entitled.  37               With respect to the second aspect
of the claim in professional negligence, the Court of Appeal considered that a
verdict for the appellant was open to the jury.  It is, however, by no means
clear that the evidence establishes a standard practice with respect to the
screening and follow-up of donors.  This was a matter for the jury to
determine.  If the jury found that the evidence fell short of establishing the
existence of a standard practice, the question arises as to whether the jury
could determine the applicable standard without the aid of expert evidence. 
This is a legal issue upon which the Court of Appeal did not pronounce but
which is closely related to the issue raised by the trial judge's instruction
referred to above.  38               It is generally accepted that when
a doctor acts in accordance with a recognized and respectable practice of the
profession, he or she will not be found to be negligent.  This is because
courts do not ordinarily have the expertise to tell professionals that they are
not behaving appropriately in their field.  In a sense, the medical profession
as a whole is assumed to have adopted procedures which are in the best
interests of patients and are not inherently negligent.  As L'Heureux-Dubé J.
stated in Lapointe, in the context of the Quebec Civil Code (at
pp. 363-64):                     Given
the number of available methods of treatment from which medical professionals
must at times choose, and the distinction between error and fault, a doctor
will not be found liable if the diagnosis and treatment given to a patient
correspond to those recognized by medical science at the time, even in the face
of competing theories.  As expressed more eloquently by André Nadeau in
"La responsabilité médicale" (1946), 6 R. du B. 153, at p.
155:  [TRANSLATION] The courts do not have
jurisdiction to settle scientific disputes or to choose among divergent
opinions of physicians on certain subjects.  They may only make a finding of
fault where a violation of universally accepted rules of medicine has
occurred.  The courts should not involve themselves in controversial questions
of assessment having to do with diagnosis or the treatment of preference. 
[Emphasis added.]  39               In The Law of Torts (7th
ed. 1987), Professor Fleming observed the following with respect to the role of
standard practice, at p. 109:                     Conformity with general practice, on the other
hand, usually dispels a charge of negligence.  It tends to show what others in
the same "business" considered sufficient, that the defendant could
not have learnt how to avoid the accident by the example of others, that most
probably no other practical precautions could have been taken, and that the
impact of an adverse judgment (especially in cases involving industry or a
profession) will be industry-wide and thus assume the function of a "test
case".  Finally, it underlines the need for caution against passing too
cavalierly upon the conduct and decision of experts.                     All
the same, even a common practice may itself be condemned as negligent if
fraught with obvious risks.  [Emphasis added.]  40               With respect to the medical
profession in particular, Professor Fleming noted, at p. 110:                     Common
practice plays its most conspicuous role in medical negligence actions. 
Conscious at once of the layman's ignorance of medical science and apprehensive
of the impact of jury bias on a peculiarly vulnerable profession, courts have
resorted to the safeguard of insisting that negligence in diagnosis and
treatment (including disclosure of risks) cannot ordinarily be established
without the aid of expert testimony or in the teeth of conformity with accepted
medical practice.  However there is no categorical rule.  Thus an accepted
practice is open to censure by a jury (nor expert testimony required) at any
rate in matters not involving diagnostic or clinical skills, on which an
ordinary person may presume to pass judgment sensibly, like omission to inform
the patient of risks, failure to remove a sponge, an explosion set-off by an
admixture of ether vapour and oxygen or injury to a patient's body outside the
area of treatment.  [Emphasis added.  Footnotes omitted.]  41               It is evident from the foregoing
passage that while conformity with common practice will generally exonerate
physicians of any complaint of negligence, there are certain situations where
the standard practice itself may be found to be negligent.  However, this will
only be where the standard practice is "fraught with obvious risks"
such that anyone is capable of finding it negligent, without the necessity of
judging matters requiring diagnostic or clinical expertise.  42               In Roberge v. Bolduc,
[1991] 1 S.C.R. 374, this Court had the opportunity to address this issue in
the context of the civil responsibility of a notary under the Quebec Civil
Code.  In that case, it was recognized that where a custom of a profession
ignores the elementary dictates of caution, it is open to a court to
find the professional person negligent.  Thus, even if a doctor practises in
accordance with common professional practice, he will be liable if that
practice is wanting.  As L'Heureux-Dubé J. stated at pp. 436-37:                     This
brief overview of both doctrine and jurisprudence indicates that courts have
discretion to assess liability despite uncontradicted evidence of common
professional practice at the relevant time.  The standard, in regard to the
particular facts of each case, must still be that of a reasonable professional
in such circumstances.                     It
may very well be that the professional practice reflects prudent and diligent
conduct.  One would hope that if a certain practice has developed amongst professionals
in regard to a particular professional act, such practice is in accordance with
a prudent course of action.  The fact that a professional has followed the
practice of his or her peers may be strong evidence of reasonable and diligent
conduct, but it is not determinative.  If the practice is not in
accordance with the general standards of liability, i.e., that one must act in
a reasonable manner, then the professional who adheres to such a practice can
be found liable, depending on the facts of each case.  [Emphasis in original.]  43               The foregoing principles were also
endorsed by this Court in Waldick v. Malcolm, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 456. 
Thus, it is apparent that conformity with standard practice in a profession
does not necessarily insulate a doctor from negligence where the standard
practice itself is negligent.  The question that remains is under what
circumstances will a professional standard practice be judged negligent?  It
seems that it is only where the practice does not conform with basic care which
is easily understood by the ordinary person who has no particular expertise in
the practices of the profession.  That is, as Professor Fleming suggests, where
the common practice is fraught with danger, a judge or a jury may find that the
practice is itself negligent.  44               As was observed in Lapointe,
courts should not involve themselves in resolving scientific disputes which
require the expertise of the profession.  Courts and juries do not have the
necessary expertise to assess technical matters relating to the diagnosis or
treatment of patients.  Where a common and accepted course of conduct is
adopted based on the specialized and technical expertise of professionals, it
is unsatisfactory for a finder of fact to conclude that such a standard was
inherently negligent.  On the other hand, matters falling within the ordinary
common sense of juries can be judged to be negligent.  For example, where there
are obvious existing alternatives which any reasonable person would utilize in
order to avoid a risk, one could conclude that the failure to adopt such
measures is negligent notwithstanding that it is the prevailing practice among
practitioners in that area.  45               Such a case arose in Anderson
v. Chasney, [1949] 4 D.L.R. 71 (Man. C.A.), aff'd [1950] 4 D.L.R. 223
(S.C.C.).  There, a doctor performed surgery on a child's throat.  During the
course of the surgery, sponges were used without any tape or strings attached
to ensure that none was left in the throat.  Nor was a nurse present to count
the number of sponges used.  One of the sponges was inadvertently left in the
throat and after the operation, the child died of suffocation.  The surgeon
gave evidence that it was not his practice to use sponges with strings, nor to
have anyone count the sponges used.  This appeared to be standard practice in
the hospital, notwithstanding that there were sponges available with strings
and nurses could be made available for counting sponges.  The Court of Appeal
held that the surgeon acted negligently.  46               The principal reasons, written by
McPherson C.J.M., did not specifically deal with the issue with respect to
standard practice.  However, McPherson C.J.M. did observe that the fact a
sponge was left in a potentially dangerous position is one which "the
ordinary man is competent to consider in arriving at a decision as to whether
or not there was negligence" (p. 74).  By failing to take either of
the precautions which were readily available, the majority held that the
surgeon was negligent.  47               In separate concurring reasons,
Coyne J.A. discussed the issue of customary practice among surgeons.  He noted
that whether or not it is negligent to omit to use sponges with ties or fail to
keep count of the sponges is not a matter requiring expert knowledge.  Coyne
J.A. observed that general practice is not a complete defence to negligence.  I
find it useful to quote fairly extensively from his reasons as I believe that
they are directly pertinent to the issues in this case.  At pages 81-82, he
stated:                     Dr.
Chasney defends on the ground that it has not been his practice, and that it is
not the usual practice of operators in the hospital in question and of some
operators elsewhere, to take these precautions.  But he took a chance in
neglecting them.  Whether to adopt them or not, he says, is a matter of
surgical skill and experience and the general practice of practitioners is
conclusive.  This, however, was not peculiarly a matter of such skill and
experience.  His counsel argued that if a general practice of surgeons is
followed, negligence cannot be attributed, and that expert evidence is
conclusive.  But if that were correct the expert witnesses would, in effect, be
the jury to try the question of negligence.  That question, however, must
continue to be one for the petit jury empanelled to try the case, if it is a
jury case, and for the Court where it is not.  The experts remain witnesses
to give their expert opinions in assistance of the jury or the Court to
determine whether there was negligence or not.  The opinions of the experts are
not conclusive.  But when an operation itself is a complicated and critical
one, and acquaintance with anatomy, physiology or other subjects of expert
medical knowledge, skill and experience are essential, jury or Court may not be
justified in disregarding such opinions and reaching conclusions based on views
contrary to those of the experts.  That is not the case here.   Effective
antecedent precautions were not taken and ordinary experience of jurymen or
Court is sufficient to enable them to pass upon the question whether such
conduct constituted negligence.  In my opinion it is clearly so in this case. 
[Emphasis added.]  48               Coyne J.A. then adds the following
at pp. 85-86:                     Whether
or not it is negligence to omit to use sponges with ties or to have a count
kept is not a matter which requires an expert to decide; it is not special
surgical skill that is in question.  Such skill is not necessary to answer the
question.  The point involved is negligence or no negligence.  It is not a
matter here which requires an expert to decide.  General practice of the
defendant and some others does not constitute a complete defence.  It is some
evidence to be taken into consideration on the question of negligence but it is
not conclusive on Court or jury.  If it were a defence conclusive on jury or
Court, a group of operators by adopting some practice could legislate
themselves out of liability for negligence to the public by adopting or continuing
what was an obviously negligent practice, even though a simple precaution,
plainly capable of obviating danger which sometimes might result in death, was
well known.... If a practitioner refuses to take an obvious precaution, he
cannot  exonerate himself by showing that others also neglect to take it. 
[Emphasis added.]  49               As well, Coyne J.A. emphasized
that the case involved no difficult or uncertain questions of medical or
surgical treatment nor any matters of a scientific or highly technical
character.  It was simply a matter of whether obvious and simple precautions,
easily understood by ordinary individuals, were required to be taken.  Coyne
J.A. remarked (at pp. 86-87):                     Ordinary
common sense dictates that when simple methods to avoid danger have been
devised, are known, and are available, non-user, with fatal results, cannot be
justified by saying that others also have been following the same old,
less-careful practice; and that when such methods are readily comprehensible by
the ordinary person, by whom, also, the need to use them or not is easily
apprehended, it is quite within the competence of Court or jury, quite as much
as of experts to deal with the issues; and that the existence of a practice
which neglects them, even if the practice were general, cannot protect the
defendant surgeon.  [Emphasis added.]  50               In brief reasons, the Supreme
Court of Canada affirmed the reasons of McPherson C.J.M.  The Court left open
the issue of when it is appropriate for a judge or jury to find a standard
medical practice to be unacceptable in terms of taking reasonable care.  51               I conclude from the foregoing
that, as a general rule, where a procedure involves difficult or uncertain
questions of medical treatment or complex, scientific or highly technical
matters that are beyond the ordinary experience and understanding of a judge or
jury, it will not be open to find a standard medical practice negligent.  On
the other hand, as an exception to the general rule, if a standard practice
fails to adopt obvious and reasonable precautions which are readily apparent to
the ordinary finder of fact, then it is no excuse for a practitioner to claim
that he or she was merely conforming to such a negligent common practice.  52               The question as to whether the
trier of fact can find that a standard practice is itself negligent is a
question of law to be determined by the trial judge irrespective of the mode of
trial.  It is, of course, for the jury to determine on the evidence what the
standard practice is.  If the evidence is conflicting on this issue, the jury
will have to resolve the conflict.  If, as in this case, the evidence is
virtually conclusive, the trial judge should instruct the jury that failure to
accept the evidence may very well result in an unreasonable verdict which will
be set aside.  Moreover, unless the nature of the issue is of a kind to bring
it within the exception to the general rule, the jury should be instructed that
once they have determined on the evidence what the standard is, the only
remaining issue is whether the defendant conformed to the standard.  On the
other hand, if the case is one coming within the exception so that the jury can
fix the standard on the basis of common sense and the ordinary understanding of
the jury without the assistance of expert testimony, the trial judge must
instruct the jury accordingly.  53               To avoid the problem encountered
in this case due to the inscrutability of the jury's response to the question
relating to negligence, and as a precaution to test the jury's understanding of
the instruction, the question to the jury with respect to negligence should
require that the jury specify in what respects the defendant was negligent.  In
a case in which the general rule applies, the answer will reveal whether the
jury has understood and applied the judge's instruction that it must accept the
standard practice as the legal standard against which the defendant's conduct
must be measured.  Additionally, in a case which falls within the exception to
the general rule and where the jury can fix the standard irrespective of the
expert evidence, the answer to the question will ensure that the standard which
the jury has adopted is not unreasonable or unknown in law.  54               In this regard, it is noteworthy
that the respondent's counsel suggested that the jury be asked to particularize
the acts of negligence.  This was not done, with the result that the Court of
Appeal observed that it is not possible to decide whether the jury did decide
the issue of negligence on the ground that the standard practice was itself
deficient.  55               A related legal issue arises with
respect to the second aspect of this case.  If the jury finds that the evidence
of standard practice does not establish that there indeed exist a standard
practice, can the jury fix the standard without reliance on expert testimony? 
In my opinion, the answer to this question is the same as the answer previously
given.  If the alleged act or acts of negligence are such that the jury could
reject expert evidence as to standard practice and set the appropriate standard
without reliance on expert evidence, then it can do precisely that where the
expert evidence fails to establish a standard practice.  In either case, the
basic question is whether the nature of the issue can be decided on the basis
of the ordinary knowledge possessed by the jury or, on the contrary, the matter
requires expert evidence because it is beyond the ken of the average juror. 
Finally, although this is not a matter which arises in this case, I do not
foreclose the possibility that exceptionally a jury might find negligence in
respect of an issue beyond its ordinary understanding based on expert evidence
which it accepts which falls short of establishing a standard practice.  (2) Conclusion
on Professional Negligence  56               After correctly charging the jury
with respect to the general standard of care relating to physicians, the trial
judge commented on the role of evidence of standard practice as follows:                     In
deciding what risks should have been known to Dr. Korn, evidence of medical
experts of custom or general practice is one factor to be considered, but it is
not conclusive.  It is open to you as triers of fact to find the custom or
general practice negligent.  [Emphasis added.]   57               I agree with the following
characterization by the Court of Appeal of the issue relating to the standard
of care which the jury was called upon to decide in this case (at pp. 72-73):  In
this case there were difficult, uncertain, highly technical scientific
questions requiring information not ordinarily expected of a practising
gynaecologist or obstetrician.  No jury is capable of deciding on its own what
understanding of recent developments the Defendant should bring to his
practice.  As already described, both Dr. Stewart and Dr. Mascola partially
exonerated the Defendant....                     Moreover,
the evidence established that the state of medical knowledge about AIDS and HIV
was highly variable even between highly qualified scientists.  There were
differences of opinion between public health authorities and practitioners in
different medical communities.  In our judgment, this was not the  kind of case
where a judge could properly instruct the jury that it could decide that a
practice that conformed to what other practitioners similarly situated were
following was negligent.  The only proper instruction to be given on at least a
part of the case was that the jury should decide whether the Defendant conducted
himself as a reasonable physician would in similar circumstances.  In our
judgment, that required the jury to confine itself to prevailing standards of
practice.  58               In light of this characterization,
I agree with the conclusion reached by the Court of Appeal that with respect to
the first aspect of the case the question of the standard of care was not one
which the jury could decide without the aid of expert evidence. The Court of
Appeal went on to hold that, since it was impossible to tell from the answer
given by the jury whether or not it found that the standard practice followed
by the respondent and other AI practitioners in Canada was negligent, a new
trial was necessary on this basis alone.   In my opinion, however, this is not
the reason why a new trial is required in this case.  If the claim had been
restricted to the first aspect of the case in negligence, a new trial would not
have been necessary notwithstanding the misdirection with respect to the
standard of care.  A new trial would only have been necessary if a finding of
negligence, supportable on the evidence, was open to the jury.  As I have
pointed out above, the Court of Appeal correctly held that a finding of
negligence on this branch of the case would not be supportable in that it was
not a finding which a jury acting judicially could make.  There was no reason
to direct a new trial on this aspect of the case and the Court of Appeal, in
fact, did not do so.  On this aspect the appellant's claim simply fails.  The
reason that a new trial is necessary is because the jury may have found
negligence on the second aspect of the case, namely the failure to adequately
screen and follow-up donors.  59               The main contention with respect
to this aspect of the claim was that closer questioning and follow-up
interviews with donors might have revealed that the donor who infected the
appellant was in a high risk category relating to the transmission of STDs. 
With respect to the foundation in law of this claim the Court of Appeal stated
(at pp. 74-75):                     HIV
is one of a number of sexually transmitted diseases.  It was the duty of the
Defendant to take reasonable steps to protect his patients against sexually
transmitted diseases.  If he failed to do so he would be liable even if the
specific disease was one which he did not actually foresee.                     As
we are not able to know upon what ground the jury's verdict rests, there must
be a new trial on the issues raised in the pleadings other than those based upon
the Defendant's lack of knowledge of the risk of HIV by AI.  60               I agree that infection with HIV is
within the same class of injury as other STDs and that the respondent could be
liable for the damage caused notwithstanding that he did not foresee that a
failure to take reasonable steps to protect his patients could result in HIV
infection.  It would be sufficient to found liability if it is established that
the respondent ought to have foreseen the class of injury.  See R. v. Côté,
[1976] 1 S.C.R. 595, at p. 604.  61               The evidence as to standard
practice with respect to this aspect of the claim was sketchy and it would be
open to the jury to find that there was at the relevant time no standard
practice.  On the other hand, the jury could also find that the standard
practice was not to screen donors or carry out follow-up interviews beyond what
the respondent did.  In either case, this is an issue that is quite different
from that involved in the first aspect of the case.  In my opinion, the jury
could determine the appropriate standard without reliance on expert evidence. 
Accordingly, if they decide that no standard practice existed, they can fix the
appropriate standard based on their view as to what a prudent and diligent
practitioner ought to have done if he or she foresaw or ought to have foreseen
that failure to carry out reasonable measures to screen and follow-up donors
could result in infection with an STD other than HIV.  As well, if the jury
finds that the evidence does establish a standard practice, it is entitled to
consider whether that practice is itself consistent with the measures which the
hypothetical reasonable prudent practitioner would take in the same
circumstances.  62               There is one other aspect to the
claim in negligence which does not fit neatly into either of the two aspects to
which I have had reference.  I refer to the allegation that the respondent
should have used frozen rather than fresh semen.  The Court of Appeal doubted
that a jury could find for the appellant on this ground but did not exclude
this issue from the matters to be dealt with at the new trial.  It appears that
this allegation was entirely dependent on the Elisa test being available which
did not occur until after January of 1985.  I find nothing else in the evidence
to support a finding of negligence based on this ground.  Accordingly, I would
not have included this allegation in the matters to be dealt with at the new trial
were it not for the fact that it appears to be included in the order in appeal
against which the respondent did not cross-appeal.  I would, therefore, simply
affirm the order of the Court of Appeal in respect to the negligence claim.  B.  Warranty Issues  63               As an alternative ground of
appeal, the appellant contends that the respondent breached a warranty that the
semen provided by the donor would be of merchantable quality and fit for its
purpose.  In other words, she claims that the respondent warranted that the
semen would not be contaminated with any STDs, including HIV, such that it
would injure the appellant.  Under this theory, even absent any negligence, the
respondent would be held strictly liable under contract for failing to provide
uncontaminated sperm.  The appellant puts forward three bases for the existence
of a warranty.  First, she claims that there was an express contractual
warranty found in the Information Sheet provided to the appellant where the
respondent promised that no donor was a homosexual or drug abuser.  Secondly,
the appellant relies on the Sale of Goods Act, s. 18, which imposes
liability on a seller of a good if the good is not fit for its purpose.  This
warranty is statutorily implied into contracts of sale.  Finally, the appellant
argues that there was an implied warranty at common law that the good provided
in a contract for goods and services would not be defective.  I will deal with
each ground in turn.  (1) 
Express warranty in the Information Sheet  64               The appellant asserts that, in the
Information Sheet provided, the respondent promised that the donor would not be
homosexual or a drug abuser and that these statements were made to assure her
that the respondent had taken precautions to ensure that the semen would be
free from contamination.  The appellant claims that the doctor breached this
express warranty.  65               In my view, this ground of appeal
must fail.  There is no indication that there was any intention on the part of
either of the parties that there should be contractual liability in respect of
the statement in the Information Sheet.  In fact, it appears that the appellant
did not have any recollection of receiving any written information from the
respondent regarding the AI procedure.  It is apparent that the purpose of the
Information Sheet was precisely what the name suggests.  That is, to provide
general information to the patient.  There was no intention that the statements
contained therein constitute an express warranty that the donor would not be a
homosexual.  66               Moreover, I note that, at trial,
the appellant did not rely on the existence of an express warranty in the
Information Sheet and the issue was not raised in the trial judge's charge to
the jury.  Nor did the appellant argue this issue at the Court of Appeal. 
Therefore, it appears that the appellant is relying on the express warranty in
the Information Sheet for the first time in this Court.  In any event, as I
have stated, I do not believe there is any merit to this argument.  (2) 
Warranty under the Sale of Goods Act  67               In order for the Sale of Goods
Act to apply, a contract must primarily be for the purpose of selling
goods.  If the sale of a good is merely incidental to what is primarily a
contract for services, then the statute will not imply a warranty.  As Legg J.
observed in Gee v. White Spot Ltd. (1986), 7 B.C.L.R. (2d) 235 (S.C.),
in order to come within the Sale of Goods Act, a contract need not be
one exclusively for the sale of goods.  However, the sale of a good must be the
primary purpose of the contract.  Whether a contract is primarily one for the
sale of goods or primarily one for services depends upon the essential
character of the agreement.  As G. H. L. Fridman wrote at p. 25 of Sale of
Goods in Canada (2nd ed. 1979):  ...
if the primary object of the contract is the transference of property in
something which was not originally the property of the "buyer", the
contract will be one of sale of goods: but if the primary purpose of the
parties is the performance of certain work, or the provision of services,
incidentally to which property in goods is to pass from one party to the other,
the contract will not be one of sale of goods.  68               Thus, the preliminary question
that arises is whether the AI procedure performed by the respondent primarily
involved a contract for the sale of semen, or was it primarily a contract for
medical services.  If the procedure is properly characterized as the latter,
then the appellant's argument under the Sale of Goods Act must fail.  As
the Court of Appeal did, I intend to address this issue assuming that there was
in fact a sale of semen between the appellant and respondent.  However, I note
that it is not entirely clear that this was the case.  69               At trial, the appellant submitted
that the question of whether a contract is characterized as a sale of goods or
one primarily for services is a question of fact which should be left to the
jury.  The trial judge instructed the jury that there was a contract for
medical services as well as for goods.  The jury was then charged that they
must determine, as a question of fact, whether the contract was "primarily
formulated to offer a sale of services, or primarily formulated to offer the
sale of a good or goods".  The jury was told that the Sale of Goods Act
only applied if the contract was primarily for the sale of semen.  70               At the outset, I find it somewhat
problematic that the characterization of the contract was a matter left to the
jury to decide.  It seems that determining whether a particular statute has
application in a given case is a question of law which ought to be resolved by
the trial judge.  Although not a pure question of law, the characterization of
the contract as one primarily for the sale of goods is certainly one of mixed
law and fact.  Only once it is determined that the Sale of Goods Act has
any application in the circumstances should the jury be instructed to determine
whether the statutory warranty was breached on the facts.  In any event, I need
not determinatively settle the issue of whether this preliminary matter ought
to have been left to the jury, as I am of the view that the jury correctly
resolved the issue.  71               The jury correctly concluded that
the contract to perform the AI procedure on the appellant was primarily a
contract for medical services and not a sale of semen.  To hold otherwise would
be to distort the true nature of the whole agreement between the parties.  The
provision of the semen was obviously an important component to the AI
procedure; however the primary reason the appellant went to a gynaecologist was
for professional medical services and expertise.  As the respondent argues, he
provided medical services to the appellant in order to assist her to become
pregnant by way of AI.  Although donor semen was a necessary component of this
process, the contract was not primarily for a sale of semen.  72               It is not relevant that the actual
AI procedure was relatively simple and quick.  The appellant still relied on
the respondent's expertise in the screening process for donors, the collection
of the semen, the insemination procedure itself, and the provision of medical
advice and information concerning any risks and the possibility of success of
the AI procedure.  It cannot be contended that the contract was one primarily
for the sale of semen such as to attract the application of the Sale of
Goods Act.  (3) 
Warranty implied by the common law  73               The fact that the contract was
primarily one for services does not end the possibility that there was an
implied warranty that the semen would not be contaminated with HIV.  The
appellant also bases her claim under the common law by virtue of which a
warranty may be implied in a contract for goods and services.  74               In the charge to the jury, the
trial judge instructed that under the common law, where a contract is primarily
for medical services, the doctor simply warrants to meet the standards of a
reasonably competent person practising in the field.  The trial charge explained
to the jury that the warranty under common law required the jury to determine
whether the respondent was negligent in failing to detect or remove the defect
from the semen.  In other words, the charge to the jury was to the effect that
the implied warranty under common law was the same as the test for negligence
in these circumstances.  75               In order to determine whether a
common law warranty ought to be implied in the circumstances of this case and
if so, whether the trial judge erred by equating the content of that warranty
to negligence, it is necessary to review the authorities in this area in some
detail.  76               In England, strict liability is
imposed for implied warranties of fitness for defective products supplied under
contracts for work and materials as well as under contracts for sale.  The
purchaser has a remedy against the business seller, even absent negligence. 
The seller can always recover, up the chain of production, from the
manufacturer.  77               A leading English case in this
area is G. H. Myers and Co. v. Brent Cross Service Co., [1934] 1 K.B.
46.  That case involved the installation of faulty connecting rods in an
automobile.  One of the rods had a latent defect that the repair dealer could
not have detected by reasonable care. Du Parcq J. held that, at common law, the
dealer was liable under an implied warranty that in a contract for work done
and material supplied, the material would be fit for its purpose.  It was held
that there should not be any distinction between a contract where goods are
supplied only and a contract where goods are supplied in the course of a
contract to perform services as this would be an arbitrary distinction.  At
pages 53-54, du Parcq J. held:  The
view to which I have come is that the liability of the person supplying goods
in the course of doing work and labour is certainly not less than the liability
of the person selling goods ....  78               Thus, the court held that an
individual who agrees to do work and provide goods has no lesser obligation
than an individual who simply contracts to provide the goods.  However, it was
recognized that not all contracts for goods and services will contain an
implied warranty that the materials will not be defective.  At page 55, du
Parcq J. noted the following:  That
depends upon the terms of the contract, and I think that the true view is
that a person contracting to do work and supply materials warrants that the
materials which he uses will be of good quality and reasonably fit for the
purpose for which he is using them, unless the circumstances of the contract
are such as to exclude any such warranty.  [Emphasis added.]  The foregoing passage contemplates
that there may be certain circumstances such that a contract to supply goods
and services will not contain an implied warranty that, regardless of any
negligence, the goods will not be defective.  79               The decision in G. H. Myers
was cited with approval by the House of Lords in Young & Marten Ltd. v.
McManus Childs Ltd., [1969] 1 A.C. 454 (H.L.).  That case dealt with contractors
who were building a house and subcontracted the roofing work.  The roofing
tiles which were used contained a latent defect which was not apparent upon
inspection.  As a result, the contractor suffered damages and claimed that
there was an implied warranty of quality or fitness.  Lord Reid observed that,
in such cases where there is no evidence of negligence by the manufacturer,
unless the owners of the house could recover from the subcontractor, they would
be without a remedy.  However, if the subcontractors were held liable, they
could generally recover from the manufacturer under the Sale of Goods
legislation.  The court adopted the general rule which was laid down by du
Parcq J. in G. H. Myers.  Lord Reid also made the following relevant
observation (at p. 468):  It
appears to me that less cogent circumstances may be sufficient to exclude an
implied warranty of quality where the use of spare parts is only incidental to
what is in essence a repairing operation where the customer's main reliance is
on the skill of the tradesman, than in a case where the main element is the
supply of an article, the installation being merely incidental.  80               In the result, the court affirmed
that, in the circumstances of that case, the common law implied a warranty and
the subcontractor was liable for the defective tiles.  It was not conclusive
that there was an element of services along with the supply of goods.  81               The principles espoused in the
English case law have also been adopted in Canada.  A leading case is G.
Ford Homes Ltd. v. Draft Masonry (York) Co. (1983), 43 O.R. (2d) 401
(C.A.).  In that case, the plaintiff supplied and installed staircases in two
houses being constructed by the defendant.  It turned out that the staircases
contravened the Ontario Building Code and had to be replaced.  The issue
was whether there was an implied term in the contract that the staircases would
conform to the Building Code.  Cory J.A., as he then was, delivered the
decision for the court.  At page 403, he remarked:                     When
may a term be implied in a contract?  A court faced with that question must
first take cognizance of some important and time-honoured cautions.  For
example, the courts will be cautious in their approach to implying terms to
contracts.  Certainly a court will not rewrite a contract for the parties.  As
well, no term will be implied that is inconsistent with the contract.  Implied
terms are as a rule based upon the presumed intention of the parties and should
be founded upon reason.  The circumstances and background of the contract,
together with its precise terms, should all be carefully regarded before a term
is implied.  As a result, it is clear that every case must be determined on its
own particular facts.  [Emphasis added.]  82               Cory J.A. reviewed the decisions
in Young & Marten Ltd. and G. H. Myers and noted
that the warranties implied at common law apply to contracts for goods and
services.  Thus, unlike the Sale of Goods Act, such warranties are
equally applicable to contracts for the provision of work and materials. 
Secondly, unless the circumstances of the case are sufficient to exclude the warranty,
there will be an implied term "that the materials used will be of
merchantable quality and that those materials will be reasonably fit for the
purposes for which they were intended" (p. 404).  83               Accordingly, it is apparent that
apart from the Sale of Goods Act, a court must consider whether a common
law warranty of fitness and merchantability should be implied into the contract
which includes services as well as the provision of materials.  However, such a
warranty will not be implied in all circumstances.  The court must examine the
specific nature of the contract and the relationship between the parties in
order to assess whether it was the intention of the parties that such a
warranty be implied.  As Cory J.A. observed, courts must be very cautious in
their approach to implying contractual terms.  84               It is important to note that a
rationale for implying warranties in contracts of goods and services is that a
supplier of goods generally has recourse against the manufacturer under the Sale
of Goods Act as a result of the statutory conditions imposed.  Thus, one
can always proceed up the chain of production and ultimately recover from the
one who should bear responsibility for the production of faulty goods.  From
time to time, the supplier will be unable to recover from the manufacturer, for
example, owing to insolvency or limitation periods.  However, arguably it is
better that the purchaser be compensated and the supplier occasionally bear the
cost of defects than leaving the consumer without a remedy.  It is important to
keep this policy rationale in mind when considering whether such a warranty
should be implied in the context of this case, which deals with biological
substances.  85               Thus, the question that must be
addressed in this appeal is whether, in the circumstances of this case, where
there is a contract to conduct a medical procedure involving the use of
biological material (semen), it is appropriate to imply a term that the semen
was warranted to be without any defects (HIV contamination).  Secondly, if it
is appropriate to imply a term into the contract for medical services was the
trial judge correct in holding that the respondent only warranted to take reasonable
care to ensure that semen would not be used if it were contaminated with any
STDs.  In this regard, one must consider whether the nature of the contract at
issue in this appeal is analogous to the commercial contracts which were dealt
with in the English and Canadian cases discussed above.  It is important to
address any policy considerations and the implications of imposing warranties
in these circumstances.  86               In answering these difficult
questions, it is useful to survey some of the American jurisprudence which has
dealt with this issue more frequently, in the context of warranties for the
supply of blood.  In my view, these cases are directly analogous to the supply
of semen in an AI practice.  87               The leading American authority on
this issue, which has been followed many times subsequently, is Perlmutter
v. Beth David Hospital, 123 N.E.2d 792 (N.Y. 1954).  In that case, a
patient received a blood transfusion during the course of a medical procedure
performed at the hospital.  The blood contained jaundice viruses and as a
result the plaintiff became infected.  There was no question of any negligence
on the part of the hospital as there were no means available for detecting the
contamination in the blood.  The plaintiff sought recovery under the Sales
Act arguing that there was an implied warranty that the blood would be fit
for its purpose and of merchantable quality.  The issue turned on whether the
transaction constituted a sale under the legislation.  It must be observed at
this point that the plaintiff did not argue that there was an implied warranty
under the common law for material supplied under a contract for service and
material.  Nonetheless, much of the discussion on the Sales Act is relevant
to the case at bar.  88               The majority of the court examined
the nature of the contract between the hospital and held (at p. 794):  The
essence of the contractual relationship between hospital and patient is readily
apparent; the patient bargains for, and the hospital agrees to make available,
the human skill and physical materiel of medical science to the end that the
patient's health be restored.                     Such
a contract is clearly one for services, and, just as clearly, it is not
divisible.  Concepts of purchase and sale cannot separately be attached to the
healing materials - such as medicines, drugs or, indeed, blood - supplied by
the hospital for a price as part of the medical services it offers.  That the
property or title to certain items of medical material may be transferred, so
to speak, from the hospital to the patient during the course of medical
treatment does not serve to make each such transaction a sale.  "`Sale'
and `transfer' are not synonymous", and not every transfer of personal
property constitutes a sale.... It has long been recognized that, when service
predominates, and transfer of personal property is but an incidental feature of
the transaction, the transaction is not deemed a sale within the Sales Act.  89               It should be observed that the
majority focused on the sharp distinction between a contract of sale and one
for services that exists in this context.  While this is important for
determining whether sale of goods legislation is applicable, it is not as
crucial in the context of implied warranties under the common law which are
also available for contracts of service where a good is furnished. 
Nonetheless, the remarks in Perlmutter are highly relevant since, as was
noted by Lord Reid in Young & Marten Ltd., it will be less likely
that such a warranty will be implied in a contract which is primarily for
services where the transfer of the good is merely incidental.  90               In Perlmutter, it was held
that the supplying of blood was entirely subordinate to the main purpose of the
hospital, which was providing trained professionals and specialized facilities
to care for the patient's health.  The patient does not bargain for blood. 
Rather, it is the skill of the medical staff and the facilities which is
sought.  Fuld J. concluded that supplying the blood was entirely incidental to
the services performed.  In my view, the same can be said of the semen in the
present case, as I discussed earlier in respect of the Sale of Goods Act.  91               In examining the nature of the
contract at issue, Fuld J. noted some of the policy considerations which are
relevant in this context.  At page 795, the following was observed:                     If,
however, the court were to stamp as a sale the supplying of blood - or the
furnishing of other medical aid - it would mean that the hospital, no matter
how careful, no matter that the disease-producing potential in the blood could
not possibly be discovered, would be held responsible, virtually as an insurer,
if anything were to happen to the patient as a result of "bad" blood....
[Emphasis added].  92               Although these comments were made
in the context of sale of goods legislation, they apply equally to the
situation of an implied warranty under common law.  In either situation, a
medical practitioner would be held strictly liable for the biological products
employed in the medical procedures, notwithstanding that it may be impossible
for the doctor to detect any risks.  This would have the effect of making
physicians insurers of the biological substances that are used in medical
procedures.  93               While it is true that the primary
purpose of the implied warranty is to hold the supplier of goods liable
notwithstanding the absence of negligence, different considerations apply in
the context of the medical profession than in the ordinary commercial context. 
As Fuld J. observed (at p. 795):  The
art of healing frequently calls for a balancing of risks and dangers to a
patient.  Consequently, if injury results from the course adopted, where no
negligence or fault is present, liability should not be imposed upon the
institution or agency actually seeking to save or otherwise assist the patient.  94               Furthermore, it should be noted
that unlike in the ordinary commercial context, the doctor cannot trace the
liability back to the initial manufacturer.  Biological products are not
manufactured goods in the same sense as commercial goods.  The underlying
rationale for the strict liability imposed under the Sale of Goods Act
or by virtue of an implied warranty at common law does not apply to goods which
are not manufactured in the ordinary sense.  Absent negligence on the part of
the donor (for example, if he knew he had AIDS), one would hardly expect that
the respondent, in the present case, could recover from the donor for the semen
contaminated with HIV, either under the Sale of Goods Act or under an
implied warranty at common law.  This is unlike a commercial contract where it
would be open to a supplier to sue the manufacturer, even absent negligence on
its part.  95               Moreover, it must be recognized
that biological products such as blood and semen, unlike manufactured products,
carry certain inherent risks.  In some ways, these substances are inherently
dangerous, although they are essential to medical procedures.  Whether a doctor
is trying to save a patient's life via a blood transfusion, or is simply
attempting to assist a patient to become pregnant by AI, the physician cannot
control the safety of these products beyond exhibiting the reasonable care
expected of a professional to ensure that the biological substance is free from
harmful viruses.  By contrast, in the commercial world, the manufacturer has
control over the goods.  If they cannot be manufactured to be safe, then the
products ought to be removed from the market.  In medicine blood is essential
to a variety of procedures in order to save lives.  While arguably, AI is not
in the same category as other life saving techniques, it is nonetheless a very
important medical procedure.  As long as the entire procedure does not amount
to an unreasonable risk such that it ought not to be offered at all, the
patient is entitled to weigh those risks and elect to proceed.  96               In Fisher v. Sibley Memorial
Hospital, 403 A.2d 1130 (D.C. 1979), an action was commenced for injury
suffered when a patient contracted hepatitis after a blood transfusion supplied
by the hospital.  It was not possible to detect the virus in the blood.  The
Court of Appeal held that the theories of implied warranty and merchantability
and strict liability in tort had no place in the context of a hospital
furnishing blood.  At pages 1132-33, Gallagher J. held as follows:  "The
activities involved in the transfusion of whole blood, a component of the
living body, from one human being to another may be characterized as sui
generis in that the sequence of events involve acts common to legal concepts of
both a sale and a service.  Moreover, it seems to us that under the facts in
the case before us it would be unrealistic to hold that there is an implied
warranty as to qualities of fitness of human blood on which no medical or
scientific information can be acquired and in respect to which plaintiff's
physician has the same information, knowledge, and experience as the supplier."
(Balkowitsch v. Minneapolis War Memorial Blood Bank, Inc., 270 Minn.
151, 132 N.W.2d 805, 811 (1965).)                     We
agree with those courts which hold that the furnishing of blood is more in the
nature of a service than of a sale of goods.  Treating blood transfusions as an
incidental service performed by hospitals comports with reality, and with the
policies underlying merchantability liability.  Although theoretically a
seller's inability to discover defects in the goods he sells is not relevant to
a warranty cause of action, we cannot ignore the difficulty of detecting
hepatitis in blood given the current state of medical knowledge.  To
characterize as a sale the supplying of blood would mean that the hospital, no
matter how careful, would be held responsible, virtually as an insurer, if the
patient were harmed as a result of impure blood.  After balancing the safety
of the individual with the interests of the hospital (in light of the absence
of an adequate test to determine the presence of hepatitis in the blood) and
the public interest in assuring the ready availability of blood for medical
treatments, we are reluctant to extend ... merchantability liability to a
nonsale transaction by analogy or by characterizing the transaction as a sale. 
[Emphasis added.]  97               The court was of the view that it
was unnatural to force a blood transfusion into the commercial sales mould
since the main object of the hospital is health care and treatment.  It was
also noted that blood products are "unavoidably dangerous" (p. 1134)
and the patient relies on the doctor's skill rather than any warranties of
fitness.  98               I also find the case of St.
Luke's Hospital v. Schmaltz, 534 P.2d 781 (Colo. 1975) to be persuasive. 
That case also involved a blood transfusion resulting in the patient contracting
hepatitis.  The court followed the reasoning in Perlmutter and rejected
the imposition of strict liability in tort or on the basis of a warranty due to
policy considerations.  It was held that a realistic view of the relationship
between a hospital and a patient is not that of a commercial transaction where
a good is sold for a price.  Rather, the patient bargains for the skill and
materials of medical science in order to care for the patient's health.  It is
simply not realistic to view the furnishing of blood as a sale of a product.  99               Although the majority of American
cases have followed Perlmutter, a few have criticized the policy
analysis conducted.  For example, in Cunningham v. MacNeal Memorial Hospital,
266 N.E.2d 897 (Ill. 1970), the court again considered the situation of a
patient who contracted hepatitis through a blood transfusion.  The court
rejected the idea that an implied warranty did not arise because no
"sale" was involved.  Notwithstanding that blood is not a
manufactured article of commerce, the court considered it a product which is
distributed for consumption.  The blood was sold in a container and the court
felt it was unreasonable not to conclude that there was a sale of goods which
was divisible from the contract for services.  100             However, the vast majority of
American cases have agreed that the policy considerations dictate that, in the
context of the provision of medical services, medical professionals should not
be held strictly liable under warranty for goods used in the provision of those
services.  In my view, the reasoning of the majority in Perlmutter, and
the line of cases which follow it, is more apt in the Canadian context with
respect to implied warranties at common law.  Although, the American decisions
did not deal with exactly this issue, the remarks made with respect to
warranties under sale of goods legislation provide support for the view that it
is inappropriate to imply a warranty in these circumstances under the common
law.  101             I am, therefore, in agreement with
the Court of Appeal's conclusion in the present case that it would be
inappropriate to imply a warranty of fitness and merchantability in the
circumstances of this case.  As Cory J.A. observed in G. Ford Homes,
courts should be very wary about implying terms of contracts and there may be
circumstances which ought to exclude such a warranty.  In the present case, the
action against the respondent for injury resulting from the AI procedure should
be confined to negligence.  I would adopt the following conclusion of the Court
of Appeal at p. 85:  In
the face of the American experience, we are unable to identify any policy
reason why a physician should face stricter liability for "goods"
which are furnished to a patient in the course of medical service than he or
she would be for any lack of professional care and skill which must be brought
to every healing or treating engagement.  102             I note that even if I am wrong in my
conclusion that a warranty should not be implied in the circumstances of this
case, I would hold, as the trial judge did, that any warranty would simply be
to take reasonable care.  In other words, if the parties intended that there be
any contractual warranty, the nature of the warranty in this case would simply
be to the effect that the respondent exercise diligence and care in performing
the AI and selecting the donors.  The contract was primarily one for medical
services and parties would not have contemplated that the respondent would warrant
the success of the procedure nor that the semen would not be contaminated with
an STD.  As the trial judge stated, the respondent "undertakes to meet the
standards of a reasonably competent person practicing in his field".  It
would be unreasonable to hold the respondent to any higher standard.  103             In the result, the appellant's
argument that there was an implied warranty at common law that the donor's
semen would not be infected with HIV must also fail.  C.  The Rough Upper Limit on
Non-Pecuniary Damages  104             In Andrews v. Grand & Toy
Alberta Ltd., supra, this Court established a rough upper limit for
non-pecuniary damages of $100,000.  In Lindal, supra, it was
recognized that it was appropriate to take into account the effect of inflation
and thus, the upper limit could vary with changing economic conditions,
including the decrease in purchasing power caused by inflation.  Thus, at the
time of the present case, the rough upper limit was approximately $240,000. 
However, the jury awarded non-pecuniary damages of $460,000.  The Court of
Appeal held that the non-pecuniary damages could not exceed the rough upper
limit and a new trial was ordered to assess damages in general.  The Court of
Appeal did not hold that the trial judge was necessarily in error for failing
to charge the jury on the upper limit, in light of the views expressed by
counsel.  However, if a jury is not given such an instruction, the damages
award must be corrected in order to conform with the jurisprudence.  105             There are two issues which must be
addressed.  First, whether this was one of those exceptional cases referred to
in Andrews such that the rough upper limit ought not to have been
applied.  Secondly, whether the trial judge ought to have charged the jury to
consider the upper limit when assessing non-pecuniary damages.  The appellant
submits that this case is unique and that the non-pecuniary damages should be
permitted to exceed the limit.  106             In Andrews, this Court set
out the rationale for the upper limit placed on the assessment of non-pecuniary
damages for pain and suffering.  It is simply impossible to put a money value
on the non-pecuniary losses which have been suffered by the plaintiff. 
Therefore, the award of non-pecuniary damages "is a philosophical and
policy exercise more than a legal or logical one" (p. 261).  This Court
has adopted the "functional" approach to assessing such damages.  That
is, rather than attempting to evaluate the loss of happiness, non-pecuniary
damages seek to provide the plaintiff with reasonable solace for the misfortune
suffered.  Money acts as a substitute for the pleasure and enjoyment which has
been lost and endeavours to alleviate, as far as possible, the pain and
suffering that the plaintiff has endured and will have to endure in the future.  107             The amount of the award depends on
the ability of money to ameliorate the condition of the victim in his or her
particular situation.  Non-pecuniary damages should only be awarded to the
extent that they can serve a useful purpose by providing an alternative source
of satisfaction.  108             However, as Dickson J. observed in Andrews,
once non-pecuniary damages are viewed from a functional perspective,
excessively large amounts should not be awarded once an individual is fully
compensated in terms of future care and other pecuniary losses.  Awards for
non-pecuniary loss are inherently arbitrary or conventional.  Therefore, once
the future care of the plaintiff is adequately addressed, it is more
appropriate to consider policy issues in limiting damage awards.  In
particular, the social burdens of excessive awards must be considered, as
extravagant claims can pose a significant burden on society.  In fact, in Arnold
v. Teno, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 287, it was observed that the real social cost of
exorbitant damage awards had been particularly evident in the United States
with respect to medical malpractice cases.  In Lindal, this Court
reiterated the sentiments expressed in the Andrews trilogy, recognizing
that the claim for non-pecuniary damages in the case of a severely injured
plaintiff can potentially be limitless.  109             In Lindal, the Court refused
to exceed the upper limit for non-pecuniary damages even though the injuries
were arguably even more severe than those suffered in Andrews.  Given
that the upper limit is merely a rough and somewhat arbitrary cap on
non-pecuniary damages, an award exceeding the limit is not justified simply
because an injury is more serious that those in the trilogy of cases.  As
Dickson J. stated in Lindal (at pp. 642-43):                     It
is true that the Court in Andrews spoke of exceeding the limit of
$100,000 in "exceptional circumstances".  The variety of possible
fact situations is limitless, and it would be unwise to foreclose the
possibility of ever exceeding the guideline of $100,000.  But, if the purpose
of the guideline is properly understood, it will be seen that the circumstances
in which it should be exceeded will be rare indeed.  We award non-pecuniary
damages because the money can be used to make the victim's life more bearable. 
The limit of $100,000 was not selected because the plaintiff could only make
use of $100,000 and no more.  Quite the opposite.  It was selected because
without it, there would be no limit to the various uses to which a plaintiff
could put a fund of money.  The defendant, and ultimately, society at large,
would be in the position of satisfying extravagant claims by severely injured
plaintiffs.  110             In my view, the above passage
adequately addresses the arguments of the appellant in the present case. 
Essentially, she contends that the evidence demonstrated the uses to which the
money could be put.  However, this is not a proper rationale supporting an
award of non-pecuniary damages in excess of the limit.  There is no doubt that
the appellant has suffered immensely as a result of this tragedy.  It is also
apparent that AIDS is a dreadful disease which will eventually take the life of
the appellant prematurely.  However, with respect to non-pecuniary losses, I do
not believe that the present case is any different than other tragedies, such
as those which befell the plaintiffs in the Andrews trilogy.  I agree
with the following comments of the Court of Appeal (at p. 87):                     While
recognizing that the Plaintiff's injuries are markedly different in kind from
those under consideration in the trilogy, we cannot conclude that the principle
adopted by the Supreme Court of Canada, aimed at controlling the social burden
of damage awards, should not be applied in this case.  It follows, in our view,
that the Plaintiff's non-pecuniary damages cannot exceed the adjusted rough
upper limit.  111             The second question which arises
with respect to non-pecuniary damages is whether the trial judge ought to have
charged the jury on the upper limit.  This is a difficult question because, on
the one hand, in a case in which a jury would not have awarded damages in the
range of the upper limit, the jury will be unduly influenced by an instruction
that refers to a higher figure.  On the other hand, it seems wrong not to
advise the jury in an appropriate case that as a matter of law and policy,
there is a limit.  The jury may struggle for nought with the assessment only to
learn later that their labours were in vain.  Moreover, judges are permitted,
and indeed required, to give the jury guidance as to the proper conventional
figure.  In Crosby v. O'Reilly, [1975] 2 S.C.R. 381, Laskin C.J., for
the Court, stated, at pp. 386-87:                     I
cannot agree with the Alberta Appellate Division that where a survival action
for the benefit of a deceased's estate is tried by judge and jury the jury
should be instructed as a matter of law that $10,000 is the present upper limit
of an award.  I do not think that damages can be so exactly defined by putting
them on the basis of a legal limitation.  At the same time, it is only common
sense, where an appellate court is to have the final say on what is a proper
conventional figure, that the jury be given careful guidance lest the result
be, as here, an extravagant figure leading to successive appeals at a risk of
costs that will eat up the ultimate award.  Rather than fix the direction as
one of law governing the upper limit of an award, the trial judge should direct
the jury, in the light of the evidence respecting the deceased in all of his or
her qualities, mode of life and prospects, in the light of age and physical
condition, that a figure beyond a particular sum, which may be less than
$10,000, may be regarded as excessive.  It would be impossible for a trial
judge to comply with this instruction with any degree of intellectual honesty
and not mention that there is an upper limit.  Indeed, the statement by Laskin
C.J. clearly implies that if an upper limit had existed, the jury should be
told about it.  112             Accordingly, in my view, the trial
judge should instruct the jury as to an upper limit, if, after considering the
submissions of counsel, he or she is of the opinion that the damages by reason
of the type of injury sustained might very well be assessed in the range of or
exceeding the upper limit.  The instructions may include an explanation of the
reason for the cap.  113             On the other hand, if the trial
judge is of the view that the injuries involved will not likely produce an
award approaching the rough upper limit, it is best that the trial judge not
charge the jury on the matter.  The upper limit, like any other matter of law,
need not be placed before the jury where the issue does not reasonably arise on
the facts of the case.  114             Whether the jury is or is not
advised of the upper limit, if the award exceeds the limit, the trial judge
should reduce the award to conform with the "cap" set out in the
trilogy and adjusted for inflation.  While a trial judge does not sit in appeal
of a jury award, the trilogy has imposed as a rule of law a legal limit to
non-pecuniary damages in these cases.  It would be wrong for the trial judge to
enter judgment for an amount that as a matter of law is excessive.  While it is
true that the matter can be corrected on appeal, an appeal may be unnecessary
if the correct amount is fixed at trial.  115             In the present case, counsel for the
respondent submitted that this was not a case which would approach the upper
limit.  However, it was submitted that the jury should be instructed on the
limit if the appellant's counsel or the trial judge felt otherwise.  Counsel
for the appellant did not request that the trial judge charge the jury on the
upper limit.  In these circumstances, I agree with the Court of Appeal that it
was reasonable for the trial judge not to give an instruction on the upper limit. 
However, since the damages awarded for non-pecuniary losses far exceeded the
upper limit, the trial judge ought to have reassessed the award in accordance
with the Andrews trilogy.  116             In light of the fact that a new
trial will be ordered with respect to the issues surrounding liability, I agree
that the issue of non-pecuniary damages should also be dealt with by the jury. 
Given that the jury at the first trial assessed the damages in excess of the
limit, it will be appropriate for the trial judge to charge the jury with
respect to the upper limit at the new trial.  117             The Court of Appeal also ordered a
new trial on the issue of damages generally.  The Court merely stated that it
was not satisfied that the damages for the past and future income losses and
the future care costs were properly assessed.  The Court of Appeal did not
explain on what basis it found the assessment to be lacking.  However, the
appellant did not argue that the Court of Appeal was in error with respect to
ordering a new trial on these pecuniary damages.  In her factum, however, the
appellant does seek an order that the jury's awards for non-pecuniary damages
and for past and future wage loss be confirmed.  118             Given that the appellant has not
demonstrated any error with respect to the Court of Appeal's conclusions on
damages, I am not inclined to interfere with the Court of Appeal's holding that
there should be a new trial on the issue of damages in general.  VI.  Disposition  119             In the result, the appeal is
dismissed with costs and the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed.  The
new trial will be limited to:  (1) a determination of the issue of negligence
other than the allegation relating to the first aspect of the claim based on
the defendant's lack of knowledge of the risk of HIV infection by A1, and (2)
an assessment of damages in general in respect of the claim in negligence. 
With respect to non-pecuniary general damages, the trial judge should instruct
the jury on the upper limit in accordance with the principles in the Andrews
trilogy and Lindal.  120             It will also not be open to the
appellant to raise the issues relating to warranties under the Sale of Goods
Act, at common law or by virtue of the Information Sheet.  These issues
have been resolved in this appeal.  //L'Heureux-Dubé J.//                     The following are
the reasons delivered by   I.                L'Heureux-Dubé
J. -- I have read the reasons of my colleague Justice Sopinka and, save
for one point, I generally agree with them as well as with his disposition of
the appeal.  The issue on which I part ways with my colleague concerns the
trial judge's instruction to the jury on the upper limit of non-pecuniary
damages.  II.                According to my colleague, the
trial judge should instruct the jury on such upper limit if he or she believes
that the damages "might very well be assessed in the range of or exceeding
the upper limit", as opposed to that not being "likely" (paras.
112-113).  Two arguments are relied on to support this position: first, the
possibility of wasting the jury's time absent such instruction, and second, the
impossibility for the trial judge to guide the jury, in light of the evidence,
as to a proper conventional figure of damages, without mentioning the upper
limit.  In my view, these arguments are not persuasive.  III.               It has always been held improper
for the trial judge or counsel to express any views as to the quantum of
damages.  This is echoed by the well- established principle that the amount of
damages is a question of fact for the jury to determine, and not a question of
law for the judge: Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 298, s. 6.  By
holding that the judge should instruct the jury as to the upper limit of
non-pecuniary damages, my colleague is indirectly making their assessment a
question of law.  In my view, it is impossible to reconcile this approach with
the separate functions performed by judge and jury.  For instance, as my
colleague puts it, "in a case in which a jury would not have awarded
damages in the range of the upper limit, the jury will be unduly influenced by
an instruction that refers to a higher figure" (para. 111).  Moreover, as
a result, the benefit of the trial by jury is lost, namely the value of the
independent judgment of lay people.  In that light, economic considerations,
such as the time and the cost involved in the jury's determination of the
quantum of damages, are irrelevant.  As well, as the Ontario Court of Appeal
stated in Gray v. Alanco Developments Ltd. (1967), 61 D.L.R. (2d) 652,
at p. 656:  To
permit the trial Judge to express such an opinion would be to sanction the
admission of opinion evidence unsupported by qualified evidence but based
solely upon the Judge's personal experience derived from the evidence or
verdicts in other cases.  This would be tantamount to countenancing his
usurpation of functions committed exclusively to the jury.  IV.              These considerations have not been
challenged by the Andrews trilogy (Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta
Ltd., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 229, Thornton v. Board of School Trustees of
School District No. 57 (Prince George), [1978] 2 S.C.R. 267, and Arnold
v. Teno, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 287).  The establishment of an upper limit for
non-pecuniary damages only affects the quantum of the awards, not the way in
which they are determined.  Nowhere was it mentioned that it is incumbent on
the trial judge to instruct the jury as to such upper limit.  Therefore, the
existence of an upper limit as a matter of law remains consistent with not
instructing the jury as to such upper limit.  V.                Moreover, in light of my
colleague's arguments, I am unable to see why the jury should be charged on the
upper limit in this case, but not in Hill v. Church of Scientology of
Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130.  In Hill, this Court decided that
there would not be a cap on damages for defamation.  Particular emphasis was
placed on the fact that the injury suffered by a plaintiff as a result of
libellous statements is markedly different from the kind of injury the Court
was concerned with in Andrews, supra, namely severe physical
injuries resulting from a motor vehicle accident.  In my opinion, the same
reasoning must prevail in cases involving other types of injuries, including
HIV contamination during an artificial insemination procedure, as in this
case.  By suggesting that the jury be instructed on the upper limit of
non-pecuniary damages, my colleague is in fact muzzling the jury, and, in so
doing, institutionalizing the status quo in that novel area of the law,
independently of evolving economics and other considerations.  VI.              Indeed, when it comes to damages,
no figure will ever be "right": the trial judge is not in a better
position than the jury to determine the quantum of damages, nor the range in
which they might be assessed.  It is not to say that jury awards are entitled
to complete deference.  If an award is excessive, I share my colleague's
opinion that the judge should reduce it to an amount that he or she believes is
appropriate on the facts of the case in order to avoid an otherwise unnecessary
appeal.  The jury's discretion in reaching that award, however, must be left
unfettered.  In my view, this system deals adequately with the guidelines
established by the trilogy.  VII.             In the present case, there is not an
iota of evidence before the trial judge, the Court of Appeal, or this Court as
to the inadequacy of this system.  Before this Court, only a brief mention was
made by the respondent in his factum, as an alternative argument, as to the
desirability of adopting the system my colleague Sopinka J. suggests.  At the
hearing, the issue was not discussed.  In his reasons, my colleague does not
bring forward any data to demonstrate that there is a crisis in Canada with
respect to extravagant jury awards for non-pecuniary damages, which would
encourage this Court to modify the law.  Nevertheless, on this fragile basis,
he advocates a profound change of the law.  VIII.            It is important to recall the context
in which this issue must be resolved.  While it is true that the upper limit
was designed, in part, to avoid extravagant non-pecuniary awards, this justification
is not restricted to jury awards, but also applies to trials before judge
alone.  Furthermore, the accuracy of this assumption has been challenged in the
Law Reform Commission of British Columbia's Report on Compensation for
Non-Pecuniary Loss (1984), at p. 13.  In addition to statistics indicating
that only a small number of cases are still tried by jury today, I find
apposite the following passage by W. H. R. Charles, Charles Handbook on
Assessment of Damages in Personal Injury Cases (2nd ed. 1990), at p. 75:  ...in
Ontario it is defence counsel who tend to request a jury trial for personal
injury cases.  Whether this is because the unpredictability of their awards,
both as to liability and measure of damages, encourages a settlement or whether
experience suggests that jury damage awards are less generous than those given
by judges sitting without a jury, is difficult to say.  If the unpredictable
nature of jury verdicts is a major factor in inducing settlement, it seems an
ironic justification for their continued existence.  Obviously there are other
reasons for retaining the jury in civil cases generally, not the least of which
is the fact that the jury reflects public opinion.  IX.              Finally, from a pragmatic
standpoint, to require the trial judge to charge the jury on the upper limit of
non-pecuniary damages may be inviting unmeritorious appeals on that part of the
judge's instructions to the jury.  X.                In conclusion, there is no
evidence that the law as it stands is incapable of dealing with the upper limit
of non-pecuniary damages, the assessment of which has always been the province
of the jury.  For the reasons previously set forth, I would leave to the jury
the determination of the quantum of damages without instructions as to the
upper limit, subject to the judge's power to reduce excessive awards.  XI.              In the result, I would dispose of
this appeal as suggested by my colleague Sopinka J.                     Appeal dismissed
with costs.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  McConnan, Bion, O'Connor & Peterson, Victoria.                     Solicitors for the
respondent:  Harper Grey Easton, Vancouver.                      Solicitors for the
intervener the Canadian Hospital Association:  Bull, Housser &
Tupper, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Canadian Red Cross Society:  MacMillan, Rooke &
Boeckle, Toronto.  