  v.  Denis Mercier                                                                                               Respondent   Neutral citation:  2002 SCC 15.  File No.:  27515.  2001:  April 18; 2002:  February 21.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec  Civil responsibility – Physicians and surgeons –
Duty of prudence and diligence – Victim of car accident bringing action in
civil responsibility arising out of treatment of his injuries by orthopaedic
surgeon – Trial judge finding surgeon to be without fault and ruling that
causation had not been established – Whether Court of Appeal justified in intervening
in trial judge’s decision – Whether presumption of causation applies.  Appeals – Standard of review – Victim of car
accident bringing action in civil responsibility arising out of treatment of
his injuries by orthopaedic surgeon – Trial judge finding surgeon to be without
fault and ruling that causation had not been established – Whether Court of
Appeal justified in intervening in trial judge’s decision – Whether Supreme
Court of Canada has reason to intervene in Court of Appeal’s decision.   The appellant’s action against the respondent went to
trial.  After the case had been heard and while the trial judge was
deliberating, he fell ill and so the case was transferred to another judge, to
be decided on the basis of the evidence entered at trial.  The new trial judge
found the respondent to be without fault, concluding that he could not be
reproached for not having diagnosed a medullary contusion rather than a sciatic
condition.  He also found that the appellant had not discharged his burden to
show causation.  The Court of Appeal found that the respondent had committed a
fault, but affirmed the trial judge’s ruling that causation had not been
established.  Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.  The inquiry to be made in this case is the traditional
one: was the Court of Appeal correct in intervening in the trial judge’s
decision because there was an error of law, an error of mixed law and fact, or
an overriding and palpable error of fact?  The Court of Appeal concluded that the
trial judge made a mistake in the analysis of fault by asking the wrong
question in determining whether a fault had been committed.  The correct
inquiry to be made in assessing whether a professional committed a fault is to
ask whether the defendant behaved as would a reasonably prudent and diligent
fellow professional in the same circumstances.  To ask, as the principal
question in the general inquiry, whether a specific positive act or an instance
of omission constitutes a fault is to collapse the inquiry and may confuse the
issue.  What must be asked is whether that act or omission would be acceptable
behaviour for a reasonably prudent and diligent professional in the same
circumstances.  The erroneous approach runs the risk of focussing on the result
rather than the means.  Here, the Court of Appeal was concerned that a proper
inquiry was not made and the wrong standard of fault was applied by the trial
judge.  This concern entitled the Court of Appeal to intervene.  The Court of Appeal also faulted the trial judge’s
decision for not taking a position on the scientific debate as to causation.  A
trial judge must assess whether the evidence supports, on a balance of
probabilities, a finding of causation.  It is not enough to say that there are
opposing medical theories on causation and that it is not up to the court to
decide between them.  It was thus open to the Court of Appeal to be concerned
that the trial judge had erred in this manner and accordingly undertake its own
analysis of causation.   The Court is not clearly satisfied that there was an
error in the Court of Appeal’s findings of fact as to causation.  The Court of
Appeal concluded that notwithstanding the faults committed by the respondent,
the accident was the legal cause of the injury suffered by the appellant
resulting in paraparesis.  This conclusion was amply supportable by the
evidence.  The Court of Appeal ultimately gave its sanction to the respondent’s
experts’ theory that it was at the point and moment of impact that there
occurred a medullary contusion, which set in motion the chain of physiological
phenomena which would lead to the subsequent paraparesis.  The Court of Appeal
committed no error in its interpretation of the evidence and its conclusion
that given the initial harm caused by the accident, no causation can be
attributed to the respondent’s faults.  The initial harm of the accident simply
outweighed any kind of effect the faulty treatment might have had, to the point
where it cannot be said on a probabilistic basis that the faulty treatment had
any causal effect.  The chances of recuperation in this case were not
significant enough on a balance of probabilities to establish that the faulty
treatment caused the harm suffered.   The rule of imposing solidary liability where a wrong
causing injury has been jointly committed should not be applied in favour of
the appellant.  It should only be applied in cases where there is a true
impossibility to determine the author of the delict, which impossibility did
not exist here.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  An Act respecting the
implementation of the reform of the Civil Code,
S.Q. 1992, c. 57, ss. 9, 85.  Civil Code of Lower Canada, arts. 1053, 1238, 1242.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, arts. 1480, 2846, 2847, 2849.  Authors Cited     Jutras, Daniel.  “Expertise
scientifique et causalité”.  Dans Congrès annuel du Barreau du Québec (1992). 
Montréal:  Service de la formation permanente, Barreau du Québec, 1992, 897.  Karim, Vincent.  Commentaires
sur les obligations, vol. 1.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1997.  Kerans, Roger P.  Standards
of Review Employed by Appellate Courts.  Edmonton:  Juriliber, 1994.  Mayrand, Albert.  “L’énigme des
fautes simultanées” (1958), 18 R. du B. 1.  Québec.  Ministère de la Justice. 
Commentaires du ministre de la Justice:  Le Code civil du Québec: Un
mouvement de société, t. II.  Québec:  Publications du Québec, 1993.   Woods, Thomas S.  “Overturning
Findings of Fact on Appeal:  A Justifiably Narrow Jurisdiction” (1998), 56 The
Advocate 61.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[1999] R.J.Q. 1658, [1999] Q.J. No. 2584 (QL), affirming a decision of the
Superior Court, [1998] Q.J. No. 234 (QL).  Appeal dismissed.   Gérald R. Tremblay,
Q.C., Louis Terriault and David E. Platts, for the
respondent.  English version of the judgment of the Court delivered
by  Gonthier J. –  I.  Introduction  1                                  
This tragic case raises issues in the areas of medical liability under
Quebec civil law and appellate review of lower court decisions.  The appellant,
who was the victim of a serious car accident, appeals against a decision of the
Quebec Court of Appeal dismissing his appeal of Morin J.’s decision in the
Superior Court, which rejected his action in civil responsibility arising out
of the treatment of his injuries by  the respondent orthopaedic surgeon as well
as another defendant physician against whom the appellant did not pursue his
action in this Court.  The general issue raised by this appeal is whether the
Court of Appeal was justified in intervening in the Superior Court’s decision,
and likewise whether this Court has reason to intervene in the Court of
Appeal’s decision.  An incidental question is whether this case warrants an
application in favour of the appellant of a presumption as to causation between
the respondent’s alleged fault and the harm suffered by the appellant.  For the
reasons that follow, I have concluded that the Court of Appeal was entitled to
intervene in the Superior Court’s decision and find fault but nevertheless
confirm the latter’s ruling that there was no causation.  This Court is
justified in modifying certain findings of fault made by the Court of Appeal,
all the while allowing the finding of fault to stand.  The latter court’s
conclusion that there was no causation is affirmed.  On the incidental
question, there is no reason to apply a presumption in favour of the appellant since,
given the divergent facts and expert opinion on the matter, there were no
serious, precise, and concordant presumptions to be made in this case.  II.  Facts  2                                  
In the evening of August 11, 1986, the appellant was hit by an
automobile travelling at 90 km/h an hour while he was hitchhiking along highway
20 in Saint-Jean-Chrysostome, in the Quebec City area.  He was transported by
ambulance to Hôtel-Dieu de Lévis Hospital where he came under the care of the
attending emergency doctor, Dr. Couture.  The doctor found that the appellant
was conscious but agitated, had open fractures in both legs and abrasions on
the abdomen, and was bleeding from the head.  3                                  
The appellant was hovering between life and death upon arrival at the
hospital.  He was losing a lot of blood from the lower limbs and his pulse was
very rapid.  The appellant suffered from partial amnesia so his memory of
events between noon on August 11 and the evening of August 18 is confused at
best.  Dr. Couture treated him for approximately three hours.  The doctor asked
for x-rays to be done on the lungs, abdomen, thorax, and the dorsolumbar
column, indicating in the x-ray requisition that this was a case of a
“polytrauma”.  These x-rays showed nothing abnormal except that Dr. Couture suspected
a fracture in the spine at the T7 vertebra.  He made a note of this as well as
the appellant’s complaint of back pain which he testified meant general back
pain.  4                                  
The appellant was examined by the respondent Dr. Mercier, an orthopaedic
surgeon, later that evening.  The respondent was aware of the suspected
fracture at T7 and noted it as follows: [translation]
“Fx T7? Will see with radiologist”.  He nonetheless concluded that the fracture
was stable or that it was actually only a benign anomaly, thus not impeding his
ability to operate.  The operation was extremely urgent as it was necessary to
treat the open wounds in the legs.  5                                  
The appellant was brought to the operating room that evening to
treat the leg fractures.  The respondent noted that the procedure was well
tolerated.  There are two notes describing the appellant’s condition written by
the respondent that evening.  The first indicates that the neurovascular exam
was satisfactory.  The respondent said at trial that this exam was basically a
vascular one, despite the terminology used.  The second note, which is undated
but considered to have been written at the same time, reads: [translation] “From a
neurological point of view, drowsy and agitated at times. No neurovascular
deficit but difficult to assess on lower limbs given the open fractures. No
dorsolumbar pain.”  The respondent said at trial that what he meant by the
latter observation was that there was no specific back pain.  6                                  
In the afternoon of August 12, a nurse entered a note that there was
good warmth and colour to the two feet as well as good movement of the toes of
both feet.  She observed that both feet, but especially the left one, were
edematous.  7                                  
On August 13, the respondent decided that the appellant’s condition had
sufficiently improved to allow another operation on the leg the next day. 
Unlike the first operation, this one was not urgent though it was desirable that
it be performed promptly so as to avoid prolonging immobilization.  8                                  
The second operation was carried out on August 14.  A nurse’s note
states that the appellant was carried to the operating room in a stretcher,
contrary to the usual practice of taking the patient to the operating room in
his own bed.  The appellant had earlier in the day complained of pains in the
back and abdomen, as well as being thirsty and hot.  The operation took place
on an orthopaedic table and it went well.  9                                  
In the evening of August 14, a nurse entered a note that the appellant
could feel physical contact to his legs but that he was unable to move his legs
and toes.  The same observation was made in the course of the next few days.  10                              
On August 15, the respondent attributed this condition to sciatica on
the right side consequent to the surgery.  The respondent noted on August 18
that there was still no recuperation of the sciatic nerve.  A similar
observation was made on August 21, the day a third operation was carried out to
modify a traction device attached to the leg.  Since the appellant was able to
feel his toes when they were touched, the respondent decided that there was
nonetheless an amelioration in the sciatica.  11                              
The respondent left for vacation on August 22 and was replaced by Dr.
Nolin, who was given a treatment plan that called for progressive mobilization
of the appellant.  The appellant started moving around in a wheelchair and was
able to move around in his bed with the aid of supports.  12                              
The appellant was discharged from the hospital on August 27 and was
scheduled to meet with the respondent in the out-patient clinic on September
12.  It was during this visit, upon removing the plaster covering the right
leg, that the respondent witnessed spasms to his great surprise, a symptom of
spastic paraplegia.  He consulted a neurologist, Dr. Bergeron, who confirmed a
condition of spastic paraplegia arising from a medullary contusion.  13                              
No x-ray of the back was taken on September 12.  The appellant returned
to school while waiting for more thorough tests, which were fixed for September
19.  The x-rays and myelogram revealed a fracture at the T8 vertebra with a
subluxation (partial dislocation) of 9 millimetres in relation to T9.  A more
detailed review of the x-rays taken on August 11 revealed that the fracture at
T8 was visible but that the subluxation was only 3 millimetres.  Tomography
tests were also done on September 22.  14                              
The respondent ordered the immobilization of the appellant and proposed
surgery in order to decompress the spinal cord.  On September 24, the appellant
requested to be transferred to the Enfant-Jésus Hospital, where the treating
neurosurgeon decided not to operate.  15                              
The appellant was diagnosed with paraparesis, a type of paralysis where
the motor activity of the lower limbs is undermined but sensitivity is still
retained.  He underwent physiotherapy and continued with his education,
obtaining a law degree and being called to the Quebec Bar.  16                              
The appellant applied for and received compensation from the Société de
l’assurance automobile du Québec (“SAAQ”).  The SAAQ informed him in July 1991
that it would no longer grant him full compensation as it found no causal
relationship between the paraparesis and the automobile accident of August 11,
1986.  However, after the Superior Court’s ruling finding the car accident to
be the cause of the appellant’s injuries, the SAAQ reversed its decision.  17                              
The appellant’s action against the respondent and Dr. Couture, the
emergency-room doctor, went to trial on February 10, 1997 before Rioux J.  The
appellant’s action against Hôtel-Dieu de Lévis Hospital was settled out of court
on March 23, 1994.  Five medical experts appeared for each side.  After the
case had been heard and while Rioux J. was deliberating, he fell ill and so the
case was transferred to Morin J., to be decided on the basis of the evidence
entered at trial.  III.  Relevant
Statutory Provisions  18                              
An Act respecting the implementation of the reform of the Civil Code,
S.Q. 1992, c. 57  9.  Proceedings pending continue to be
governed by the former legislation.  . . . A further exception is made for all
matters concerning proof and procedure in such proceedings.  85. The conditions of civil liability are
governed by the legislation in force at the time of the fault or act which
causes the injury.  Civil Code
of Lower Canada  1053.  Every person capable of discerning
right from wrong is responsible for the damage caused by his fault to another,
whether by positive act, imprudence, neglect or want of skill.  1238.  Presumptions are either established
by law or arise from facts which are left to the discretion of the courts.  1242.  Presumptions not established by law
are left to the discretion and judgment of the court.  Civil Code
of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64  2846.  A presumption is an inference
established by law or the court from a known fact to an unknown fact.  2847. . . .  A presumption concerning presumed facts is simple
and may be rebutted by proof to the contrary; a presumption concerning deemed
facts is absolute and irrebuttable.  2849.  Presumptions which are not
established by law are left to the discretion of the court which shall take
only serious, precise and concordant presumptions into consideration.  IV.  Judgments
Below  A.  Quebec
Superior Court, [1998] Q.J. No. 234 (QL)  19                              
Morin J. found that Dr. Couture had committed no fault in the manner
that he treated the appellant and accordingly rejected the action against him.  20                              
Morin J. also found the respondent Dr. Mercier to be without fault.  He
began with the suspected fracture at T7 and concluded that either it was stable
or it was not a fracture at all.  This was the assessment of all of the expert
witnesses as well as the respondent himself.  In those circumstances, there can
be no reproach for not discussing T7 with the radiologist since it would not
have led to anything and there were no injuries resulting from this supposed
fracture.  21                              
The trial judge found that reviewing the x-rays with the radiologist
would not have shed any light on the T8-T9 fracture-luxation since the
radiologist himself testified that he could not see it on the x-rays taken on
August 11, 1986.  Similarly, the respondent could not be blamed for not seeing
it.  22                              
On the question of back pain, Morin J. accepted the respondent’s
testimony that the reason he wrote [translation] “no dorsolumbar pain” was because the appellant indicated no precise back pain in
response to questions posed by the respondent on that subject.  Since there was
no indication to suspect a fracture of the spinal column, the respondent had no
reason to immobilize the patient to stabilize the spine.  23                              
The respondent diagnosed the appellant with a sciatic problem when, in
retrospect, it was a case of paraparesis stemming from a medullary (spinal)
contusion.  Morin J. listed some factors explaining why this could not be
characterized as a fault.  By August 15, when the respondent made the diagnosis
of sciatica, he had the radiologist’s report which made no mention of the
fracture-luxation at T8-T9.  The appellant did not complain to the respondent
of any specific back pain.  Even though the nurses took note of back pain, they
testified that this meant that it was of a generalized nature.  The appellant
himself testified that from what he remembers of that time, he had back pain
but of a tolerable nature.  Morin J. found that it was not unreasonable to
think that the appellant did not consider it important to mention it to the
respondent.  Even though the appellant’s friend, Jocelyn Richard, did testify
that the former complained to him of back pain, there was no indication that
the respondent was witness to this.  Moreover, the friend did not mention the
complaints of back pain to any medical personnel.  Richard also claims to have
frequently seen the appellant with priapism (which would have been indicative
of medullary trauma) but no nurse ever noticed this, and they testified that
they would have taken note of such a state had they seen it.  There is no
evidence that the respondent knew of this condition.  Finally, the state of the
appellant’s lower limbs made an adequate neurological exam very difficult.  24                              
For all of these reasons, Morin J. concluded that the respondent could
not be reproached for not having diagnosed a medullary contusion rather than a
sciatic condition.  This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that many experts
testified that the nature of the injuries suffered by the appellant was very
unusual, which made diagnosis even more difficult.  25                              
Even though Morin J. found there to be no fault and therefore no civil
liability, he canvassed the arguments regarding the causal link between the
purported fault and the injury.  He indicated that the respondent’s experts’
theory seemed more probable, but that even if it was not, the court found
itself confronted by two opposing medical theories regarding causation among
which it could not choose one against the other.  He consequently found that
the appellant had not discharged his burden to show causation and thus there
was a second reason to dismiss the action.  B.  Quebec
Court of Appeal, [1999] R.J.Q. 1658  26                              
The Court of Appeal (Gendreau, Proulx and Rousseau-Houle JJ.A.)
concluded that Morin J. had asked himself the wrong question in determining
whether there was a fault.  Morin J. had asked whether the respondent had
committed a fault by not diagnosing the neurological deficit and the unstable fracture
at the T8 and T9 vertebrae.  The true question to be asked according to the
Court of Appeal was whether the respondent [translation]
“had abided by the rules of art in the treatment of a seriously injured patient
who has the potential, if not the probability, of having a back fracture” (p.
1662).  This error on the part of the trial judge led him to apply the wrong
standard in evaluating the conduct of the respondent and therefore permitted
the Court of Appeal to make its own assessment as to fault.  27                              
The Court of Appeal found that in not following up on the suspected
fracture at the T7 vertebra, in not doing more complete neurological exams, in
not consulting the nurses’ notes alerting to the possibility of a neurological
deficit, and in not ordering immobilization of the spinal column, the
respondent did not behave like a prudent and diligent orthopaedic surgeon.  The
respondent had thus committed a fault.  28                              
On the issue of causation, the Court of Appeal corrected what it
considered to be a mistaken approach by Morin J.  The trial judge had refused
to take sides in the experts’ dispute as to the cause of the neurological
deficit, saying that it was not his role to judge between two opposed medical
theories.  The Court of Appeal found that such an approach to causation would
unduly favour defendants in all cases where the establishment of the causal
link depends on contradictory expert scientific evidence. Even if the
scientific conclusions are not absolute or not incontestable, a judge must
convert scientific conclusions to a legal conclusion since scientific causation
is not the same as legal causation.  The latter is established on the balance
of probabilities based on all of the evidence.  29                              
The Court of Appeal rejected the appellant’s claim for a reversal of the
burden of proof.  It said that there was enough evidence to maintain the
traditional rule of the burden of proof.  It specified that this rule should be
set aside in only the most exceptional cases, such as the one where two defendants
negligently fire in the same direction and at the same time, their delictual
conduct eliminating any means of proof available to the plaintiff.  30                              
On the question of causation, the Court of Appeal concluded that the
medullary injury was already complete on the evening of the accident and that
the manifestations of that injury presented themselves gradually.  It took note
that even the appellant’s principal experts did not exclude the hypothesis that
a subluxation already occurred in the evening of August 11 and that this
entailed a certain medullary contusion.  Their only contention was that only
external mobilization could account for the subluxation of T8.  The Court of
Appeal accepted the respondent’s experts’ evidence regarding the ligaments’
rupture, compression, and MRI results to conclude that the medullary lesion was
probably complete at the time of the accident.  It acknowledged that an early
immobilization resulting in a better recuperation was more than a simple
possibility, but that this was not significant enough to give rise to civil
liability given the extent of the initial harm caused.  V.  Issues  31                              
The questions raised by this appeal are the following:  (1) What is
the standard of review of a lower court decision?  (a) Did the Court of Appeal properly intervene in the Superior Court
decision?  (b) Is there a basis for this Court to intervene in the Court of Appeal
decision?  (2) Is there a
reason to apply a presumption of causation in favour of the appellant?  VI.  Analysis  A.  Transitional
Law  32                              
The events in this case all took place before the coming into force of
the new Civil Code of Québec in 1994.  Sections 9 and 85 of An Act
respecting the implementation of the reform of the Civil Code make it clear
that the substantive law governing this case is that of the Civil Code of
Lower Canada, more specifically art. 1053 of that Code.  While questions of
evidence such as presumptions are governed by the new code, there has been no
break in the approach towards presumptions from the previous regime.  The
relevant provisions in the Civil Code of Lower Canada did not provide a
definition and did not specify the kind of presumptions to be taken into
account.  However, the case law has always made those specifications and the
new code has simply codified them in art. 2849 (see Ministère de la Justice, Commentaires
du ministre de la Justice (1993), vol. II, at p. 1783; J.-L. Baudouin and
Y. Renaud, Code civil du Québec annoté (3rd ed. 2000), vol. 2, at pp.
3355-58).  B.  Reviewing Lower Court Decisions  33                              
Questions about the correct legal test are questions of law (Canada
(Director of Investigation and Research) v. Southam Inc., [1997] 1 S.C.R.
748, at para. 35).  In the case at bar, the question of the correct
inquiry or legal test in determining a delictual fault is a question of law.  34                              
An appellate court must review a lower court’s judgment on questions of
law to determine their correctness (P. (D.) v. S. (C.), [1993] 4 S.C.R.
141, at p. 189 (a contrario); Moge v. Moge, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 813,
at p. 833; R. v. Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, [1992] 2 S.C.R.
606, at p. 647; Lapointe v. Hôpital Le Gardeur, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 351, at
p. 373 (a contrario); and R. P. Kerans, Standards of Review Employed
by Appellate Courts (1994), at p. 90).  35                              
Questions of fact are “questions about what actually took place between
the parties” (Southam, supra, at para. 35).  The question of
whether the respondent did this or that is a question of fact, as is the
question of whether the accident or any lack of immobilization caused the
appellant’s state of paraparesis or hindered his recovery.   37                              
The principle of non-intervention on questions of fact is also
applicable to a second appellate court such as this Court vis-à-vis a
first appellate court (Demers v. Montreal Steam Laundry Co. (1897), 27
S.C.R. 537, at pp. 538-39; Pelletier v. Shykofsky, [1957] S.C.R. 635, at
p. 638; Dorval, supra, at p. 294; Scotsburn Co-operative
Services Ltd. v. W. T. Goodwin Ltd., [1985] 1 S.C.R. 54, at pp. 63-64).  38                              
In Demers, supra, at pp. 538-39, Taschereau J. said:  For it is settled law upon which we have often acted here, that where a
judgment upon facts has been rendered by a court of first instance, and a first
court of appeal has reversed that judgment, a second court of appeal should
interfere with the judgment on the first appeal, only if clearly satisfied that
it is erroneous. . . .  This statement
was endorsed in Pelletier, supra, and both of these cases were
discussed in Dorval, supra, where Fauteux J. examined the
principle that must govern this Court’s review of an appeal court’s judgment on
questions of fact once the latter has examined the facts and arrived at a
conclusion after justifiably intervening in the trial judgment.  He said, at p.
294:  [translation] Thus, in
order to intervene in this case, it would be necessary to be clearly satisfied
that the judgment of the Court of Appeal is erroneous, either with respect to
the reason for its intervention or with respect to its assessment of the
evidence in the record.  Fauteux J.
said that he was not “clearly satisfied” that the Court of Appeal erred and
therefore dismissed the appeal.  39                              
Similarly in Scotsburn, supra, this Court was asked to
review the decision of a court of appeal where the latter justifiably
intervened in the trial judgment.  Dickson J. (as he then was) applied the rule
in Dorval, supra, and held, at p. 64, that he was not “clearly
satisfied” that there was an error by the Court of Appeal in its interpretation
of the evidence.  40                              
In Beaudoin-Daigneault v. Richard, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 2, even though
this Court did disturb the findings of fact made by the Court of Appeal, it did
so only after affirming the validity of the principle expressed in Dorval,
supra, and finding that the Court of Appeal erroneously intervened in
the trial judgment.  This Court intervened for the purpose of restoring the
trial decision, which simply confirms the general principle of appellate
non-intervention.  41                              
A peculiarity of the case at bar is that the first trial judge, Rioux
J., fell ill after hearing all the evidence and was consequently substituted by
Morin J.  The latter made his decision based on the evidence entered at trial. 
There is seemingly less of a basis for deference where the trial judge did
exactly what the Court of Appeal and, by extension, this Court do to arrive at
a decision.  However, the Quebec Court of Appeal has upheld the principle of
deference in cases similar to the one at bar where the judge of first instance
is not the one who presided over the trial:  Cie de volailles Maxi Ltée v.
Empire Cold Storage Co., [1995] Q.J. No. 731 (QL); Cooke v. Suite,
[1995] R.J.Q. 2765.  42                              
Even where observation of the witnesses and hearing the testimonies are
not of any particular importance for the disposition of the case, the principle
of non-intervention is still important since the trial judge is entrusted with
the task of making a decision based on the facts, and is presumed to have
diligently discharged that duty.  In Toneguzzo-Norvell (Guardian ad litem
of) v. Burnaby Hospital, [1994] 1 S.C.R. 114, the British Columbia Court of
Appeal justified its intervention on the basis that it was in as good a
position to draw inferences from the expert evidence as was the trial judge
since there was no issue of credibility.  In this Court, McLachlin J. (as she
then was), at p. 122, agreed that the principle of non-intervention does not
apply with the same force where the credibility of witnesses is not in issue. 
However, she did observe that the weight to be assigned to the various pieces
of evidence under our trial system is essentially the province of the trier of
fact.  More broadly it is correct to say that where a trial judge has been
given the mandate to make a decision based on questions of fact, there is still
a need for appellate judicial restraint given that the assessment of facts is
the province of the trier of fact.  Also, the autonomy and integrity of the
trial process as well as resource allocation militate in favour of the finality
of judgments (see Schwartz v. Canada, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 254, at para. 32;
T. S. Woods, “Overturning Findings of Fact on Appeal: A Justifiably Narrow
Jurisdiction” (1998), 56 The Advocate 61, at pp. 63 and 65-67;  Kerans, supra,
at pp. 10-16; and R. D. Gibbens, “Appellate Review of Findings of Fact”
(1991-92), 13 Adv. Q. 445, at pp. 445-47).  43                              
Schwartz, supra, brought an element of refinement to the
established case law that a second appellate court should only disturb findings
of fact if it is clearly satisfied that an error has occurred in the first
appellate judgment.  La Forest J. said, at para. 37:  In my view, nothing justifies a second appellate
court in showing that kind of deference to the assessment of the balance of
probabilities made by the first appellate court.  If the second appellate court
agrees that the trial judge made some kind of error that justifies
intervention, it should be free to reconsider the evidence and substitute its
own findings of fact for that of the first court of appeal’s if disagreement
occurs.  44                              
Schwartz, supra, is a refinement on the previous case law
in the sense that where the first appellate court reverses the trial judge on
findings of fact related to credibility, this Court should not feel constrained
in assessing the evidence on a balance of probabilities since the first
appellate court was no better placed in assessing credibility, and this Court
is faced with a trial level decision going in one direction and an appellate
decision going in the opposite direction.  This Court can in that context make
its own assessments on questions of fact such as whether something has been
established on a balance of probabilities.  45                              
In contrast, where there are concurrent findings of fact at the
lower courts, this Court will be hesitant to intervene and disturb findings of
fact.  This Court has already said in Ontario (Attorney General) v. Bear
Island Foundation, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 570, at p. 574, that the principle of
non-intervention “is all the stronger in the face of concurrent findings
of both courts below” (emphasis added).  46                              
In either case, the second appellate court must be “clearly satisfied
that [the judgment of the Court of Appeal] is erroneous” (Dorval, supra,
at p. 294).  I do not consider La Forest J.’s statement as being a departure
from the previous case law on the role of second appellate courts on questions
of fact.  He cited some of the same cases as I have here (Beaudoin-Daigneault,
Demers, and Dorval), and did not express any kind of opposition
to that case law, not to mention any desire to overturn those cases.  Despite
the freedom with which this Court can reconsider the evidence and “substitute
its own findings of fact for that of the first court of appeal’s if
disagreement occurs” (Schwartz, supra, at para. 37),  that
disagreement must nonetheless stem from a clear satisfaction that an error has
occurred in the first appellate court’s assessment of the facts.  47                              
In the case at bar, the Court of Appeal did not really disturb the
Superior Court’s findings on causation since it substantially agreed with the
ultimate conclusion of Morin J.  The Court of Appeal did intervene on the
causation issue since Morin J. had framed the legal analysis of causation in an
erroneous manner, which I discuss in greater detail below.  But after
reassessing the evidence, the Court of Appeal came to the same conclusion as
Morin J. that no causation was proven on the balance of probabilities.  Thus,
on the issue of causation, there is substantive agreement between the Superior
Court and the Court of Appeal, which takes us away from the pattern described
in Schwartz, supra, and brings us closer to the scenario in Bear
Island, supra.  48                              
A question “about whether the facts satisfy the legal tests” is one of
mixed law and fact.  Stated differently, “whether the defendant satisfied the
appropriate standard of care is a question of mixed law and fact” (Southam,
at para. 35).  49                              
Generally, such a question, once the facts have been established
without overriding and palpable error, is to be reviewed on a standard of
correctness since the standard of care is normative and is a question of law
within the normal purview of both the trial and appellate courts.  Such is the
standard for medical negligence.  There is no issue of expertise of a
specialized tribunal in a particular field which may go to the determination of
facts and be pertinent to defining an appropriate standard and thereby call for
some measure of deference by a court of general appeal (Southam, supra,
at para. 45; and Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, supra, at p.
647).  50                              
The inquiry to be made here is the traditional one.  Was the Court of
Appeal correct in intervening in the Superior Court’s decision because there
was an error of law, an error of mixed law and fact, or an overriding and
palpable error of fact?  Do the appropriate bases present themselves for this
Court to intervene in the Court of Appeal’s decision?  C.  Errors
of Law in the Reasons of the Superior Court  51                              
The Court of Appeal found two errors of law in the Superior Court
judgment.  First, it concluded that Morin J. made a mistake in the analysis of
fault.  Second, it found that Morin J. made a mistake in the analysis of
causation.  I shall deal with these in turn.  52                              
The Court of Appeal said that Morin J. had asked the wrong question in
determining whether a fault had been committed and thereby applied the wrong
standard in evaluating the conduct of the respondent.  According to the Court
of Appeal, instead of asking whether the respondent was at fault in failing to
diagnose or badly diagnosing the medullary contusion and the fracture-luxation
at T8-T9, Morin J. should have asked whether the respondent acted according to
the professional rules of art in the treatment of this patient.  The Court of
Appeal essentially said that the question to be answered should be cast in
general terms according to the appropriate standard of conduct in the analysis
of fault under Quebec civil law, rather than incorporating the specific facts
of the case into the question.  53                              
The correct inquiry to be made in assessing whether a professional
committed a fault is indeed to ask whether the defendant behaved as would a
reasonably prudent and diligent fellow professional in the same circumstances
(J.-L. Baudouin and P. Deslauriers, La responsabilité civile (5th ed.
1998), at p. 850).  To ask, as the principal question in the general
inquiry, whether a specific positive act or an instance of omission constitutes
a fault is to collapse the inquiry and may confuse the issue.  What must be
asked is whether that act or omission would be acceptable behaviour for a
reasonably prudent and diligent professional in the same circumstances.  The
erroneous approach runs the risk of focussing on the result rather than the
means.  Professionals have an obligation of means, not an obligation of result.  54                              
In deciding that the wrong question had been asked, the Court of
Appeal was concerned that a proper inquiry was not made and the wrong standard
of fault was applied by the trial judge.  This concern entitled the Court of
Appeal to intervene.  While it is not entirely clear that Morin J. was unaware
of the appropriate inquiry to be made, his conclusion, at para. 78, that [translation] “Dr.
Mercier cannot be faulted for failing to diagnose the medullary contusion his
patient suffered . . . and having thought instead that he was
suffering from sciatica on the right side” raises some doubt as to whether he
was sufficiently focussed on a delictual analysis of means rather than
one of result.  55                              
The Court of Appeal also faulted the decision by the trial judge for
not  taking a position on the scientific debate as to causation.  Morin J.
wrote, at para. 90:  [translation] [T]he court
concludes that it is not up to it to decide between the opposing medical
theories it is finally presented with concerning the causal link between the
defendants’ actions and the paraplegia the plaintiff is suffering from.  The trial judge must assess whether the evidence supports, on a
balance of probabilities, a finding of causation.  If this standard of proof is
not met, the plaintiff has simply been unsuccessful in discharging his burden
of proof.  It is not enough to say that there are opposing medical theories on
causation and that it is not up to the court to decide between them.  56                              
A trial judge must reach a legal conclusion based on the scientific
evidence and other evidence presented.  Not to come to a definitive conclusion
on a balance of probabilities amounts to an undue advantage granted to the
defendant, who might simply need to come up with a plausible but contrary
scientific theory in order to negative the plaintiff’s claim.  Such an approach
is tantamount to an alteration of the standard of proof since the trial judge
is no longer looking at which scientific theory is most probable.  It is an
error of law in the analysis of causation for a trial judge to conclude that he
or she does not have the authority to make a final legal determination in the
face of competing theories.  57                              
There is room for the principle of judicial neutrality in the analysis
of fault.  It is appropriate for the courts not to take a position when there
are competing but recognized medical theories on what is competent professional
practice or an appropriate diagnosis.  In Lapointe, supra, at p.
363, L’Heureux-Dubé J. said that “a doctor will not be found liable if the
diagnosis and treatment given to a patient correspond to those recognized by
medical science at the time, even in the face of competing theories”
(emphasis added).  However, it is not appropriate to be similarly neutral on
matters of causation and thereby refrain from determining whether causation has
been established on the legal standard of balance of probabilities.  58                              
It was open to the Court of Appeal to be concerned that the trial judge
had erred in this manner and accordingly to undertake its own analysis of
causation.  There is no reason for this Court to question that intervention. 
At issue are the Court of Appeal’s findings as to fault and causation.  I will
now turn to these.  D.  Fault  59                              
The Court of Appeal identified four principal faults committed by the
respondent:  not verifying with the radiologist the fracture at T7 and not
ensuring that there were no other fractures in the spinal column; not asking
for more complete neurological tests; not taking cognizance of the nurses’
notes indicating a neurological deficit; and not ordering the immobilization of
the spinal column.  Because of all these failings, it was possible to conclude
that the respondent did not behave as a prudent and diligent orthopaedist would
in similar circumstances.  60                              
As I discussed above, findings of fault in the law of delict are
questions of mixed law and fact.  They are the application of a legal concept
onto a set of facts.  The standard to be applied in this instance of a question
of mixed law and fact is one of correctness.  It is open to this Court to vary
the findings of fault of the Court of Appeal if it judges that these were done
erroneously.  61                              
The Court of Appeal, at p. 1664, identified as a fault the omission by
the respondent to verify with the radiologist the possible fracture at T7 and
to assure himself that there were no other fractures, given the violence of the
impact during the accident:   [translation]
Dr. Mercier’s
presumption concerning the relative importance of the fracture at T7 did not
exempt him from examining, after the first emergency operation, the appellant’s neurological state in order to verify the injury
at T7 and to ensure that there were no other spinal column fractures, given the
violence of the impact during the accident.  There are two elements to this finding of fault: the suspicion about
a fracture at T7 and the violence of the impact.  The majority of the expert
opinion concluded that there was no fracture at T7 but rather a benign
anomaly.  In any case, at the time of diagnosis by Dr. Couture and the
respondent, there was only a suspicion of a fracture at T7.  The Court
of Appeal undoubtedly meant this implicitly as it reproached the respondent not
for being ignorant of the fracture at T7 (there was none to be discovered), but
rather, for not inquiring further, so long as there was a remaining doubt, into
the possibility of a fracture at T7 or elsewhere, given the extreme
violence of the accident.  62                              
The fault of the respondent lies in making neither further examinations
of the spine based on the suspected fracture at T7 nor neurological
examinations.  Even though it was generally accepted among the experts that
there was no fracture at T7, the suspicion of a fracture at one level should
have motivated the respondent to ensure that there were no fractures at any
other level, and to ensure that there was no other injury in the back.  By his
own testimony, the respondent was concerned about T7 even after the second
operation, and expressed that concern by asking the appellant about back pain,
though by that time he could no longer move his toes.  63                              
There can be no reproach against the respondent for not verifying the
fracture at T7 with the radiologist.  As far as T7 itself was concerned, the
respondent had exercised his professional judgement and decided that whatever
fracture there may be at that level, it was stable.  64                              
However, the suspected fracture at T7 together with the violence of the
impact, as well as the consequent concern of the respondent about back pain
later on, should have led the respondent to examine more fully the state of the
spine once the urgent first operation was done.  Further investigation would
have permitted him to discover the true fracture at T8.  The fault lies in not
conducting the requisite neurological tests, and not examining the back
properly with the available tests such as more localized x-rays and scans.  The
respondent admitted at trial that these tests were available on August 11, and
so they clearly could have been done after the first operation.  Dr. Bouvier
for the appellant testified that there is a general need upon admission to the
emergency ward to do tests frequently to assess whether there is deterioration
or amelioration.  Both Dr. Lévesque and Dr. Drouin, also for the appellant,
testified that neurological tests were possible despite the limitations posed
by the injuries to the lower limbs.  While these experts said that the exams
could have been done upon admission, which was contested by the respondent’s
experts, Dr. Jodoin and Dr. Séguin, they certainly could have been done
after the first operation, once the appellant’s injuries in the lower limbs
were stabilized.  Dr. Charlebois for the respondent did say that he would have
inquired into the patient’s ability to withstand further tests, and would have
required more specific information before conducting further tests.  The
respondent’s other experts did not contest the possibility for doing more localized
x-rays and scans, but said that there was no indication to the respondent for
the need to do them.  For the reasons mentioned above, I find no error in the
Court of Appeal’s concluding that a reasonably prudent and diligent orthopaedic
surgeon would have done them.  65                              
The Court of Appeal considered it a fault for the respondent not to take
cognizance of the nurses’ notes made after the second operation.  These notes
indicated a neurological deficit as well as back pain.  However, it is
difficult to see this as a fault given that the respondent personally checked
to see how the appellant was recovering after the second operation and asked
specifically about back pain.  There is no reason to find a fault on this
point.  66                              
The Court of Appeal found the lack of immobilization to be a fault.  It
did not make clear whether this fault was contingent on the first fault.  I
cannot see how it could be otherwise.  Obviously, if T7 was considered to be
stable and there was no reason to suspect any other fracture, there was no
reason to immobilize.  It is only upon learning or at least being suspicious
that there is an unstable fracture that there would be a reason to immobilize. 
I do consider that a lack of immobilization, more specifically the second operation,
could be a fault, but only in conjunction with the first fault of not making
further inquiries.  67                              
As for the particulars of that fault of not immobilizing, the Court of
Appeal reproached the respondent for not making an immobilization order.  However,
the testimony of two nurses was quite explicit to the effect that there is
immobilization in cases such as these until an explicit order for mobilization
is given.  This is corroborated by the fact that the respondent made a
mobilization order on August 14, after the second operation.  68                              
On the other hand, there is documentary evidence in the hospital record
stating that the respondent had been turned over several times, was rubbed in
the back, and was given a bath in bed between August 12 and 13.  The appellant’s
expert, Dr. Bouvier, considered this to be an example of wrongful
mobilization.  69                              
There was thus evidence for the Court of Appeal to conclude as it did on
this point.  There is no reason for this Court to disturb that conclusion.  70                              
The Court of Appeal found the use of a stretcher in carrying the
appellant to the operating room to be a fault.  It made this finding on the
basis of nurse Couture’s note that said that the patient was moved on a “civière”
(stretcher) for the second operation on August 14.  71                              
Nurse Couture testified at trial that she found it odd that she should
have written such a thing since the normal practice was to take orthopaedic
patients in their own beds, especially when there is a traction device on the
patient, as was the case here.  She said that it normally never happens that
such a patient is taken on a stretcher.  The respondent testified that all
patients in traction on whom he has operated are brought to the operating room
in their beds.  Dr. Jodoin, expert for the respondent, insisted that it is
impossible that a stretcher was used instead of bringing the appellant into the
operating room in his own bed since he was attached to a traction device.  This
device with its pulley mechanism is fixed to the bed with the result that a
patient is never put on a stretcher when traction is needed.  Dr. Jodoin said
that he was [translation]
“morally certain” that the appellant was not put on a stretcher to be taken to
the operating room.  72                              
It was open to the Court of Appeal to rely on nurse Couture’s written
note regarding use of the stretcher, even though the author of that note as
well as other medical professionals cast serious doubt about its accuracy.  73                              
The second operation conducted on August 14 is an instance of a lack of
immobilization.  The respondent admitted at trial that the second operation was
not urgent.  Carrying it out without making the appropriate examinations to
ensure adequate stability was clearly a fault.  There was a need to ensure
prior stability through appropriate examinations because the operation, with
its attendant curarization resulting in the neutralization of the muscular
support around the spine, posed an unacceptable danger to the stability of the
spine.  The respondent did not behave as a reasonably prudent and diligent
orthopaedic surgeon, and thereby committed a fault.  E.  Causation 74                              
The Court of Appeal concluded, at p. 1669, that, notwithstanding the
faults committed by the respondent, the accident was the legal cause of the
injury suffered by the appellant resulting in paraparesis,  [translation] While an
early immobilization and a diminution of the oedema in the spinal cord are more
than mere possibilities with regard to a better recovery of the neurological
deficit, they are not significant enough, given the magnitude of the initial
damage caused by the accident, to hold Dr. Mercier liable in part.  It canvassed
the principal points of the expert evidence and reached a conclusion.  This
conclusion was amply supportable by the evidence.  I am not clearly satisfied
that there was an error in the Court of Appeal’s findings of fact as to
causation that would permit me to intervene in the latter’s decision.  75                              
The general theory of the appellant’s experts is that the injury took
place due to hospital mobilization that related principally to the second
operation.  The appellant’s toes were moving after the first operation, but
were not after the second.  It is argued that the paraparesis is due to an
absence of adequate immobilization of the appellant.  According to these
experts, it was the faulty treatment that aggravated the injury caused by the
accident.  Immobilization would have decompressed the spinal cord.  According
to Dr. Bouvier, the paraparesis is due to the displacement of the vertebrae
caused by the mobilization of the appellant, such as the back rub given between
the first and second operations, the turning over of the appellant, the giving
of baths in bed, the transfer from bed to stretcher before the second
operation, and the second operation itself.  Dr. Guimond ascribed greatest
probability of injury to the second operation.  He specified that the
curarization of the second operation had the effect of relaxing the back muscles,
which resulted in a lack of support for the spine.  It was this instability
that caused the vertebral displacement at T8-T9 to go from 3 millimetres
ascertained upon arrival to 8 or 9 millimetres discovered a month later.  Dr.
Guimond acknowledged that some neurological deficit to the lower limbs may have
been caused by the accident, but asserted that the deficit was not complete. 
He attributed 25 percent of the injury to the accident, the remainder to the
respondent’s fault of not properly immobilizing the appellant.  The appellant’s
experts pointed to the spinal compression shown on the myelogram and MRI as
proof that the hospital mobilizations caused the harm.  76                              
The general theory of the respondent’s experts is that the violence of
the accident was so great that there was a fracture-luxation at T8-T9 of 8 or 9
millimetres, which was spontaneously reduced by virtue of elastic recoil to 3
millimetres.  The vertebrae assumed their normal position because these bone
structures are linked not only by ligaments but also muscles that are all
around the spinal column.  The initial displacement caused a contusion to the
spinal cord, setting off a chain of physiological phenomena that caused
irreversible damage to the spinal cord.  A contusion is an injury produced by
an instantaneous blunt force.  The spinal column ultimately stabilized at the 8
or 9 millimetre mark which it had reached at the peak of the impact.  Dr.
Jodoin observed in support of the recoil theory that nothing other than a
violent impact making the spinal column stretch could have caused the ligaments
to tear.  Given the violence of the impact, the subsequent movements in the
hospital had a negligible effect on an injury that was definitive and final in
its amplitude, leaving no room for recuperation.  In support of this
conclusion, the respondent’s experts drew a distinction between primary and
secondary compression, saying that the tests only show the latter, which
indicates that the harm was caused by a contusion rather than a compression.  77                              
The uncontested facts are that there was a massive shearing between the
thoracic vertebrae upon impact, causing fractures to a vertebra and a rib, and
causing all but one of the surrounding ligaments to tear.  The one ligament
that did not tear was attached to a rib that did fracture, such was the
violence of the impact.  Experts for both the appellant and respondent
acknowledged the tearing of the ligaments.  Dr. Milette for the appellant
stated in his report, at p. 9:  [translation] Several vertebral
ligaments were probably partially or completely torn at T8-T9, including the
posterior ligamentary complex.  Certain costo-vertebral ligaments resisted, and
a fracture occurred at the origin of the ninth rib on the left side and
probably on the right side.  Dr. Milette also stated numerous times in his testimony that the
ligaments were torn: [translation] “all those ligaments were torn”; “that means tearing of many
structures which, normally, are very solid”; “the violence causes the tearing,
causes the fractures and the torn ligaments . . .”.  This assessment
was confirmed by both Dr. Jodoin and Dr. Charlebois, the latter saying in
his testimony that [translation] “the subsequent displacement shows that there was in fact a
rupture of all those ligaments and we see that among other things on the
tomography, the scan, that was subsequently carried out
. . .”.  78                              
The Court of Appeal ultimately gave its sanction to the respondent’s
experts’ theory that it was at the point and moment of impact that there
occurred a medullary contusion, which set in motion the chain of physiological
phenomena such as swelling, intramedullary oedema, ischemia by compression, and
destruction of nerve cells, all of which would lead to the subsequent
paraparesis.  There then occurred a recoil, hence explaining the mere 3
millimetre subluxation of T8 upon admission to the hospital, which was
universally considered to be within normal range.  The later subluxation of 8
to 9 millimetres was simply a return to the state of the spine as it existed
immediately upon impact.  This happened because the ligaments started healing
in their elongated form.  The fact that the toes were moving on August 12 but
were not moving on August 14 after the second operation was merely a delayed
manifestation of the injury that occurred at the time of the accident.  79                              
The appellant’s experts have no alternative explanation for the torn
ligaments.  The fact that the ligaments were torn lends much credence to the
respondent’s theory that there was a violent extension and recoil action of the
spine.  Nothing less than this would have caused such tough ligaments to tear. 
This in turn supports the view that the sudden displacement of the vertebrae
caused a contusion to the spinal cord, setting in motion the destructive
phenomena that resulted in paraparesis.  80                              
As part of their general contestation of the respondent’s experts’
theory that all the damage was done upon impact, the appellant’s experts
provide a contrary affirmation on three points in support of their own theory
that any injury from the accident could have been contained and reversed
without much lasting adverse effect.  The first and most significant point is
the extent of the immobilization in the hospital.  The second is the significance
to be assigned to compression of the spinal cord as shown in the tests.  The
third is the significance to be assigned to spinal shock and the ostensible
lack of it in this case.  81                              
The appellant alleges that inadequate immobilization, as evidenced by
the back rub, the baths, the turning over, and the second operation and
attendant curarization, was the cause of the harm he suffered.  The evidence
shows that there was no explicit order for the immobilization of the
appellant.  However, nurse Plante testified that immobilization of patients
such as the appellant is done as a matter of course due to the extent of the
injuries suffered until an order of mobilization is given.  This appears to
have occurred given that an express order for the progressive mobilization of
the patient was made after the second operation.  Nurse Couture testified that
patients in intensive care are moved by at least two people, and care is taken
to use a pillow between the legs to guard against torsion.  Hospital records
indicate that this was the care taken even after the mobilization order was
given.  There is no reason to suspect that it was otherwise before the order
was given.  The respondent testified that when the appellant was transferred
onto the operating table, he was moved en bloc with at least four
people.  Thus, even if we accept that the appellant was first moved onto a “civière”
and then onto the operating table, it was done with minimal possibility of
torsion.  82                              
As for the second operation itself, an orthopaedic operating table was
used which was described as having a post in the centre that immobilized the
appellant’s back during the operation.  While curarization would have weakened
the muscular support around the spine, the care taken in transporting the
patient to and from the operation and the immobilization of his back on the
operating table left little or no possibility of its having any harmful effect.  83                              
The respondent testified that after the operation, the appellant would
have been moved in the same way as he was prior to the operation, namely en
bloc.  While the respondent’s testimony about how the appellant was moved
before and after the operation, and how the appellant was placed on the
orthopaedic table during the operation, was introduced under reserve of an
objection to its admissibility as descriptive of general practice rather than
specific recollection, it is of lesser probative value but nevertheless useful
in assessing probability.  It is properly admissible.  84                              
The appellant was indeed allowed to move after the second operation. 
However, even the appellant’s experts limit the cause of the paraparesis to
movements up to the second operation and immediately after (i.e. the transfer
from the operating table to the “civière” and then back to the bed), but
not the progressive mobilization subsequent to the second operation.  Dr.
Bouvier explicitly admitted that he had no indication that aggravation took
place after the second operation.  85                              
The appellant’s experts argued that it was the hospital movements that
caused the subluxation of 8 or 9 millimetres.  As Dr. Jodoin for the respondent
testified, the relative impact of the accident in contrast to the hospital
movements would be a ratio of 100:1.  Given that it takes a violent trauma for
the spinal ligaments to tear, and given that they were in fact torn in this
case, it is hard to believe that the accident caused a mere 3 millimetre
displacement but the hospital movements caused an 8 or 9 millimetre
displacement.  The Court of Appeal was entitled to weigh the evidence and
conclude that the harm caused by the accident was so great and definitive in
its effect that any lack of immobilization was not significant enough to
impinge upon a better recovery.  Even though there obviously was some
mobilization of the appellant between the first and second operations, this was
minimal in light of the general level of immobilization and the precautions
taken.  86                              
A significant part of the evidence, and a major point of contention
between the experts as to its diagnostic value, concerned the existence of
spinal cord compression as shown by the myelogram and MRI.  Compression here
means the pathological and sustained vertebral pressure on the spinal cord.  It
was accepted by both groups of experts that compression can cause paraparesis
and that evidence of compression would be an indication that hospital movements
had caused damage.  The respondent’s experts added the caveat that it is only
direct compression that would be such an indication, whereas indirect or
secondary compression would mean that there was another cause for the medullary
damage, namely contusion to the spinal cord with  the consequent damaging
physiological phenomena.  87                              
The appellant’s experts, Dr. Lévesque and Dr. Drouin, pointed to the
compression depicted by the tests as an indication that the hospital movements
had caused damage.  Dr. Laroche and Dr. Séguin, experts for the respondent,
distinguished between a direct and an indirect compression of the spinal cord. 
Dr. Laroche said that while the dural sac that contains the spinal cord was
compressed, the spinal cord itself was not.  In other words, there was no
direct compression, only a secondary compression.  Dr. Séguin said that
secondary compression was brought on by the oedema, swelling of the spinal
cord, and destruction of the nerve cells.  88                              
There is one slight error committed by the Court of Appeal in
understanding the expert evidence, but this does not bear in any way on the
result that it ultimately arrived at.  The Court of Appeal says that Dr. Séguin
stated that if there was a medullary compression caused by the subluxation of
the already fractured and unstable vertebrae, this compression would have been
visible on the myelogram even 5 to 6 weeks after the hospitalization.  89                              
What Dr. Séguin actually said was that if there was a direct compression
caused by the accident, there would have been a residual appearance of
it in the myelogram.  However, what he said is as true about compression caused
by the lack of immobilization as it is about compression caused by the
accident.  In other words, if there had been direct compression of the spinal
cord itself, regardless of the cause, it would have appeared on the myelogram.  90                              
The Court of Appeal was entitled to accord more weight to Dr. Séguin’s
interpretation of the myelogram and Dr. Bélanger’s and Dr. Charlebois’s
interpretations of the MRI, and come to the conclusion that there was a
contusion to the spinal cord at impact but not a compression brought on by
subsequent hospital mobilization.  Both Dr. Séguin and Dr. Laroche were quite
detailed at trial in their explanations of how the dye in the myelogram still
managed to flow through the suspected point of compression, thus indicating
that there was no direct compression.  The contusion to the spine, which was an
instantaneous blow to the tissue by the vertebral structure, was the injury
that sparked the physiological chain reaction that ultimately resulted in paraparesis.  91                              
There was much discussion before this Court about the spinal shock
syndrome.  Neither the Superior Court nor the Court of Appeal discussed this. 
The appellant’s position is that both lower courts failed to appreciate the
significance of the absence of spinal shock in this case.  92                              
The appellant asserted that spinal shock is a syndrome that is
recognized in medicine and that manifests itself in cases where there has been
a major trauma to the spinal cord, even when this trauma leads only to partial
disability in terms of mobility, and that spinal shock manifests itself by the
observable lack of mobility and sensitivity on the part of the patient.  93                              
The appellant’s expert, Dr. Guimond, stated that, as a rule, serious
trauma to the spine is usually accompanied by spinal shock, where the patient
is rendered completely immobile for a temporary period after the traumatic
incident.  The appellant argued that since no deduction of a state of temporary
immobility could be made from the hospital record, there was no spinal shock. 
Since there was no spinal shock, the neurological damage had not been
irreversibly caused at the moment of the car accident.  94                              
Counsel for the respondent argued that the absence of spinal shock was
not inconsistent with a severe but partial medullary lesion causing
paraparesis.  The expert evidence, notably that of Dr. Jodoin and Dr. Séguin
which remained uncontradicted in this respect, supports the respondent’s
position.  95     
The significance, if any, of the absence of spinal shock is a matter of
fact which has to be appreciated in the context of all of the evidence. 
Despite the cogent argument advanced by the appellant on this issue, the
evidence relating to spinal shock is inconclusive, and does not justify
overlooking all the evidence that points in the other direction.  96                              
There was ample evidence that all of the damage suffered was caused by
the accident and that there was no aggravation or independent damage caused by
the faults of the respondent.  The profusely bleeding and life-threatening open
wounds on the legs, the fractures at the T8 vertebra and the ninth rib, the
tearing of all but one of the ligaments attaching the vertebral column to the
ribs, the bleeding head wounds and brain concussion, and the partial memory
loss all speak to the extreme violence of the appellant being hit by a car
travelling at 90 km/h.  It is also important to keep in mind that the appellant
was an Olympic-level wrestler whose muscular structure was exceptionally
strong, as evidenced by the infliction of an extremely unusual injury rather
than a complete and fatal fracture of the spine.  97                              
Most of the appellant’s experts conceded that the accident did cause at
least some harm.  Dr. Guimond considered the second operation as the most
probable cause of the vertebral subluxation since the appellant’s toes were
still moving after the first operation.  Dr. Guimond and the appellant’s other
experts did not consider the progressive mobilization permitted after the
second operation to be a causal factor.  Dr. Guimond apportioned the causation
as 25 percent due to the accident and 75 percent due to the respondent’s faults
because the toes were moving upon arrival and there was no spinal shock.  Dr.
Bouvier also considered the turning over of the appellant, and the rubbing and baths
given to the appellant between the two operations as causal elements of the
paraparesis.  However, to do so he relied on the respondent’s written note upon
the appellant’s arrival in emergency that the neurovascular exam was all right,
despite the fact that the respondent testified that “neurovasc” was simply a
shorthand manner of saying “vascular”.  The limited neurological examination
cannot be taken to mean that there was no neurological problem until the second
operation.  Dr. Guimond did not justify his apportionment of causation.  It is
inconsistent with the fact that the accident was far more violent than the
subsequent movements during the hospitalization, more specifically the second
operation.  98                              
Causation here is a question of fact.  There seems to be some confusion
as to whether this element in the analysis of civil liability is a question of
fact or a question of mixed law and fact.  Baudouin and Deslauriers, supra,
at p. 348, observe that the Quebec Court of Appeal has a tendency to
characterize the issue as one of fact and leaves the determination to the
sovereign appreciation of the trial judge.  However, they also say that this
Court in Morin v. Blais, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 570, considered the matter to
be a question of law. While there is nothing explicit to that effect in Morin,
supra, Beetz J. did seem to be aware of the need to justify intervention
since he said, at p. 578, that “the determination of a causal relation between
one or more facts evincing fault and the damage presupposes a choice, an
appraisal and a characterization of the facts”.  He then cited Hébert v.
Lamothe, [1974] S.C.R. 1181, as an example of how “this Court did not
hesitate to intervene and divide the liability between the two drivers”.  The
issue was one of the points of contention between the majority judgment and the
dissenting opinion of Ritchie and de Grandpré JJ., where de Grandpré J. said,
at p. 574, that he found nothing “clearly erroneous” in the judgment of the
Court of Appeal, citing Dorval, supra, as well as Pelletier,
supra, where this Court held that it could only intervene in the
judgment of the Court of Appeal on questions of inference (whether the
defendant’s employee was in the performance of his duties) if it was clearly
satisfied that an error had occurred.  99                              
It is important to note that this Court in Morin, supra,
sought to correct an approach by the Quebec Court of Appeal where the latter
“appeared to see no choice except between two mutually exclusive hypotheses,
namely respondent’s fault or appellant’s fault” (p. 578).  The Court also laid
down a legal principle for a particular circumstance in which a presumption of
causation can be made (pp. 579-80).  100                          
The Quebec Court of Appeal in Bonenfant v. O.T.J. de la
Rédemption, [1994] R.R.A. 225, at p. 227, cited Morin, supra,
as authority for the proposition that it can intervene on a question of
causation since it is an issue [translation]
“where the facts and the law intersect, a question of characterization”.  I have stated above the peculiarity of the Morin
judgment.  101                          
V. Karim, Commentaires sur les obligations (1997), vol. 1, at p.
271, supports this characterization of causation as a question of mixed law and
fact.  He says that the intervention of an appellate court is justified when  [translation] the trier
of fact does not give reasons for his or her decision in justifying the
application of the law to the facts.  The same applies when the trial court’s
decision does not conform to the evidence adduced, or its conclusions as to the
existence of causation cannot be reconciled with the established facts.    102                          
It is true that the reasons Karim lists are grounds for intervention by
an appellate court.  However, not giving reasons for a decision, not making the
decision conform to the proven facts, and not having conclusions that are
reconcilable with the established facts have nothing to do with the nature of
the causation inquiry per se.  They are general grounds for appellate
intervention.  103                          
The confusion on this issue perhaps stems from an inability to
distinguish between cause in the pure physical sense and cause as it is
cognizable in law.  The latter is a question of law only insofar as we are
looking at facts through the lens of the law.  However, the inconsequentiality
of this observation is made obvious by the truth that everything in
judicial decision making is looked at through the lens of the law.  This does
not make everything a question of law.  For example, even questions of pure
fact like whether a person was present in a certain place, or whether a person
committed a certain act are determined according to the probability of that
being so (or according to certainty beyond a reasonable doubt in the criminal
domain).  This use of the legal rule of evidence of proof on a balance of
probabilities to ascertain facts does not transform the question of fact into
one of law.  104                          
In the determination of fault one applies norms of behaviour required by
law to a set of facts.  This obviously makes the question one of mixed law and fact. 
In contrast, in the determination of causation one is inquiring into whether
something happened between the fault and the damage suffered so as to link the
two.  That link must be legally significant in an evidentiary sense, but it is
rendered no less a question of fact.  105                          
The difficulty on this point may also arise from the fact that the
analysis of causation sometimes depends on presumptions that can be drawn. 
However, as indicated by the legislator in the Civil Code of Québec in
making “Presumptions” a chapter in the title on proof, and as L’Heureux-Dubé J.
discussed in Quebec (Public Curator), supra, at para. 47, these
too are means of proof and so are properly within the realm of fact.  106                          
I am not clearly satisfied that the Court of Appeal committed an
error in its interpretation of the evidence and its conclusion that given the
initial harm caused by the accident, no causation can be attributed to the
respondent’s faults.  The court found that while an early immobilization and a
diminution of the oedema in the spinal cord offered chances of recuperation
that were more than simple possibilities, these were not significant enough
given the magnitude of the initial harm caused by the accident.  The court here
touched upon the likelihood of the treatment preventing recuperation.  It
concluded that the treatment administered by the respondent did not cause the
harm suffered.  By saying [translation]
“more than simple possibilities” and [translation]
“not significant enough”, the Court of Appeal basically found
the likelihood of an early immobilization leading to recuperation to be
somewhere on the spectrum in between the poles of possibility and probability:
greater than the realm of what is merely possible but still not enough to meet
the threshold of probability.  The initial harm of the accident simply
outweighed any kind of effect the faulty treatment might have had, to the point
where it cannot be said on a probabilistic basis that the faulty treatment had
any causal effect.  It is worth repeating the traditional principle set out in Laferrière
v. Lawson, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 541, at pp. 608-9, where I found that causation
must be established on a balance of probabilities and that the loss of a mere
chance cannot be a compensable harm.  Accordingly, the chances of recuperation
in this case were not significant enough on a balance of probabilities to
establish that the faulty treatment caused the harm suffered.  F.  Presumptions and Burden of Proof  107                          
The appellant strenuously argued for a presumption of causation and a
reversal of the burden of proof in this case.  He posited that since the
respondent created a risk and that the harm subsequently occurred within the
ambit of the risk created, there should be either a reversal of the burden of
proof or a presumption of causation.  He also argued that he was deprived of
some important means of proof because more tests were not done, and therefore
there should be a reversal of the burden of proof onto the respondent to show
that his fault did not cause the damage.  108                          
There are two concepts here that must be disentangled.  First, there is
the evidentiary tool of presumptions.  Second, there is an allocation of
liability on defendants where there is an impossibility in proving causation
between the specific fault and the damage.  I will deal with these in turn.  109                          
The law of presumptions in the case at bar has its source in arts. 2846,
2847 and 2849 of the Civil Code of Québec (“C.C.Q.”), as well as
arts. 1238 and 1242 of the Civil Code of Lower Canada.  Since the law of
presumptions has to do with proof, the new articles are applicable to this pre-C.C.Q.
case by virtue of s. 9 of An Act respecting the implementation of the reform
of the Civil Code.  As mentioned above, there has been no change in the law
on this matter in the transition from the old code to the new one, except that
the C.C.Q. has codified the judicial specifications of the kind of
presumptions that can be taken into account.  110                          
Presumptions of fact can establish both fault as well as
causation.  D. Jutras, “Expertise scientifique et causalité”, in Congrès
annuel du Barreau du Québec (1992), 897, at fn. 24, has observed, [translation] “Presumptions of fact serve to establish, sometimes
simultaneously, fault and causation.”  111                          
On the matter of presumptions and burden of proof, Baudouin and
Deslauriers, supra, at pp. 358-59, say:  [translation] . . . in medical matters, presumptions of fact sometimes
result in a reversal of the burden of proving either fault or a causal link
between the action in question and the damage sustained.   J.-C. Royer, La preuve civile (2nd ed. 1995), at p. 518, is
more specific in saying:  [translation] This constitutes a reversal of the evidentiary
burden, since a presumption of fact does not alter the general principle of
article 2803 of the Civil Code of Québec and,
consequently, cannot reverse the burden of proof.  Royer says that in order to avoid the confusion of terminology
regarding burdens of proof, authors and case law have preferred to use
“unfavourable inference” against the defendant rather than a reversal of the
burden of proof.  One of the cases cited is Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2
S.C.R. 311, at p. 330, which of course expresses greater comfort with use of
the term “inference” rather than “reversal of burden”.  112                          
The C.C.Q. itself alludes to this inference or reversal of
the evidentiary burden in art. 2847 where it says that a simple presumption may
be rebutted by proof to the contrary.  Jutras, supra, at fn. 24,
accurately discusses the consequence of this reversal for the defendant:  [translation] “The
defendant may rebut the presumption by showing that the occurrence of the harm
is just as consistent with a lack of fault as with the existence of fault.” 
Nevertheless, the legal burden of proof remains on the plaintiff.  113                          
As for the conditions of the applicability of presumptions in the civil
law context, art. 2849 makes it clear that only serious, precise, and
concordant presumptions are to be taken into consideration.  Failing the
satisfaction of these criteria, the plaintiff must actually establish the
unknown fact rather than the trier of fact being permitted to draw an inference
from the known fact to the unknown fact.  114                          
I am not clearly satisfied that the Court of Appeal made an error in its
decision not to apply presumptions of causation in favour of the appellant. 
L’Heureux-Dubé J. in Quebec (Public Curator), supra, at para. 47,
said that presumptions of fact were a method of proof among others.  Although
she was addressing a case where the lower court judge had made presumptions of
fact, her comments regarding non-intervention are equally applicable where the
lower court chooses not to make presumptions.  The refusal to make presumptions
is as much an evidentiary decision as is any other acceptance or non-acceptance
of methods of proof.  115                          
There was evidentiary material for the appellant to make his
case: the initial x-rays, the doctors’ notes, the nurses’ notes, his friend
Jocelyn Richard’s observations, and the subsequent tests.  Article 2849 C.C.Q.
provides that only serious, precise, and concordant presumptions are to be
taken into consideration.  These criteria were not fulfilled in this case.  The
evidence pointed in different and sometimes opposite directions.  Jutras, supra,
at fn. 24, is correct in saying:  [translation]
“In cases where the expert evidence is disputed . . ., presumptions of fact are
therefore of little use, since it will not be sufficient to assert that the
fault is one of the possible causes.”  116                          
The Court of Appeal appropriately said that it is insufficient to show
that the defendant created a risk of harm and that the harm subsequently
occurred within the ambit of the risk created.  To the extent that such a
notion is a separate means of proof with a less stringent standard to satisfy, Snell,
supra, and definitely Laferrière, supra, should have put
an end to such attempts at circumventing the traditional rules of proof on the
balance of probabilities.  There may be a misapprehension of what I said in Laferrière,
supra, at p. 609:  “In some cases, where a fault presents a clear danger
and where such a danger materializes, it may be reasonable to presume a
causal link, unless there is a demonstration or indication to the contrary”
(emphasis added).  This is merely a reiteration of the traditional approach on
presumptions, and does not create another means of proof in Quebec civil law in
the establishment of the causal link.  The Court of Appeal correctly
interpreted this passage as pertaining to presumptions within the traditional
rules of causation.  117                          
I have dealt with the law of presumptions and how it relates to the
burden of proof.  The second concept I wish to deal with is the impossibility
of proving causation and the allocation of liability.  118                          
The appellant cited art. 1480 C.C.Q. in his discussion of
establishing the causal link.  This article imposes solidary liability on
defendants where they have jointly committed a wrong causing an injury or where
each has committed a separate fault, one of which may have caused the injury. 
For this article to operate, it is necessary for the plaintiff to show an
impossibility to determine the causal connection between the damage suffered
and the specific culprit.  The classic scenario is one where hunters
simultaneously fire their guns, injuring the plaintiff.  This was in fact the
situation in cases such as Labelle v. Charette, [1960] Que. Q.B. 770,
and Massignani v. Veilleux, [1987] R.R.A. 541 (C.A.), as well as the
common-law case of Cook v. Lewis, [1951] S.C.R. 830, where this Court
ruled that if the defendants’ own wrongdoing prevents the plaintiff from making
the necessary causal connection to the specific author of the wrong, liability
is to be attributed collectively so as to avoid the injustice of leaving the
victim with no recourse.  (See also A. Mayrand, “L’énigme des fautes
simultanées” (1958), 18 R. du B. 1, and Baudouin and Deslauriers, supra,
at pp. 348 and 370-71, for the doctrinal discussion of the matter.)  It is in
cases such as these that there is a true reversal of the burden of proof, but
not on the issue of causation between fault and damages, but rather on the
particular issue of linking the damage to the particular author of the delict.  119                          
I agree with Morin J. in Stéfanik v. Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu de Lévis,
[1997] R.J.Q. 1332, at pp. 1354-55, that art. 1480 C.C.Q. is about the
modalities of liability rather than a question of proof, and thus the article
is not applicable to situations arising before the advent of the Civil Code
of Québec.  Morin J. correctly stated though that this was not of great
significance since art. 1480 merely enshrined the rule set out by the case law,
some examples of which I have given above.  120                          
There is no reason to apply this rule in favour of the appellant.  It
should only be applied in cases where there is a true impossibility to
determine the author of the delict.  There was no such impossibility here:
either it was the car accident, or the respondent, or a combination of both in
certain proportions.  VII.  Disposition  121                          
For the foregoing reasons, I would dismiss the appeal without costs.  Appeal dismissed.   Solicitors for the respondent:  McCarthy Tétrault,
Montréal.    