Auto Concrete Curb Ltd. v.
South Nation River Conservation Authority, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 201  South Nation River Conservation
Authority and Kostuch Engineering Limited                                                            Appellants  v.  Auto Concrete Curb Ltd.                                                                   Respondent  Indexed as:  Auto Concrete
Curb Ltd. v. South Nation River Conservation Authority  File No.:  23090.  1993:  June 14;
1993:  September 9.  Present:  La Forest and
Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for
ontario                      Auto Concrete Curb
Ltd. (the contractor) successfully tendered to dredge the River South Nation
with a proposal based on using a suction method which required large disposal
sites where the water could be separated from the sludge and returned to the
river.  When it could not obtain the permits necessary to this method, it had
to adopt other procedures and incurred a considerable loss.  The contractor, in
its suit against the engineering firm which had prepared the specifications and
against the conservation authority, alleged that the engineer's failure to tell
it about the need to get permits and to warn it that this might be difficult to
do constituted a negligent misrepresentation upon which it relied to its
detriment.  The courts below held for the contractor.                     Held:  The appeal should be
allowed.                     The standard of
care imposed on an engineer preparing tender documents does not require it to
advise prospective contractors of the need to obtain permits to do the work by
the particular method they propose.  Barring specific arrangements to the
contrary, the method by which a contractor chooses to execute the work falls
within its sphere of responsibility, and neither the owner nor the design
professionals employed by the owner have a duty to advise the contractor as to
what method to choose, or how to go about accomplishing the work by whatever
method the contractor in fact chooses.  This settled rule defines legal
responsibility and is not abrogated by the fact that some design professionals
may in fact choose to advise contractors on the methods they choose to use and
on problems which may be associated with the choice of a particular method. 
The engineer here was not under a duty of care to advise the contractor about
problems it might encounter in obtaining permits to do the work in the fashion
it proposed.  Cases Cited                     Referred to:  R. v. Paradis and Farley Inc.,
[1942] S.C.R. 10; Vermont Construction Inc. v. Beatson, [1977] 1 S.C.R.
758; Temar Construction Ltd. v. West Hill Redevelopment Co. (1986), 21
C.L.R. 156.  Authors Cited  Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th ed.,  vol. 4.   
Hudson, Alfred Arthur.  Hudson's Building and Engineering Contracts,
10th ed. By I. N. Duncan Wallace.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1970.  McLachlin,
Beverley M. and Wilfred J. Wallace.  The Canadian Law of
Architecture and Engineering.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1987.                       P. Donald
Rasmussen, for the
respondent.                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered by                     McLachlin
J. -- This appeal arises
out of a contract for dredging of the South Nation River.  The contractor, Auto
Concrete Curb Ltd., was the successful tenderer for the project.  The
contractor's proposal was based on doing the work by a suction method which
required large disposal sites where the water would be separated from the
sludge and returned to the river.  The method which had been employed by other
contractors on other sections of the work was different; it involved removing
the sludge mechanically with backhoes and hauling it away in trucks.  The
contractor was unable to obtain the necessary permits for doing the work by the
suction method.  Consequently it had to adopt other procedures and lost
considerable money.                     The respondent
contractor sued Kostuch Engineering Limited, the engineering firm which had
prepared the specifications and South Nation River Conservation Authority which
had published the invitation for tender.  The basis of the suit was the
allegation that the engineer should have told the contractor about the need to
get permits and warned the contractor that this might be difficult to do.  The
failure to do so, it was alleged, constituted a negligent misrepresentation
upon which the contractor relied to its detriment.                     The courts below
held for the contractor.  Based on the evidence of engineers who testified at
trial, the trial judge found that sludge dredging would have been within the
contemplation of a competent engineer in the preparation of the tender document
for the project.  On this basis, he concluded that the tender documents were
negligently prepared in that they failed to specify restrictions or
reservations about the excavation method and failed to warn of permits required
on the suction method.  The Court of Appeal (1992), 89 D.L.R. (4th) 393,
declined to interfere with this conclusion.                     In my respectful
opinion, the courts below erred in holding that the standard of care imposed on
an engineer preparing tender documents requires it to advise prospective
contractors of the need to obtain permits to do the work by the particular
method they propose.  While it may be that the engineers who testified
suggested they might have done this, that is not conclusive of the legal
standard of care.  It was necessary to go beyond the evidence to consider what
the legal standard of care was in these circumstances.                     It has long been
established that, barring specific arrangements to the contrary, the method by
which a contractor chooses to execute the work falls within its sphere of
responsibility, and that neither the owner nor the design professionals
employed by the owner have a duty to advise the contractor as to what method to
choose, or how to go about accomplishing the work by whatever method the
contractor in fact chooses.  (See R. v. Paradis and Farley Inc., [1942]
S.C.R. 10, at p. 18; Vermont Construction Inc. v. Beatson, [1977] 1
S.C.R. 758, at pp. 767-68; Temar Construction Ltd. v. West Hill
Redevelopment Co. (1986), 21 C.L.R. 156 (Ont. H.C.), at pp. 168-69;
Beverley M. McLachlin and Wilfred J. Wallace, The Canadian Law of
Architecture and Engineering, at p. 145; Hudson's Building and
Engineering Contracts (10th ed. 1970), at pp. 529-30; Halsbury's Laws of
England, 4th ed., vol. 4, at p. 626, para. 1231, and at p. 686, para.
1344).  This settled rule defines legal responsibility and is not abrogated by
the fact that some design professionals may in fact choose to advise
contractors on the methods they choose to use and  on problems which may be
associated with the choice of a particular method.                     Applying this rule
to the facts in the case at bar, I am satisfied that the engineer was not under
a duty of care to advise the contractor about problems it might encounter in
obtaining permits to do the work in the fashion it proposed.  It was also
argued that in any event, the contractor had not relied on the engineer.  I
find it unnecessary to consider this question.                     I would allow the
appeal with costs to the appellants throughout.                     Appeal allowed with
costs.                     Solicitors for the
appellants:  Scott & Aylen, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the
respondent:  Rasmussen, Starr, Ruddy, Ottawa.  