                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA    Date:  20071004 Docket:  31227  Between: Jason
George Hill and Jack
Loft, Andrea McLaughlin, Joseph Stewart, Ian Matthews and
Terry Hill Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of
Ontario, Aboriginal Legal Services of Toronto Inc., Association
in Defence of the Wrongly Convicted, Canadian
Association of Chiefs of Police, Criminal Lawyers’
Association (Ontario), Canadian Civil Liberties
Association, Canadian Police Association and
Police Association of Ontario Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel,
Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Charron and Rothstein JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 106)  Dissenting
  Reasons on Cross-Appeal: (paras. 107 to 188)   McLachlin C.J. (Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish and Abella
  JJ. concurring)  Charron J. (Bastarache and
  Rothstein JJ. concurring)  ______________________________    v.  Services
Board, Jack Loft, Andrea
McLaughlin, Joseph Stewart,  and  Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario,
Aboriginal Legal Services of Toronto Inc., Association
in Defence of the Wrongly Convicted, Canadian
Association of Chiefs of Police, Criminal Lawyers’
Association (Ontario), Canadian Civil Liberties
Association, Canadian Police Association and Police Association of Ontario                                                                                   Interveners   Neutral citation:  2007 SCC
41.  File No.:  31227.  2006:  November 10; 2007:  October 4.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel,
Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Charron and Rothstein JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario  Torts — Negligence — Duty of care — Police
investigation — Whether police owe duty of care to suspects in criminal
investigations — If so, standard of care required by police investigating a
suspect — Whether police officers’ conduct in investigating suspect was
negligent.  Police — Investigation — Negligence — Whether
Canadian law recognizes tort of negligent investigation.    Per McLachlin C.J. and
Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish and Abella JJ.: The police are not immune from
liability under the law of negligence and the tort of negligent investigation
exists in Canada.  Police officers owe a duty of care to suspects.  Their
conduct during an investigation should be measured against the standard of how
a reasonable officer in like circumstances would have acted.  Police officers
may be accountable for harm resulting to a suspect if they fail to meet this
standard. In this case, the police officers’ conduct, considered in light of
police practices at the time, meets the standard of a reasonable officer in
similar circumstances and H’s claim in negligence is not made out.  [3] [74]
[77]          Cases Cited  By McLachlin C.J.  Applied:  Anns v.
Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Cooper
v. Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79; Donoghue v. Stevenson,
[1932] A.C. 562; discussed: Childs v. Desormeaux, [2006] 1 S.C.R.
643, 2006 SCC 18; referred to:  Edwards v. Law Society of Upper
Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 562, 2001 SCC 80; Odhavji Estate v. Woodhouse,
[2003] 3 S.C.R. 263, 2003 SCC 69; Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk
Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021; Jane Doe v. Metropolitan
Toronto (Municipality) Commissioners of Police (1998), 160 D.L.R. (4th)
697; Chartier v. Attorney General of Quebec, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 474; Brooks
v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 1495, [2005]
UKHL 24; Hill v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire, [1988] 2 All E.R.
238; Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 77, 2003 SCC
63; Rufo v. Simpson, 103 Cal.Rptr.2d 492 (2001); Ryan v.
Victoria (City), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 201; R. v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool,
[1983] 1 S.C.R. 205; Jauvin v. Procureur général du Québec, [2004]
R.R.A. 37; Lacombe v. André, [2003] R.J.Q. 720; Lapointe v. Hôpital
Le Gardeur, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 351; Folland v. Reardon (2005), 74 O.R.
(3d) 688; R. v. Sheppard, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 869, 2002 SCC 26.   Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Cooper v. Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537,
2001 SCC 79; Edwards v. Law Society of Upper Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R.
562, 2001 SCC 80; Odhavji Estate v. Woodhouse, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 263, 2003
SCC 69; Childs v. Desormeaux, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 643, 2006 SCC 18; Beckstead
v. Ottawa (City) Chief of Police (1997), 37 O.R. (3d) 62; Reynen v.
Canada (1993), 70 F.T.R. 158; McGillivary v. New Brunswick (1994),
149 N.B.R. (2d) 311; Al’s Steak House & Tavern Inc. v. Deloitte &
Touche (1994), 20 O.R. (3d) 673; Collie Woollen Mills Ltd. v. Canada
(1996), 107 F.T.R. 93; Stevens v. Fredericton (City) (1999), 212 N.B.R.
(2d) 264; Dix v. Canada (Attorney General) (2002), 315 A.R. 1, 2002 ABQB
580; Kleysen v. Canada (Attorney General) (2001), 159 Man. R. (2d) 17,
2001 MBQB 205; Avery v. Canada (Attorney General), [2004] N.B.J. No. 391
(QL), 2004 NBQB 372; A.A.D. v. Tanner (2004), 188 Man. R. (2d) 15, 2004
MBQB 213; Hill v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire, [1988] 2 All E.R.
238; Alexandrou v. Oxford, [1993] 4 All E.R. 328; Osman v. Ferguson,
[1993] 4 All E.R. 344; Cowan v. Chief Constable of the Avon and Somerset
Constabulary, [2001] E.W.J. No. 5088 (QL), [2001] EWCA Civ 1699; Brooks
v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 1495, [2005]
UKHL 24; Calveley v. Chief Constable of the Merseyside Police, [1989] 1
All E.R. 1025; Emanuele v. Hedley (1997), 137 F.L.R. 339; Courtney v.
State of Tasmania, [2000] TASSC 83; Wilson v. State of New South Wales
(2001), 53 N.S.W.L.R. 407, [2001] NSWSC 869; Tame v. New South Wales
(2002), 191 A.L.R. 449, [2002] HCA 35; Gruber v. Backhouse (2003), 190
F.L.R. 122, [2003] ACTSC 18; Duke v. State of New South Wales, [2005]
NSWSC 632; Gregory v. Gollan, [2006] NZHC 426; Sullivan v. Moody (2001),
183 A.L.R. 404, [2001] HCA 59; Cran v. State of New South Wales (2004),
62 N.S.W.L.R. 95, [2004] NSWCA 92, leave to appeal denied, [2005] HCA Trans 21;
Simpson v. Attorney General, [1994] 3 N.Z.L.R. 667; Gregoire v.
Biddle, 177 F.2d 579 (1949); Thompson v. Olson, 798 F.2d 552 (1986);
Kompare v. Stein, 801 F.2d 883 (1986); Kelly v. Curtis, 21 F.3d 1544
(1994); Orsatti v. New Jersey State Police, 71 F.3d 480 (1995); Schertz
v. Waupaca County, 875 F.2d 578 (1989); Castle Rock v. Gonzales, 125
S.Ct. 2796 (2005); Jane Doe v. Metropolitan Toronto (Municipality)
Commissioners of Police (1998), 160 D.L.R. (4th) 697; Jane Doe v.
Metropolitan Toronto (Municipality) Commissioners of Police (1990), 72 D.L.R.
(4th) 580; Dorset Yacht Co. v. Home Office, [1970] A.C. 1004; R. v.
Beare, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 387; R. v. Beaudry, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 190, 2007
SCC 5; R. v. Storrey, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 241; Lacombe v. André,
[2003] R.J.Q. 720; Jauvin v. Procureur général du Québec, [2004] R.R.A.
37.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms .  Civil Code of Québec,
S.Q. 1991, c. 64, art. 1457.    Police Act, R.S.B.C.
1996, c. 367, s. 34(2).    Police Act,
S.N.S. 2004, c. 31, ss. 30(1), 31(1).   Police Services Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. P.15, ss. 1, 42.  Provincial Police Act,
R.S.M. 1987, c. P150, C.C.S.M. c. P150, s. 5.  Public Authorities Protection Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.38, s. 7(1).    Authors Cited  Blackstone, Sir William.  Commentaries
on the Laws of England, Book IV, 1769.  Canada.  Department of Justice.  Guidelines: 
Compensation for Wrongfully Convicted and Imprisoned Persons.  Ottawa: 
Department of Justice, 1988.  Canada.  Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples.  Bridging
the Cultural Divide: A Report on Aboriginal People and Criminal Justice in
Canada.  Ottawa:  The Commission, 1996.  Federal/Provincial/Territorial Heads of Prosecutions
Committee Working Group.  Report on the Prevention of Miscarriages of
Justice.  Ottawa:  Department Justice, 2004.  Garrison, Arthur H.  “Law Enforcement Civil
Liability under Federal Law and Attitudes on Civil Liability:  A Survey of
University, Municipal and State Police Officers” (1995), 18 Police Stud.
19.  Hall, Daniel E., et al., “Suing cops and
corrections officers:  Officer attitudes and experiences about civil liability”
(2003), 26 Policing:  An International Journal of Police Strategies &
Management 529.  Hughes, Tom.  “Police officers and civil liability:
‘the ties that bind’?” (2001), 24 Policing:  An International Journal of
Police Strategies & Management 240. Kaiser, H. Archibald.  “Wrongful Conviction and
Imprisonment:  Towards an End to the Compensatory Obstacle Course” (1989), 9 Windsor
Y.B. Access Just. 96.  Klar, Lewis N.  Tort Law, 3rd ed. 
Toronto:  Thomson Carswell, 2003.   Manitoba.  Report of the Commission of Inquiry
into Certain Aspects of the Trial and Conviction of James Driskell. 
Winnipeg:  Department of Justice, 2007.  Manitoba.  The Inquiry Regarding Thomas Sophonow: 
The Investigation, Prosecution and Consideration of Entitlement to Compensation. 
Winnipeg:  Manitoba Justice, 2001.  Mew, Graeme.  The Law of Limitations, 2nd ed. 
Markham, Ont.:  Lexis Nexis Butterworths, 2004.  Newfoundland and Labrador.  The Lamer Commission
of Inquiry into the Proceedings Pertaining to:  Ronald Dalton, Gregory Parsons
and Randy Druken:  Report and Annexes.  St. John’s:  Government of
Newfoundland and Labrador, 2006.  Nova Scotia.  Royal Commission on the Donald
Marshall, Jr., Prosecution:  Findings and Recommendations.  Halifax: 
The Commission, 1989.  Ontario.  Report of the Commission on Proceedings
Involving Guy Paul Morin (Kaufman Report).  Toronto:  Ministry of the
Attorney General, 1998.  Saskatchewan.  Commission of Inquiry into the
Wrongful Conviction of David Milgaard (ongoing).  Vaughn, Michael S., Tab W. Cooper and Rolando V.
del Carmen.  “Assessing Legal Liabilities in Law Enforcement:  Police Chiefs’
Views” (2001), 47 Crime & Delinquency 3.  Weir, Tony.  Tort Law. 
Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 2002.     Anne M. Turley, for
the intervener the Attorney General of Canada.  M. Michele Smith and
Heather C. Mackay, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Ontario.  Jonathan Rudin and Kimberly R.
Murray, for the intervener the Aboriginal Legal Services of Toronto Inc.  Julian N. Falconer and
Sunil S. Mathai, for the intervener the Association in Defence of the
Wrongly Convicted.  Leona K. Tesar and Gregory R.
Preston, for the intervener the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police.  Mark J. Sandler and Joseph Di Luca,
for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association (Ontario).  Bradley E. Berg and Allison A.
Thornton, for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association.  Ian Roland and Emily
Lawrence, for the interveners the Canadian Police Association and the
Police Association of Ontario.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel,
Deschamps, Fish and Abella JJ. was delivered by  The Chief Justice —  I.       Introduction  1         
The police must investigate crime.  That is their duty.  In the vast
majority of cases, they carry out this duty with diligence and care.
Occasionally, however, mistakes are made.  These mistakes may have drastic
consequences.  An innocent suspect may be investigated, arrested and imprisoned
because of negligence in the course of a police investigation. This is what
Jason George Hill, appellant in the case at bar, alleges happened to him.  2                                  
Can the police be held liable if their conduct during the course of an
investigation falls below an acceptable standard and harm to a suspect results?
If so, what standard should be used to assess the conduct of the police?  More
generally, is police conduct during the course of an investigation or arrest
subject to scrutiny under the law of negligence at all, or should police be
immune on public policy grounds from liability under the law of negligence? 
These are the questions at stake on this appeal.  3                                  
I conclude that police are not immune from liability under the Canadian
law of negligence, that the police owe a duty of care in negligence to suspects
being investigated, and that their conduct during the course of an
investigation should be measured against the standard of how a reasonable
officer in like circumstances would have acted.  The tort of negligent
investigation exists in Canada, and the trial court and Court of Appeal were
correct to consider the appellant’s action on this basis.  The law of
negligence does not demand a perfect investigation.  It requires only that
police conducting an investigation act reasonably.  When police fail to meet
the standard of reasonableness, they may be accountable through negligence law
for harm resulting to a suspect.  II.     Facts and Procedural History  4                                  
This case arises out of an unfortunate series of events which resulted
in an innocent person being investigated by the police, arrested, tried,
wrongfully convicted, and ultimately acquitted after spending more than 20
months in jail for a crime he did not commit.  5                                  
Ten robberies occurred in Hamilton between December 16, 1994 and January
23, 1995.  The modus operandi in all of the robberies seemed essentially
the same.  Eyewitnesses provided similar descriptions of the suspect.  The
police, relying on similarities in the modus operandi and eyewitness
descriptions, concluded early on in the investigation that the same person had
committed all the robberies, and labelled the perpetrator “the plastic bag
robber”.   7                                  
At the time of the arrest, the police were in possession of potentially
exculpatory evidence, namely, an anonymous Crime Stoppers tip received on
January 25, 1995 suggesting that two Hispanic men (“Frank” and “Pedro”) were
the perpetrators.  As time passed, other exculpatory evidence surfaced.  Two
similar robberies occurred while Hill was in custody.  The descriptions of the
robber and the modus operandi were similar to the original robberies,
except for the presence of a threat of a gun in the last two robberies.  The
police received a second Crime Stoppers tip implicating “Frank”, which
indicated that “Frank” looked similar to Jason George Hill and that “Frank” was
laughing because Hill was being held responsible for robberies that Frank had
committed.  The police detective investigating the last two robberies
(Detective Millin) received information from another officer that a Frank
Sotomayer could be the robber.  He proceeded to gather evidence and information
which tended to inculpate Sotomayer — that Sotomayer and Hill looked very much
alike, that there was evidence tending to corroborate the credibility of the 
Crime Stoppers tip implicating “Frank”, and that photos from the first
robberies seemed to look more like Sotomayer than Hill.  Information from this
investigation of the later robberies was conveyed to the detective supervising
the investigation of the earlier robberies (Detective Loft).  8                                  
Two of the charges against Hill were dropped in response to this new
evidence, the police having concluded that Sotomayer, not Hill, had committed
those robberies.  However, the police did not drop all of the charges.  9                                  
Legal proceedings against Hill in relation to the remaining eight
charges began.  Two more charges were withdrawn by the Crown during the
preliminary inquiry because a witness testified that Hill was not the person
who robbed her.  Five more charges were withdrawn by the Assistant Crown
Attorney assigned to prosecute at trial.  A single charge remained, and the
Crown decided to proceed based on this charge, largely because two
eyewitnesses, the bank tellers, remained steadfast in their identifications of
Hill.  10                              
Hill stood trial and was found guilty of robbery in March 1996.  He
successfully appealed the conviction based on errors of law made by the trial
judge.  On August 6, 1997, his appeal was allowed and a new trial was ordered. 
Hill was ultimately acquitted of all charges of robbery on December 20, 1999.  11                              
To summarize, Hill first became involved in the investigation as a
suspect in January of 1995 and remained involved in various aspects of the
justice system as a suspect, an accused, and a convicted person, until December
of 1999.  Within this period, he was imprisoned for various periods totalling
more than 20 months, although not continuously.  12                              
Hill brought civil actions against the police (the Hamilton-Wentworth
Regional Police Services Board and a number of individual officers) and the
Crown prosecutors involved in his preliminary inquiry and trial.  The actions
against some of the individual officers and all of the Crown prosecutors were
discontinued before trial.  The action against the remaining defendants was
brought on the basis of negligence, malicious prosecution, and breach of rights
protected by the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  This appeal
is concerned with the negligence claim.  13                              
Hill alleges that the police investigation was negligent in a number of
ways.  He attacks the identifications by the two bank tellers on the ground
that they were interviewed together (not separately, as non-mandatory
guidelines suggested), with a newspaper photo identifying Hill as the suspect
on their desks, and particularly objects to the methods used to interview
witnesses and administer a photo lineup.  He also alleged that the police
failed to adequately reinvestigate the robberies when new evidence emerged that
cast doubt on his initial arrest.  14                              
At trial, Marshall J. of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice held that
the police were not liable in negligence ((2003), 66 O.R. (3d) 746).  In his
view, the conduct of the police did not breach the standard of care of a
reasonably competent professional in like circumstances; the police had acted
in the frenzy of the moment, in circumstances where there was no recognized
police procedure at the time, and it would be “facile hindsight” to conclude
that they were negligent (para. 75).  The trial judge expressed considerable
sympathy for Hill and found frailties in the police evidence.  Nevertheless, he
concluded that the standard of care that would be expected of the reasonable
officer at that time was met (paras. 75-76).  15                              
Hill appealed.  The Court of Appeal unanimously held that there is a
tort of negligent investigation and that the appropriate standard of care is
the reasonable officer in like circumstances, subject to qualification at the
point of arrest when the standard of care is tied to the standard of reasonable
and probable grounds ((2005), 76 O.R. (3d) 481).  However, the Court of Appeal
split on the application of the tort of negligent investigation to the facts.  16                              
A majority of three (per MacPherson J.A. (Goudge and MacFarland
JJ.A. concurring)) held that the standard of care was not breached and that the
police should not be held liable in negligence.  In the view of the majority,
the impugned elements of the investigation pre-arrest complied with the
standard of care. In particular, the majority was not prepared to find the
photo lineup negligent. In light of the lack of uniform rules or procedures
relating to photo lineups at the time, it was not clear that the police failed
to do what the reasonable officer would have done in conducting the lineup as
they did.  Further, it was not established that the photo lineup was
structurally biased.  Nor was the failure to reinvestigate negligent.  First,
since “Hamilton is a fairly large city with many bank robberies”, it was
reasonable that the police’s knowledge that later robberies were committed by
Sotomayer did not cast doubt on the earlier arrest of the appellant (para.
112).  Second, it was reasonable not to connect information relating to later
robberies to the earlier robberies for which Hill was arrested because the
later robberies involved a gun and the earlier ones did not. Third, police did
take significant actions in response to new information, including dropping some
of the charges against Hill. Fourth, some key evidence against Hill remained
unchanged even after Sotomayer was arrested for some of the “plastic bag
robberies”, including some of the eyewitness identifications. Finally, the
ultimate decision to proceed to trial was made by the Crown prosecutor, not the
police.  17                              
In dissent, Feldman and LaForme JJ.A. found aspects of the impugned
police conduct constituted negligent failure to reinvestigate.  They concluded
that the trial judge had made errors of law and palpable and overriding errors
of fact, in concluding that the photo lineup and failure to reinvestigate were
not negligent.  A photo lineup consisting of one aboriginal person and eleven
Caucasians is “prima facie potentially structurally biased with obvious
potential for unfairness” and thus “falls below the standard of care required
of police” (para. 156).  Feldman and LaForme JJ.A. also found that the police
had not pursued a number of pieces of evidence which could potentially have
exculpated Hill  (paras. 144 ff.).  18                              
Hill appeals to this Court, contending that the majority of the Court of
Appeal erred in finding that the police investigation leading to his arrest and
prosecution was not negligent.  The police cross-appeal, arguing that there is
no tort of negligent investigation in Canadian law.  III.    Analysis  The Tort of
Negligent Investigation  1.    Duty of Care  19                              
The issue at this stage is whether the law recognizes a duty of care on
an investigating police officer to a suspect in the course of investigation. 
This matter is not settled in
Canada.  Lower courts have divided and this Court has never considered the matter. 
We must therefore ask whether, as a matter of principle, a duty of care should
be recognized in this situation.  20                              
The test for determining whether a person owes a duty of care involves
two questions: (1) Does the relationship between the plaintiff and the
defendant disclose sufficient foreseeability and proximity to establish a prima
facie duty of care; and (2) If so, are there any residual policy
considerations which ought to negate or limit that duty of care?  (See Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.), as affirmed and
explained by this Court in a number of cases (Cooper v. Hobart, [2001] 3
S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79, at paras. 25 and 29-39; Edwards v. Law Society of
Upper Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 562, 2001 SCC 80,  at para. 9; Odhavji
Estate v. Woodhouse, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 263, 2003 SCC 69, at paras. 47-50; Childs
v. Desormeaux, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 643, 2006 SCC 18, at para. 47).)  (a)   Does the Relationship Establish a Prima
Facie Duty of Care?  21                              
The purpose of the inquiry at this stage is to determine if there was a
relationship between the parties that gave rise to a legal duty of care.  22                              
The first element of such a relationship is foreseeability.  In the
foundational case of Donoghue v. Stevenson,  [1932] A.C. 562 (H.L.),
Lord Atkin stated:  The rule that you are to love your neighbour becomes in law, you must not
injure your neighbour; and the lawyer’s question, Who is my neighbour? receives
a restricted reply. . . .  Who, then, in law is my neighbour?  The answer seems
to be — persons who are so closely and directly affected by my act that I
ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected when I am
directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called in question.
[Emphasis added; p. 580.]  Lord Atkin went
on to state that each person “must take reasonable care to avoid acts or
omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your
neighbour”  (p. 580).  Thus the first question in determining whether a duty in
negligence is owed is whether it was reasonably foreseeable that the actions of
the alleged wrongdoer would cause harm to the victim.  23                              
However, as acknowledged in Donoghue and affirmed by this Court
in Cooper, foreseeability alone is not enough to establish the required
relationship.  To impose a duty of care “there must also be a close and direct
relationship of proximity or neighbourhood”: Cooper, at para. 22.  The
proximity inquiry asks whether the case discloses factors which show that the
relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant was sufficiently close to
give rise to a legal duty of care.  The focus is on the relationship between
alleged wrongdoer and victim:  is the relationship one where the imposition of
legal liability for the wrongdoer’s actions is appropriate?  24                              
Generally speaking, the proximity analysis involves examining the
relationship at issue, considering factors such as expectations,
representations, reliance and property or other interests involved: Cooper,
at para. 34.  Different relationships raise different considerations.  “The
factors which may satisfy the requirement of proximity are diverse and depend
on the circumstances of the case.  One searches in vain for a single unifying
characteristic”: Cooper, at para. 35.  No single rule, factor or
definitive list of factors can be applied in every case.  “Proximity may be
usefully viewed, not so much as a test in itself, but as a broad concept which
is capable of subsuming different categories of cases involving different factors”
(Canadian National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1
S.C.R. 1021, at p. 1151, cited in Cooper, at para. 35).  25                              
Proximity may be seen as providing an umbrella covering types of
relationships where a duty of care has been found by the courts.  The vast
number of negligence cases proceed on the basis of a type of relationship
previously recognized as giving rise to a duty of care.  The duty of care of
the motorist to other users of the highway; the duty of care of the doctor to
his patient; the duty of care of the solicitor to her client — these are but a
few of the relationships where sufficient proximity to give rise to a prima
facie duty of care is recognized, provided foreseeability is established. 
The categories of relationships characterized by sufficient proximity to
attract legal liability are not closed, however.  From time to time, claims are
made that relationships hitherto unconsidered by courts support a duty of care
giving rise to legal liability.  When such cases arise, the courts must
consider whether the claim for sufficient proximity is established.  If it is,
and the prima facie duty is not negated for policy reasons at the second
stage of the Anns test, the new category will thereafter be recognized
as capable of giving rise to a duty of care and legal liability.  The result is
a concept of liability for negligence which provides a large measure of
certainty, through settled categories of liability — attracting relationships,
while permitting expansion to meet new circumstances and evolving conceptions
of justice.  26                              
In this case, we are faced with a claim in negligence against persons in
a type of relationship not hitherto considered by the law — the relationship
between an investigating police officer and his suspect.  We must therefore ask
whether, on principles applied in previous cases, this relationship is marked
by sufficient proximity to make the imposition of legal liability for
negligence appropriate.  27                              
Before moving on to the analysis of proximity in depth, it is worth
pausing  to state explicitly that this judgment is concerned only with a very
particular relationship — the relationship between a police officer and a
particularized suspect that he is investigating. There are particular
considerations relevant to proximity and policy applicable to this
relationship, including: the reasonable expectations of a party being
investigated by the police, the seriousness of the interests at stake for the
suspect, the legal duties owed by police to suspects under their governing
statutes and the Charter  and the importance of balancing the need for
police to be able to investigate effectively with the protection of the
fundamental rights of a suspect or accused person.  It might well be that both
the considerations informing the analysis of both proximity and policy would be
different in the context of other relationships involving the police, for
example, the relationship between the police and a victim, or the relationship
between a police chief and the family of a victim. This decision deals only
with the relationship between the police and a suspect being investigated.  If
a new relationship is alleged to attract liability of the police in negligence
in a future case, it will be necessary to engage in a fresh Anns
analysis, sensitive to the different considerations which might obtain when
police interact with persons other than suspects that they are investigating. 
Such an approach will also ensure that the law of tort is developed in a manner
that is sensitive to the benefits of recognizing liability in novel situations
where appropriate, but at the same time, sufficiently incremental and gradual
to maintain a reasonable degree of certainty in the law.  Further, I cannot
accept the suggestion that cases dealing with the relationship between the
police and victims or between a police chief and the family of a victim are
determinative here, although aspects of the analysis in those cases may be
applicable and informative in the case at bar.  (See Odhavji and Jane
Doe v. Metropolitan Toronto (Municipality) Commissioners of Police (1998),
160 D.L.R. (4th) 697 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)).)  I note that Jane Doe is a
lower court decision and that debate continues over the content and scope of
the ratio in that case.  I do not purport to resolve these disputes on this
appeal. In fact, and with great respect to the Court of Appeal who relied to
some extent on this case, I  find the Jane Doe decision of little
assistance in the case at bar.  28                              
Having said this, I proceed to consider whether there is sufficient
proximity between a police officer and a suspect that he or she is
investigating to establish a prima facie duty of care.  29                              
The most basic factor upon which the proximity analysis fixes is whether
there is a relationship between the alleged wrongdoer and the victim, usually
described by the words “close and direct”.  This factor is not concerned with
how intimate the plaintiff and defendant were or with their physical proximity,
so much as with whether the actions of the alleged wrongdoer have a
close or direct effect on the victim, such that the wrongdoer ought to have had
the victim in mind as a person potentially harmed.  A sufficiently close and
direct connection between the actions of the wrongdoer and the victim may exist
where there is a personal relationship between alleged wrongdoer and victim. 
However, it may also exist where there is no personal relationship between the
victim and wrongdoer.  In the words of Lord Atkin in Donoghue:  [A] duty to take due care [arises] when the person or property of one was
in such proximity to the person or property of another that, if due care was
not taken, damage might be done by the one to the other.  I think that this
sufficiently states the truth if proximity be not confined to mere physical
proximity, but be used, as I think it was intended, to extend to such close and
direct relations that the act complained of directly affects a person whom the
person alleged to be bound to take care would know would be directly affected
by his careless act.  [Emphasis added; p. 581.]  30                              
While not necessarily determinative, the presence or absence of a
personal relationship is an important factor to consider in the proximity
analysis.  However, depending on the case, it may be necessary to consider
other factors which may bear on the question of whether the relationship
between the defendant and plaintiff is capable in principle of supporting legal
liability:  Cooper, at para. 37.  31                              
In accordance with the usual rules governing proof of a cause of action,
the plaintiff has the formal onus of establishing the duty of care: Odhavji and
Childs, at para. 13, should not be read as changing this fundamental
rule.  Uncertainty may arise as to which factors fall to be considered at this
part of the stage one analysis, and which should be reserved to the second
stage “policy” portion of the analysis.  The principle that animates the first
stage of the Anns test — to determine whether the relationship is in
principle sufficiently close or “proximate” to attract legal liability — 
governs the nature of considerations that arise at this stage.  “The proximity
analysis involved at the first stage of the Anns test focuses on factors
arising from the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant”, for
example expectations, representations, reliance and the nature of the interests
engaged by that relationship: Cooper, at paras. 30 (emphasis deleted)
and 34.  By contrast, the final stage of Anns is concerned with
“residual policy considerations” which “are not concerned with the relationship
between the parties, but with the effect of recognizing a duty of care on other
legal obligations, the legal system and society more generally”:  Cooper,
at para. 37.  In practice, there may be overlap between stage one and stage two
considerations.  We should not forget that stage one and stage two of the Anns
test are merely a means to facilitate considering what is at stake.  The
important thing is that in deciding whether a duty of care lies, all relevant
concerns should be considered.  32                              
In this appeal, we are concerned with the relationship between an
investigating police officer and a suspect.  The requirement of reasonable
foreseeability is clearly made out and poses no barrier to finding a duty of
care; clearly negligent police investigation of a suspect may cause harm to the
suspect.  33                              
Other factors relating to the relationship suggest sufficient
proximity to support a cause of action.  The relationship between the police
and a suspect identified for investigation is personal, and is close and direct. 
We are not concerned with the universe of all potential
suspects.  The police had identified Hill as a particularized suspect at the
relevant time and begun to investigate him.  This created a close and direct
relationship between the police and Hill.  He was no longer merely one person
in a pool of potential suspects.  He had been singled out.  The relationship is
thus closer than in Cooper and Edwards.  In those cases, the
public officials were not acting in relation to the claimant (as the police did
here) but in relation to a third party (i.e. persons being regulated) who, at a
further remove, interacted with the claimants.  34                              
A final consideration bearing on the relationship is the interests it
engages. In this case, personal representations and consequent reliance are
absent.  However, the targeted suspect has a critical personal interest in the
conduct of the investigation.  At stake are his freedom, his reputation and how
he may spend a good portion of his life.  These high interests support a
finding of a proximate relationship giving rise to a duty of care.  35                              
On this point, I note that the existing remedies for wrongful
prosecution and conviction are incomplete and may leave a victim of negligent
police investigation without legal recourse. The torts of false arrest, false
imprisonment and malicious prosecution do not provide an adequate remedy for
negligent acts.  Government compensation schemes possess their own limits, both
in terms of eligibility and amount of compensation.  As the Court of Appeal
pointed out, an important category of police conduct with the potential to
seriously affect the lives of suspects will go unremedied if a duty of care is
not recognized.  This category includes “very poor performance of important
police duties” and other “non-malicious category of police misconduct”  (paras.
77-78).  To deny a remedy in tort is, quite literally, to deny justice. This
supports recognition of the tort of negligent police investigation, in order to
complete the arsenal of already existing common law and statutory remedies.  36                              
The personal interest of the suspect in the conduct of the investigation
is enhanced by a public interest.  Recognizing an action for negligent police
investigation may assist in responding to failures of the justice system, such
as wrongful convictions or institutional racism. The unfortunate reality is
that negligent policing has now been recognized as a significant contributing
factor to wrongful convictions in Canada.  While the vast majority of police
officers perform their duties carefully and reasonably, the record shows that
wrongful convictions traceable to faulty police investigations occur.  Even one
wrongful conviction is too many, and Canada has had more than one.  Police
conduct that is not malicious, not deliberate, but merely fails to comply with
standards of reasonableness can be a significant cause of wrongful convictions.
(See the Honourable Peter Cory, The Inquiry Regarding Thomas Sophonow: The
Investigation, Prosecution and Consideration of Entitlement to Compensation
(2001), at p. 10 (“Cory Report”); the Right Honourable Antonio Lamer, The
Lamer Commission of Inquiry into the Proceedings Pertaining to: Ronald Dalton,
Gregory Parsons and Randy Druken: Report and Annexes (2006), at p. 71;
Federal/Provincial/Territorial Heads of Prosecutions Committee Working Group, Report
on the Prevention of Miscarriages of Justice (2004); the Honourable Fred
Kaufman, The Commission on Proceedings Involving Guy Paul Morin: Report  (1998),
at pp. 25-26, 30-31, 34-36, 1095-96, 1098-99, 1101 and 1124.)  37                              
As Peter Cory points out, at pp. 101 and 103:  [I]f the State
commits significant errors in the course of the investigation and prosecution,
it should accept the responsibility for the sad consequences . . . .                                                                              .
. .  [S]ociety needs protection from both the deliberate and the careless acts
of omission and commission which lead to wrongful conviction and prison.  38                              
Finally, it is worth noting that a duty of care by police officers to
suspects under investigation is consistent with the values and spirit
underlying the Charter , with its emphasis on liberty and fair process. 
The tort duty asserted here would enhance those values, which supports the
appropriateness of its recognition.  39                              
These considerations lead me to conclude that an investigating police
officer and a particular suspect are close and proximate such that a prima
facie duty should be recognized.  Viewed from the broader societal
perspective, suspects may reasonably be expected to rely on the police to
conduct their investigation in a competent, non-negligent manner.  (See Odhavji,
at para. 57.)  40                              
It is argued that recognition of liability for negligent investigation
would produce a conflict between the duty of care that a police officer owes to
a suspect and the police’s officer duty to the public to prevent crime, that
negates the duty of care.  I do not agree.  First, it seems to me doubtful that
recognizing a duty of care to suspects will place police officers under
incompatible obligations.  Second, on the test set forth in Cooper  and
subsequent cases, conflict or potential conflict does not in itself negate a prima
facie  duty of care; the conflict must be between the novel duty proposed
and an “overarching public duty”, and it must pose a real potential for
negative policy consequences. Any potential conflict that could be established
here would not meet these conditions.  41                              
First, the argument that a duty to take reasonable care toward suspects
conflicts with an overarching duty to investigate crime is tenuous.  The
officer’s duty to the public is not to investigate in an unconstrained manner. 
It is a duty to investigate in accordance with the law.  That law includes many
elements.  It includes the restrictions imposed by the Charter  and the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 .  Equally, it may include tort law.  The
duty of investigation in accordance with the law does not conflict with the
presumed duty to take reasonable care toward the suspect. Indeed, the suspect
is a member of the public.  As such, the suspect shares the public’s interest
in diligent investigation in accordance with the law.  42                              
My colleague Justice Charron suggests there is a conflict between the
police officer’s duty to investigate crime, on the one hand, and the officer’s
duty to leave people alone.  It may be that a citizen has an interest in or
preference for being left alone.  But I know of no authority for the
proposition that an investigating police officer is under a duty to leave
people alone.  The proposed tort duty does not presuppose a duty to leave the
citizen alone, but only a duty to investigate reasonably in accordance with the
limits imposed by law.  43                              
Second, even if a potential conflict could be posited, that would not
automatically negate the prima facie duty of care.  The principle
established in Cooper and its progeny is more limited.  A prima facie
duty of care will be negated only when the conflict, considered together
with other relevant policy considerations, gives rise to a real potential for
negative policy consequences.  This reflects the view that a duty of care in
tort law should not be denied on speculative grounds.  Cooper
illustrates this point.  The proposed duty was rejected on the basis, not of
mere conflict, but a conflict that would “come at the expense of other
important interests, of efficiency and finally at the expense of public
confidence in the system as a whole” (para. 50).  Not only was there a
conflict, but a conflict that would engender serious negative policy
consequences.  In this case, the situation is otherwise.  Requiring police
officers to take reasonable care toward suspects in the investigation of crimes
may have positive policy ramifications.  Reasonable care will reduce the risk
of wrongful convictions and increase the probability that the guilty will be
charged and convicted.  By contrast, the potential for negative repercussions
is dubious.  Acting with reasonable care to suspects has not been shown to
inhibit police investigation, as discussed more fully in connection with the
argument on chilling effect.  44                              
In a variant on this argument, it is submitted that in a world of
limited resources, recognizing a duty of care on police investigating crimes to
a suspect will require the police to choose between spending resources on
investigating crime in the public interest and spending resources in a manner
that an individual suspect might conceivably prefer.  The answer to this
argument is that the standard of care is based on what a reasonable police
officer would do in similar circumstances.  The fact that funds are not
unlimited is one of the circumstances that must be considered.  Another
circumstance that must be considered, however, is that the effective and
responsible investigation of crime is one of the basic duties of the state,
which cannot be abdicated.  A standard of care that takes these two
considerations into account will recognize what can reasonably be accomplished
within a responsible and realistic financial framework.  45                              
I conclude that the relationship between a police officer and a
particular suspect is close enough to support a prima facie duty of
care.  (b)   Policy Considerations Negating the Prima
Facie Duty of Care  46                              
The second stage of the Anns test asks whether there are broader
policy reasons for declining to recognize a duty of care owed by the defendant
to the plaintiff.  Even though there is sufficient foreseeability and proximity
of relationship to establish a prima facie duty of care, are there
policy considerations which negate or limit that duty of care?  47                              
In this case, negating conditions have not been established.  No
compelling reason has been advanced for negating a duty of care owed by police
to particularized suspects being investigated.  On the contrary, policy considerations
support the recognition of a duty of care.  48                              
The respondents and interveners representing the Attorneys General of
Ontario and Canada and various police associations argue that the following
policy considerations negate a duty of care: the “quasi-judicial” nature of
police work; the potential for conflict between a duty of care in negligence
and other duties owed by police; the need to recognize a significant amount of
discretion present in police work; the need to maintain the standard of reasonable
and probable grounds applicable to police conduct; the potential for a chilling
effect on the investigation of crime; and the possibility of a flood of
litigation against the police. In approaching these arguments, I proceed on the
basis that policy concerns raised against imposing a duty of care must be more
than speculative; a real potential for negative consequences must be apparent. 
Judged by this standard, none of these considerations provide a convincing
reason for rejecting a duty of care on police to a suspect under investigation.  (i)      The “Quasi-Judicial” Nature of Police
Duties  49                              
It was argued that the decision of police to pursue the investigation of
a suspect on the one hand, or close it on the other, is a quasi-judicial
decision, similar to that taken by the state prosecutor.  It is true that both
police officers and prosecutors make decisions that relate to whether the suspect
should stand trial.  But the nature of the inquiry differs.  Police are
concerned primarily with gathering and evaluating evidence.  Prosecutors are
concerned mainly with whether the evidence the police have gathered will
support a conviction at law.  The fact-based investigative character of the
police task distances it from a judicial or quasi-judicial role.  50                              
The possibility of holding police civilly liable for negligent
investigation does not require them to make judgments as to legal guilt or
innocence before proceeding against a suspect.  Police are required to weigh
evidence to some extent in the course of an investigation: Chartier v.
Attorney General of Quebec, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 474.  But they are not required
to evaluate evidence according to legal standards or to make legal judgments. 
That is the task of prosecutors, defence attorneys and judges.  This
distinction is properly reflected in the standard of care imposed, once a duty
is recognized.  The standard of care required to meet the duty is not that of a
reasonable lawyer or judge, but that of a reasonable police officer. 
Where the police investigate a suspect reasonably, but lawyers, judges or
prosecutors act unreasonably in the course of determining his legal guilt or
innocence, then the police officer will have met the standard of care and
cannot be held liable either for failing to perform the job of a lawyer, judge
or prosecutor, or for the unreasonable conduct of other actors in the criminal
justice system.  (ii)     Discretion  51                              
The discretion inherent in police work fails to provide a convincing
reason to negate the proposed duty of care.  It is true that police
investigation involves significant discretion and that police officers are
professionals trained to exercise this discretion and investigate effectively. 
However, the discretion inherent in police work is taken into account in
formulating the standard of care, not whether a duty of care arises. 
The discretionary nature of police work therefore provides no reason to deny
the existence of a duty of care in negligence.  52                              
Police, like other professionals, exercise professional discretion.  No
compelling distinction lies between police and other professionals on this
score.  Discretion, hunch and intuition have their proper place in police
investigation.  However, to characterize police work as completely
unpredictable and unbound by standards of reasonableness is to deny its
professional nature.  Police exercise their discretion and professional
judgment in accordance with professional standards and practices, consistent
with the high standards of professionalism that society rightfully demands of
police in performing their important and dangerous work.  53                              
Police are not unlike other professionals in this respect.  Many
professional practitioners exercise similar levels of discretion.  The
practices of law and medicine, for example, involve discretion, intuition and
occasionally hunch.  Professionals in these fields are subject to a duty of
care in tort nonetheless, and the courts routinely review their actions in
negligence actions without apparent difficulty.  54                              
Courts are not in the business of second-guessing reasonable exercises
of discretion by trained professionals.  An appropriate standard of care allows
sufficient room to exercise discretion without incurring liability in
negligence.  Professionals are permitted to exercise discretion.  What they are
not permitted to do is to exercise their discretion unreasonably.  This is in
the public interest. (iii)     Confusion with the Standard of Care for Arrest  55                              
Recognizing a duty of care in negligence by police to suspects does not
raise the standard required of the police from reasonable and probable grounds
to some higher standard, as alleged.  The requirement of reasonable and
probable grounds for arrest and prosecution informs the standard of care
applicable to some aspects of police work, such as arrest and prosecution,
search and seizure, and the stopping of a motor vehicle.  A flexible standard
of care appropriate to the circumstances, discussed more fully below, answers
this concern.  (iv)    Chilling Effect  56                              
It has not been established that recognizing a duty of care in tort
would have a chilling effect on policing, by causing police officers to take an
unduly defensive approach to investigation of criminal activity.  In theory, it
is conceivable that police might become more careful in conducting
investigations if a duty of care in tort is recognized.  However, this is not
necessarily a bad thing.  The police officer must strike a reasonable balance
between cautiousness and prudence on the one hand, and efficiency on the
other.  Files must be closed, life must move on, but care must also be taken. 
All of this is taken into account, not at the stage of determining whether
police owe a duty of care to a particular suspect, but in determining what the
standard of that care should be.  57                              
The record does not support the conclusion that recognizing potential
liability in tort significantly changes the behaviour of police.  Indeed, some
of the evidence suggests that tort liability has no adverse effect on the
capacity of police to investigate crime.  This supports the conclusion of the
majority in the Court of Appeal below that the “‘chilling effect’ scenario”
remains speculative and that concern about preventing a “chilling effect” on
the investigation of crime is not (on the basis of present knowledge) a
convincing policy rationale for negating a duty of care (para. 63).  (For a
sampling of the empirical evidence on point, see e.g.: A. H. Garrison, “Law
Enforcement Civil Liability Under Federal Law and Attitudes on Civil Liability:
A Survey of University, Municipal and State Police Officers” (1995), 18 Police
Stud. 19; T. Hughes, “Police officers and civil liability: ‘the ties that
bind’?” (2001), 24 Policing:  An International Journal of Police Strategies
& Management 240, at pp. 253-54, 256 and 257-58; M. S. Vaughn, T.
W. Cooper and R. V. del Carmen, “Assessing Legal Liabilities in Law
Enforcement:  Police Chiefs’ Views” (2001), 47 Crime & Delinquency 3;
D. E. Hall et al., “Suing cops and corrections officers: Officer attitudes and
experiences about civil liability” (2003), 26 Policing: An International
Journal of Police Stategies & Management 529, at pp. 544-45.)
Whatever the situation may have been in the United Kingdom (see Brooks v.
Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 1495, [2005] UKHL
24; Hill v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire, [1988] 2 All E.R.
238 (H.L.)), the studies adduced in this case do not support the proposition
that recognition of tort liability for negligent police investigation will
impair it.  58                              
The lack of evidence of a chilling effect despite numerous studies is
sufficient to dispose of the suggestion that recognition of a tort duty would
motivate prudent officers not to proceed with investigations “except in cases
where the evidence is overwhelming” (Charron J., at para. 152).  This lack of
evidence should not surprise us,  given the nature of the tort.  All the tort
of negligent investigation requires is that the police act reasonably in the
circumstances.  It is reasonable for a police officer to investigate in the
absence of overwhelming evidence — indeed evidence usually becomes overwhelming
only by the process of investigation.  Police officers can investigate on
whatever basis and in whatever circumstances they choose, provided they act
reasonably.  The police need not let all but clearly impaired drivers go to
avoid the risk of litigation, as my colleague suggests.  They need only act
reasonably.  They may arrest or demand a breath sample if they have reasonable
and probable grounds.  And where such grounds are absent, they may have
recourse to statutorily authorized roadside tests and screening.  59                              
It should also be noted that many police officers (like other
professionals) are indemnified from personal civil liability in the course of
exercising their professional duties, reducing the prospect that their fear of
civil liability will chill  crime prevention.  (v)     Flood of Litigation  60                              
Recognizing sufficient proximity in the relationship between police and
suspect to ground a duty of care does not open the door to indeterminate
liability.  Particularized suspects represent a limited category of potential
claimants. The class of potential claimants is further limited by the
requirement that the plaintiff establish compensable injury caused by a
negligent investigation.  Treatment rightfully imposed by the law does not
constitute compensable injury.  These considerations undermine the spectre of a
glut of jailhouse lawsuits for negligent police investigation.  61                              
The record provides no basis for concluding that there will be a flood
of litigation against the police if a duty of care is recognized.  As the Court
of Appeal emphasized, the evidence from the Canadian experience seems to be to
the contrary (majority reasons, at para. 64).  Quebec and Ontario have both
recognized police liability in negligence (or the civil law equivalent) for
many years, and there is no evidence that the floodgates have opened and a
large number of lawsuits against the police have resulted.  (See the majority
reasons in the Court of Appeal, at para. 64.)  The best that can be said from
the record is that recognizing a duty of care owed by police officers to
particular suspects led to a relatively small number of lawsuits, the cost of
which are unknown, with effects on the police that have not been measured. 
This is not enough to negate the prima facie duty of care established at
the first stage of the Anns test.  (vi)    The Risk that Guilty Persons Who Are
Acquitted May Unjustly Recover in Tort  62                              
My colleague Charron J. (at paras. 156 ff.) states that recognizing tort
liability for negligent police investigation raises the possibility that
persons who have been acquitted of the crime investigated and charged, but who
are in fact guilty,  may recover against an officer for negligent
investigation.  This, she suggests, would be unjust.  63                              
This possibility of  “injustice” — if indeed that is what it is — is
present in any tort action. A person who recovers against her doctor for
medical malpractice may, despite having proved illness in court, have in fact
been malingering.  Or, despite having convinced the judge on a balance of
probabilities that the doctor’s act caused her illness, it may be that the true
source of the problem lay elsewhere.  The legal system is not perfect.  It does
its best to arrive at the truth.  But it cannot discount the possibility that a
plaintiff who has established a cause of action may “factually”, if we had
means to find out, not have been entitled to recover.  The possibility of error
may be greater in some circumstances than others.  However, I know of no case
where this possibility has led to the conclusion that tort recovery for
negligence should be denied.  64                              
The answer to the ever-present possibility of erroneous awards of
damages lies elsewhere, it seems to me.  The first safeguard is the requirement
that the plaintiff  prove every element of his or her case.  Any suspect suing
the police bears the burden of showing that police negligence in the course of
an investigation caused harm compensable at law.  This means that the suspect
must establish through evidence that the damage incurred, be it a conviction,
imprisonment, prosecution or other compensable harm, would not have been
suffered but for the police’s negligent investigation. Evidence going to the
factual guilt or innocence of the suspect, including the results of any
criminal proceedings that may have occurred, may be relevant to this causation
inquiry.  It is not necessary to decide here whether an acquittal should be
treated as conclusive proof of innocence in a subsequent civil trial.  Existing
authority is equivocal:  Toronto (City) v. C.U.P.E., Local 79, [2003] 3
S.C.R. 77, 2003 SCC 63.  (I note that in the United States, victims may recover
damages against a defendant who has been acquitted in criminal proceedings:  Rufo
v. Simpson, 103 Cal.Rptr.2d 492 (Ct. App. 2001).)  The second safeguard
is the right of appeal.  These safeguards, not the categorical denial of the
right to sue in tort, are the law’s response to the ever-present possibility of
error in the legal process.  65                              
I conclude that no compelling policy reason has been shown to negate the
prima facie duty of care.  2.      Standard of Care  66                              
Two issues arise: What is the appropriate standard of care? and Was that
standard met on the facts of this case?  (a)     The Appropriate Standard of Care for the
Tort of Negligent Investigation  67                              
Both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal adopted the standard of the
reasonable police officer in like circumstances as the standard that is
generally appropriate in cases of alleged negligent investigation. I agree that
this is the correct standard.  68                              
A number of considerations support the conclusion that the standard of
care is that of a reasonable police officer in all the circumstances. First,
the standard of a reasonable police officer in all the circumstances provides a
flexible overarching standard that covers all aspects of investigatory police
work and appropriately reflects its realities. The particular conduct required
is informed by the stage of the investigation and applicable legal
considerations.  At the outset of an investigation, the police may have little
more than hearsay, suspicion and a hunch.  What is required is that they act as
a reasonable investigating officer would in those circumstances.  Later, in
laying charges, the standard is informed by the legal requirement of reasonable
and probable grounds to believe the suspect is guilty; since the law requires
such grounds, a police officer acting reasonably in the circumstances would
insist on them.  The reasonable officer standard entails no conflict between
criminal standards (Charron J., at para. 175). Rather, it incorporates them, in
the same way it incorporates an appropriate degree of judicial discretion,
denies liability for minor errors or mistakes and rejects liability by
hindsight.  In all these ways, it reflects the realities of police work.  69                              
Second, as mentioned, the general rule is that the standard of care in
negligence is that of the reasonable person in similar circumstances.  In cases
of professional negligence, this rule is qualified by an additional principle:
where the defendant has special skills and experience, the defendant must “live
up to the standards possessed by persons of reasonable skill and experience in
that calling”.  (See L. N. Klar, Tort Law (3rd ed. 2003), at p. 306.) 
These principles suggest the standard of the reasonable officer in like
circumstances.  70                              
Third, the common law factors relevant to determining the standard of
care confirm the reasonable officer standard.  These factors include: the
likelihood of known or foreseeable harm, the gravity of harm, the burden or
cost which would be incurred to prevent the injury, external indicators of
reasonable conduct (including professional standards) and statutory standards.
(See Ryan v. Victoria (City), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 201; R. v. Saskatchewan
Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205, at p. 227.) These factors suggest a
standard of reasonableness, not something less onerous. There is a significant
likelihood that police officers may cause harm to suspects if they investigate
negligently.  The gravity of the potential harm caused is serious.  Suspects
may be arrested or imprisoned, their livelihoods affected and their reputations
irreparably damaged.  The cost of preventing the injury, in comparison, is not
undue.  Police meet a standard of reasonableness by merely doing what a
reasonable police officer would do in the same circumstances — by living up to
accepted standards of professional conduct to the extent that it is reasonable
to expect in given circumstances.  This seems neither unduly onerous nor overly
costly.  It must be supposed that professional standards require police to act
professionally and carefully, not just to avoid gross negligence.  The
statutory standards imposed by the Police Services Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
P.15, although not definitive of the standard of care, are instructive (s. 1).  71                              
Fourth, the nature and importance of police work reinforce a standard of
the reasonable officer in similar circumstances.  Police conduct has the
capacity to seriously affect individuals by subjecting them to the full
coercive power of the state and impacting on their repute and standing in the
community.  It follows that police officers should perform their duties
reasonably.  It has thus been recognized that police work demands that society
(including the courts) impose and enforce high standards on police conduct
(Cory Report, at p. 10).  This supports a reasonableness standard, judged in
the context of a similarly situated officer.  A more lenient standard is
inconsistent with the standards that society and the law rightfully demand of
police in the performance of their crucially important work.  72                              
Finally, authority supports the standard of the reasonable police officer
similarly placed.  The preponderance of case law dealing with professionals has
applied the standard of the reasonably competent professional in like
circumstances. (See Klar, at p. 349; see also the reasons of the trial judge at
para. 63.) The Quebec Court of Appeal has twice stated that the standard is the
ordinarily competent officer in like circumstances.  (Jauvin v. Procureur
général du Québec, [2004] R.R.A. 37, at para. 59, and Lacombe v. André,
[2003] R.J.Q. 720, at para. 41).  73                              
I conclude that the appropriate standard of care is the
overarching standard of a reasonable police officer in similar circumstances. 
This standard should be applied in a manner that gives due recognition to the
discretion inherent in police investigation.  Like other professionals, police
officers are entitled to exercise their discretion as they see fit, provided
that they stay within the bounds of reasonableness. The standard of care is not
breached because a police officer exercises his or her discretion in a manner
other than that deemed optimal by the reviewing court.  A number of choices may
be open to a police officer investigating a crime, all of which may fall within
the range of reasonableness.  So long as discretion is exercised within this range,
the standard of care is not breached.  The standard is not perfection, or even
the optimum, judged from the vantage of hindsight.  It is that of a reasonable
officer, judged in the circumstances prevailing at the time the decision was
made — circumstances that may include urgency and deficiencies of information.  The law of negligence does not require perfection of
professionals; nor does it guarantee desired results (Klar, at p. 359). 
Rather, it accepts that police officers, like other professionals, may make
minor errors or errors in judgment which cause unfortunate results, without
breaching the standard of care.  The law distinguishes between unreasonable
mistakes breaching the standard of care and mere “errors in judgment” which any
reasonable professional might have made and therefore, which do not breach the
standard of care. (See Lapointe v. Hôpital Le Gardeur, [1992] 1 S.C.R.
351; Folland v. Reardon (2005), 74 O.R. (3d) 688 (C.A.); Klar, at p.
359.)  (b)     Application of the
Standard of Care to the Facts — Was the Police Conduct in this Case Negligent?  74                              
The defendant police officers owed a duty of care to Mr. Hill.  That
required them to meet the standard of a reasonable officer in similar
circumstances.  While the investigation that led to Mr. Hill’s arrest and
conviction was flawed, I conclude that it did not breach this standard, judged
by the standards of the day.  75                              
Hill alleges that Detective Loft, who was in charge of the investigation
of the plastic bag robberies, conducted the investigation negligently, and that
Officers McLaughlin, Stewart, Matthews and Hill acted negligently in aspects of
the investigation assigned to them.  On this basis, he argues that the Police
Services Board is vicariously liable for the individual acts and omissions of
its officers.  76                              
The arrest itself is not impugned as negligent.  Although there were
problems in the case against Hill, it is accepted that the investigation, as it
stood at the time the arrest was made, disclosed reasonable and probable grounds. 
It is the conduct of the police prior to and following the arrest that Hill
criticizes.  At the pre-arrest stage, Mr. Hill alleges: witness contamination
as the result of publishing his photo (McLaughlin); failure to make proper
records of events and interviews with witnesses (McLaughlin and Stewart);
interviewing two witnesses together and with a photo of Hill on the desk
(McLaughlin); and structural bias in the photo lineup in which Hill was
identified (Hill and Loft).  At the post-arrest stage, Hill charges that
Detective Loft failed to reinvestigate after evidence came to light that
suggested the robber was not Hill, but a different man, Sotomayer.  (It is also
alleged that Detective Loft failed to communicate relevant facts to defence
counsel.  This has more to do with trial conduct than investigation, and I
consider it no further.)  77                              
We must consider the conduct of the investigating officers in the year
1995 in all of the circumstances, including the state of knowledge then
prevailing.  Police practices, like practices in other professions, advance as
time passes and experience and understanding accumulate.  Better practices that
developed in the years after Hill’s investigation are therefore not
conclusive.  By extension, the conclusion that certain police actions did not
violate the standard of care in 1995 does not necessarily mean that the same or
similar actions would meet the standard of care today or in the future.  We
must also avoid the counsel of perfection; the reasonable officer standard
allows for minor mistakes and misjudgments.  Finally, proper scope must be
accorded to the discretion police officers properly exercise in conducting an
investigation.  78                              
Considered in this light, the first four complaints, while questionable,
were not sufficiently serious on the record viewed as a whole to constitute a
departure from the standard of a reasonable police officer in the
circumstances.  The publication of Hill’s photo, the somewhat incomplete record
of witness interviews, the fact that two witnesses were interviewed together
and the failure to blind-test the photos put to witnesses are not good police
practices, judged by today’s standards.  But the evidence does not establish
that a reasonable officer in 1995 would not have followed similar practices in
similar circumstances.  Nor is it clear that if these incidents had not
occurred, Hill would not have been charged and convicted.  It follows that the
individual officers involved in these incidents cannot be held liable to Hill
in negligence.  79                              
This brings us to the photo lineup. The photo array consisted of one
aboriginal suspect, Hill, and eleven Caucasian foils.  However, a number of the
subjects had similar features and colouring, so that Hill did not in fact stand
out as the only aboriginal.  80                              
The first question is whether this photo lineup met the standard of a
reasonable officer investigating an offence in 1995.  The trial judge accepted
expert evidence that there were “no rules” and “a great deal of variance in
practice right up to the present time” in relation to photo lineups  (paras. 66
and 70). These findings of fact have not been challenged.  It follows that on
the evidence adduced, it cannot be concluded that the photo lineup was
unreasonable, judged by 1995 standards. This said, the practice followed was
not ideal.  A reasonable officer today might be expected to avoid lineups using
foils of a different race than the suspect, to avoid both the perception of
injustice and the real possibility of unfairness to suspects who are members of
minority groups — concerns underlined by growing awareness of persisting
problems with institutional bias against minorities in the criminal justice
system, including aboriginal persons like Mr. Hill. (See Royal Commission on
Aboriginal Peoples, Bridging the Cultural Divide: A Report on Aboriginal
People and Criminal Justice in Canada (1996).)  81                              
In any event, it was established that the lineup’s racial composition
did not lead to unfairness.  A racially skewed lineup is structurally biased
only “if you can tell that the one person is non-Caucasian” and “assuming the
suspect is the one that’s standing out” (majority reasons in the Court of
Appeal, at para. 105).  Although the suspects were classified as being of a
different race by the police’s computer system, at least some of them appeared
to have similar skin tones and similar facial features to Hill.  On this
evidence, the trial judge concluded that the lineup was not in fact
structurally biased.   Any risk that Hill might have been unfairly chosen over
the 11 foils in the photo lineup did not arise from structural bias relating to
the racial makeup of the lineup but rather from the fact that Hill happened to
look like the individual who actually perpetrated the robberies, Frank
Sotomayer.  82                              
It remains to consider Mr. Hill’s complaint that the police negligently
failed to reinvestigate when new information suggesting he was not the robber
came to light after his arrest and incarceration. This complaint must be
considered in the context of the investigation as a whole.  The police took the
view from the beginning that the 10 robberies were the work of a single person,
branded the plastic bag robber.  They maintained this view and arrested Hill
despite a series of tips implicating two men, “Pedro” and “Frank”.  Other
weaknesses in the pre-charge case against Hill were the failure of a search of
Hill’s home to turn up evidence, and the fact that at the time of his arrest
Hill had a long goatee of several weeks’ growth, while the eyewitnesses to the
crime described the robber as a clean-shaven man.  While the police may have
had reasonable and probable grounds for charging Hill, there were problems with
their case.  83                              
After Hill was charged and taken into custody, the robberies continued. 
Another officer, Detective Millin, was put in charge of the investigation of
these charges.  Sotomayer emerged as a suspect.  Millin went into Hill’s file
and became concerned that Sotomayer, not Hill, may have committed at least some
of the earlier robberies.  He met with Detective Loft and discussed with him
the fact that in the photographic record, the perpetrator of the December 16
robbery resembled Sotomayer more than Hill.  As a result, on March 7 the charges
against Hill relating to that robbery were withdrawn and Sotomayer was charged
instead.  Detective Millin met with Detective Loft again on April 4 and 6 to
express concerns that Sotomayer and not Hill was the plastic bag bandit on the
other charges.  Detective Loft told Detective Millin that he would attempt to
have the trial of the charges against Hill put over to permit further
investigation.  He never did so.  The matter remained in the hands of the Crown
prosecutors and no further investigation was done.  Eventually, the Crown
withdrew all the charges, except one, on which Hill was convicted.  Detective
Loft did not intervene to prevent that charge going forward.  Nor did he check
the alibi that Hill supplied.  Had Detective Loft conducted further investigation,
it is likely the case against Hill would have collapsed.  Had he re-interviewed
the eyewitnesses, for example, and shown them Sotomayer’s photo, it is probable
that matters would have turned out otherwise; when the witnesses were
eventually shown the photo of Sotomayer, they recanted their identification of
Hill as the robber.  84                              
When new information emerges that could be relevant to the suspect’s
innocence, reasonable police conduct may require the file to be reopened and
the matter reinvestigated.  Depending on the nature of the evidence which later
emerges, the requirements imposed by the duty to reinvestigate on the police
may vary.  In some cases, merely examining the evidence and determining that it
is not worth acting on may be enough.  In others, it may be reasonable to
expect the police to do more in response to newly emerging evidence. 
Reasonable prudence may require them to re-examine their prior theories of the
case, to test the credibility of new evidence and to engage in further
investigation provoked by the new evidence.  At the same time, police
investigations are not never-ending processes extending indefinitely past the
point of arrest.  Police officers acting reasonably may at some point close
their case against a suspect and move on to other matters. The question is
always what the reasonable officer in like circumstances would have done to
fulfil the duty to reinvestigate and to respond to the new evidence that
emerged.  85                              
It is argued that by failing to raise the matter with the Crown and ask
that they halt the case for purposes of reinvestigation, and instead allowing
it to proceed to trial, Detective Loft failed to act as a reasonable officer
similarly situated.  It is also argued that the other defendant officers also
acted unreasonably in not intervening before the case came to trial.  86                              
The liability of the officers who assisted in the investigation is
readily disposed of.  It has not been established that a reasonable police
officer in the position of McLaughlin, Stewart, Matthews and Hill would have
intervened to halt the case. They were not in charge of the case and had only
partial responsibility.  87                              
The case of Detective Loft presents more difficulty.  He was in charge
of the case and could have asked the Crown to postpone the case to permit
reinvestigation, as favoured by Detective Millin.  He considered doing so, but
in the end did not intervene, with the result that the matter went to trial. 
Explaining his decision, he referred to the evidence of two eyewitnesses
identifying Hill as the robber on the final charge.  88                              
This was not a case of tunnel-vision or blinding oneself to the facts. 
It falls rather in the difficult area of the exercise of discretion.  Deciding
whether to ask for a trial to be postponed to permit further investigation when
the case is in the hands of Crown prosecutors and there appears to be credible
evidence supporting the charge is not an easy matter.  In hindsight, it turned
out that Detective Loft made the wrong decision.  But his conduct must be
considered in the circumstances prevailing and with the information available
at the time the decision was made.  At that time, awareness of the danger of
wrongful convictions was less acute than it is today. There was credible evidence
supporting the charge.  The matter was in the hands of the Crown prosecutors,
who had assumed responsibility for the file.  Notwithstanding that Detective
Millin favoured asking the prosecutors to delay the trial, I cannot conclude
that Detective Loft’s exercise of discretion in deciding not to intervene at
this late stage breached the standard of a reasonable police officer similarly
situated.  89                              
I therefore conclude that although Detective Loft’s decision not to
reinvestigate can be faulted, judged in hindsight and through the lens of
today’s awareness of the danger of wrongful convictions, it has not been
established that Detective Loft breached the standard of a reasonable police
officer similarly placed.  3.      Loss or Damage  90                              
To establish a cause of action in negligence, the plaintiff must show
that he or she suffered compensable damage.  Not all damage will justify
recovery in negligence.  Recovery is generally available for damage to person
and property.  On the other hand, debates have arisen, for example, about when
an action in negligence may be brought for purely economic loss and
psychological harm. (See Klar, at pp. 201-4, and T. Weir, Tort Law
(2002), at pp. 44-51.)  91                              
It is not disputed that imprisonment resulting from a wrongful
conviction constitutes personal injury to the person imprisoned.  Indeed, other
forms of compensable damage without imprisonment may suffice; a claimant’s life
could be ruined by an incompetent investigation that never results in
imprisonment or an unreasonable investigation that does not lead to criminal
proceedings. Wrongful deprivation of liberty has been recognized as actionable
for centuries and is clearly one of the possible forms of compensable damage
that may arise from a negligent investigation.  There may be others.  92                              
On the other hand, lawful pains and penalties imposed on a guilty person
do not constitute compensable loss.  It is important as a matter of policy that
recovery under the tort of negligent investigation should only be allowed for
pains and penalties that are wrongfully imposed.  The police must be allowed to
investigate and apprehend suspects and should not be penalized for doing so
under the tort of negligent investigation unless the treatment imposed on a suspect
results from a negligent investigation and causes compensable damage that would
not have occurred but for the police’s negligent conduct. The claimant bears
the burden of proving that the consequences of the police conduct relied upon
as damages are wrongful in this sense if they are to recover. Otherwise,
punishment may be no more than a criminal’s just deserts — in a word, justice.  4.      Causal Connection  93                              
Recovery for negligence requires a causal connection between the breach
of the standard of care and the compensable damage suffered.  Negligent police
investigation may cause or contribute to wrongful conviction and imprisonment,
fulfilling the legal requirement of causal connection on a balance of
probabilities.  The starting point is the usual “but for” test.  If, on a
balance of probabilities, the compensable damage would not have occurred but
for the negligence on the part of the police, then the causation requirement is
met.  94                              
Cases of negligent investigation often will involve multiple causes.  Where
the injury would not have been suffered “but for” the negligent police
investigation the causation requirement will be met even if other causes
contributed to the injury as well.  On the other hand, if the contributions of
others to the injury are so significant that the same damage would have been
sustained even if the police had investigated responsibly, causation will not
be established.  It follows that the police will not necessarily be absolved of
responsibility just because another person, such as a prosecutor, lawyer or
judge, may have contributed to a wrongful conviction causing compensable
damage.  5.      Limitation Period  95                              
The respondents claim that Hill’s action is statute-barred.  The
relevant limitation period is set out in the Public Authorities Protection
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.38, s. 7(1) (now repealed):  7.—(1) No action, prosecution or other
proceeding lies or shall be instituted against any person for an act done in
pursuance or execution or intended execution of any statutory or other public
duty or authority, or in respect of any alleged neglect or default in the
execution of any such duty or authority, unless it is commenced within six
months next after the cause of action arose, or, in case of continuance of
injury or damage, within six months after the ceasing thereof.  96                              
The limitation period for negligent investigation begins to run when the
cause of action is complete.  This requires proof of a duty of care, breach of
the standard of care, compensable damage, and causation.  A cause of action in
negligence arises not when the negligent act is committed, but rather when the
harmful consequences of the negligence result.  (See G. Mew, The Law of Limitations
(2nd ed. 2004), at p. 148, citing L. N. Klar et al., Remedies in Tort
(loose-leaf), ed. by L. D. Rainaldi, vol. 4 (release 5), c. 27, at para. 217,
n. 23.)  97                              
As discussed above, the loss or injury as a result of alleged police
negligence is not established until it is clear that the suspect has been
imprisoned as a result of a wrongful conviction or has suffered some other form
of compensable harm as a result of negligent police conduct.  The wrongfulness
of the conviction is essential to establishing compensable injury in an action
where the compensable damage to the plaintiff is imprisonment resulting from a
wrongful conviction.  In such a case, the cause of action is not complete until
the plaintiff can establish that the conviction was in fact wrongful.  So long
as a valid conviction is in place, the plaintiff cannot do so.  98                              
It follows that the limitation period in this case did not start to run
until December 20, 1999 when Mr. Hill, after a new trial, was acquitted of all
charges of robbery.  The action was commenced by notice of action on June 19,
2000, within the six-month limitation period set out in the Public
Authorities Protection Act.  Therefore, the relevant limitation period was
met.  6.      Adequacy of Reasons  99                              
The appellant Hill argues that this appeal should be allowed on the
basis that the reasons of the trial judge were inadequate.  With respect, I
disagree.  100                          
The question is whether the reasons are sufficient to allow for
meaningful appellate review and whether the parties’ “functional need to know”
why the trial judge’s decision has been made has been met.  The test is a
functional one:  R. v. Sheppard, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 869, 2002 SCC
26, at para. 55.  101                          
In determining the adequacy of reasons, the reasons should be considered
in the context of the record before the court.  Where the record discloses all
that is required to be known to permit appellate review, less detailed reasons
may be acceptable.  This means that less detailed reasons may be required in
cases with an extensive evidentiary record, such as the current appeal. On the
other hand, reasons are particularly important when “a trial judge is called
upon to address troublesome principles of unsettled law, or to resolve confused
and contradictory evidence on a key issue”, as was the case in the decision
below: Sheppard, at para. 55.  In assessing the adequacy of reasons, it
must be remembered that “[t]he appellate court is not given the power to
intervene simply because it thinks the trial court did a poor job of expressing
itself”:  Sheppard, at para. 26.  102                          
It might have been preferable for the trial judge to provide a more
comprehensive treatment of the allegations of negligence and the dismissal of
the action.  As the Court of Appeal noted, the trial judge’s choice not to
address some of the specific allegations of negligence might have made
appellate review more “difficult” (para. 165).  103                          
This said, the reasons were in fact sufficient to allow for meaningful
appellate review, when considered in light of the extensive trial record, and
Hill’s functional need to know why the case was decided against him was met. 
As the Court of Appeal concluded, it was “clear from the reasons for judgment
why the trial judge reached the decision he did — he found the evidence of
police officers Loft, Matthews and Stewart and Crown prosecutor Nadel to be
credible and, based on their evidence, he concluded that the respondents’
conduct did not constitute either malicious prosecution or negligent
investigation.  The trial judge also reviewed the evidence of the appellant’s
expert witness, Professor Lindsay, and concluded that it did not undermine the
quality of the police investigation in this case.  The appellant simply did not
demonstrate a standard of care breached by this investigation” (majority
reasons, at para. 124).  104                          
I agree with this assessment.  The claim that the reasons were
inadequate therefore fails.  IV.     Conclusion  105                          
I would dismiss Hill’s appeal with costs.  The Court of Appeal was
correct to conclude that the police conduct impugned on this appeal met the
standard of care and, therefore, was not negligent.  106                          
I would also dismiss the cross-appeal.  The Court of Appeal rightly
concluded that the tort of negligent investigation is available in Canadian
law.  The reasons of Bastarache, Charron and Rothstein JJ. were delivered by  Charron J. (dissenting on
the cross-appeal) —  1.      Overview  107                          
The dictum that it is better for ten guilty persons to escape than for
one innocent person to go to jail has long been a cornerstone of our criminal
justice system  (W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England
(1769), Book IV, c. 27, at p. 352).  Consequently, many safeguards have been
created within that system to protect against wrongful convictions.  Despite
the presence of such safeguards, however, miscarriages of justice do occur. 
When an innocent person is convicted of a crime that he or she did not commit,
it is undeniable that justice has failed in the most fundamental sense.  108                          
Mr. Hill submits that he is one such victim of the criminal justice
system.  Of the 10 robbery charges laid against him, 9 were withdrawn by the
Crown.  Mr. Hill was convicted on the remaining charge but, following a
successful appeal, was retried and ultimately acquitted of the offence.  Mr.
Hill claims that he has sustained significant damages because of substandard
policing during the course of the criminal investigation leading to and
following the charges laid against him.  He therefore brings this action in
negligence.  109                          
While Mr. Hill acknowledges that his cause of action is novel, he
nonetheless submits that the tort system can act as an effective deterrent
against, and fairly allocate the costs arising from, negligent investigative
practices.  Consequently, he urges this Court to bring “[t]he law of negligence
. . . to bear on the problem of wrongful convictions” by recognizing a new tort
of negligent investigation designed to compensate the wrongfully convicted who
have suffered damages as a result of a substandard police investigation
(appellant’s factum, at para. 71).  110                          
The Crown takes the position that this mischaracterizes the issue.  In
its view, this is not a case about providing a remedy for the wrongfully
convicted since, if this Court accepts Mr. Hill’s argument, any person
charged with a criminal offence in respect of whom the charge does not
ultimately result in a conviction would be a potential plaintiff.  The Crown
submits that the “wrongfully convicted” consist, rather, of those persons who
are not only presumed innocent or found not guilty, but who are also determined
to be factually innocent after a review or an inquiry under ss. 696.1  to 696.6 
of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 .  111                          
The Crown argues further that, for important public policy reasons, tort
liability should be limited to instances where the police seriously abuse or
misuse their public powers, not where they are merely negligent in the
discharge of their duties.  According to the Crown, the imposition of a duty of
care in negligence would not only subsume existing torts such as false arrest,
false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, and misfeasance in public office,
but would upset the careful balance between society’s need for effective law
enforcement and an individual’s right to liberty.  112                          
The novel question before this Court is therefore whether the new tort
of negligent investigation should be recognized by Canadian law.  I have
concluded that it should not.  A private duty of care owed by the police to
suspects would necessarily conflict with the investigating officer’s
overarching public duty to investigate crime and apprehend offenders.  The
ramifications from this factor alone defeat the claim that there is a relationship
of proximity between the parties sufficient to give rise to a prima facie duty
of care.  In addition, because the recognition of this new tort would have
significant consequences for other legal obligations, and would detrimentally
affect the legal system, and society more generally, it is my view that even if
a prima facie duty of care were found to exist, that duty should be
negatived on residual policy grounds.  113                          
Therefore, for the reasons that follow, I would allow the Crown’s
cross-appeal and find that the tort of negligent investigation is not a remedy
available at  common law.  In light of this conclusion, I find that the action
was properly dismissed by the courts below and  I would therefore dismiss Mr. 
Hill’s appeal.  2.       Analysis  2.1     Elements of the Tort Action  114                          
Mr. Hill claims that the defendants — who for simplicity I will refer to
collectively as “investigating officers” —  committed the tort of negligent
investigation and that he is entitled to damages.  In order to succeed in his
claim, Mr. Hill must establish the following elements:  (1) that the
investigating officers owed him a duty of care; (2) that the investigating
officers failed to meet the standard of care appropriate in the circumstances;
(3) that he suffered a compensable loss or injury; and (4) that the loss or
injury was caused by the investigating officers’ negligent act or omission. 
While the most contentious elements of the proposed tort of negligent
investigation are the duty and standard of care, the proposed new tort gives
rise to difficult issues in respect of all four elements of the action.  I will
touch on each element in what follows, focussing principally on the duty of
care.  2.2     The Anns Test  115                          
Police officers have multiple duties.  There is no question that one of
them is the duty to investigate crime.  This duty exists at common law and, in
Ontario, is embodied in s. 42 of the Police Services Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. P.15, which describes the general duties of a police officer.  Although
“investigating crime” is not specifically listed, several of the listed duties
are related to, or form part of, the police investigation into crime.  Section
42(1) reads as follows:  42.—(1) The duties of a police officer include,  (a)     preserving the peace;  (b)     preventing crimes and other offences and providing
assistance and encouragement to other persons in their prevention;  (c)     assisting victims of crime;  (d)     apprehending criminals and other offenders and others
who may lawfully be taken into custody;  (e)     laying charges and participating in prosecutions;  (f)      executing warrants that are to be executed by police officers
and performing related duties;  (g)     performing the lawful duties that the chief of police assigns;  (h)     in the case of a municipal police force and in the case of an
agreement under section 10 (agreement for provision of police services by
O.P.P.), enforcing municipal by-laws;  (i)      completing the prescribed training.  See also Police
Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 367, s. 34(2); Police Act, R.S.A. 2000, c.
P-17, s. 38(1); The Police Act, 1990, S.S. 1990-91, c. P-15.01, ss. 18
and 19(1); Provincial Police Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. P150, C.C.S.M., c.
P150, s. 5; Police Act, S.N.S. 2004, c. 31, ss. 30(1) and 31(1); Police
Act, S.N.B. 1977, c. P-9.2, s. 12(1); Police Act, R.S.P.E.I. 1988,
c. P-11, s. 5(2); Royal Newfoundland Constabulary Act, 1992, S.N.L.
1992, c. R-17, s. 8(1); Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act, R.S.C. 1985,
c. R-10, s. 18 ; Police Act, R.S.Q., c. P-13.1, s. 48.  116                          
There is no dispute that a police officer owes an overarching duty to
the public to investigate crime.  The question that occupies us here is whether
this overarching  public duty translates into a private duty owed to individual
members of that public who fall in a particular class, namely suspects under
investigation.  This question calls for the application of what is commonly
called the Anns test (in reference to the House of Lords decision in Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728), as refined by this
Court in Cooper v. Hobart, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537, 2001 SCC 79; Edwards
v. Law Society of Upper Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 562, 2001 SCC 80; Odhavji
Estate v. Woodhouse, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 263, 2003 SCC 69, and Childs v.
Desormeaux, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 643, 2006 SCC 18.  117                          
The Chief Justice has set out in some detail the analytical framework
that must be followed in applying the Anns test.  For the purpose of my
analysis, I need only summarize that test briefly.  For convenience, I
reproduce here the succinct summary of the Anns test articulated by
McLachlin C.J. and Major J. in Edwards (at paras. 9-10):  At the first stage of the Anns test, the question is whether the
circumstances disclose reasonably foreseeable harm and proximity sufficient to
establish a prima facie duty of care.  The focus at this stage is on
factors arising from the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant,
including broad considerations of policy.  The starting point for this analysis
is to determine whether there are analogous categories of cases in which
proximity has previously been recognized.  If no such cases exist, the question
then becomes whether a new duty of care should be recognized in the circumstances. 
Mere foreseeability is not enough to establish a prima facie duty of
care.  The plaintiff must also show proximity — that the defendant was in a
close and direct relationship to him or her such that it is just to impose a
duty of care in the circumstances.  Factors giving rise to proximity must be
grounded in the governing statute when there is one, as in the present case.  If the plaintiff is successful at the first stage of Anns
such that a prima facie duty of care has been established (despite the
fact that the proposed duty does not fall within an already recognized category
of recovery), the second stage of the Anns test must be addressed.  That
question is whether there exist residual policy considerations which justify
denying liability. Residual policy considerations include, among other things,
the effect of recognizing that duty of care on other legal obligations, its
impact on the legal system and, in a less precise but important consideration,
the effect of imposing liability on society in general.  2.3     Foreseeability  118                          
The requirement of reasonable foreseeability poses no barrier to finding
a duty of care in this case.  A police investigator can readily foresee that a
targeted suspect is among those persons who could be harmed as a result of the
negligent conduct of the investigation.  To be sure, when a targeted suspect is
in fact the perpetrator of the offence under investigation, the public rather
than the suspect may be the actual victim of a substandard investigation. 
Nonetheless, on the strict question of foreseeability, it is clear that this
part of the test is made out.  2.4        Proximity  2.4.1     The Search For Analogous Categories  119                          
It is when we turn to the question of proximity that problems arise.  As
stated in the above-noted summary of the Anns test, the proximity
analysis can usefully be started by inquiring whether the case falls, either
directly or by analogy, within a category of cases in which a duty of care has
previously been recognized.  If the case does fall within such a category of cases,
the court can generally be satisfied that there are no residual policy
considerations that might negative the imposition of a duty of care, and a duty
of care will be found to exist.  In this case, Mr. Hill does not dispute that,
prior to the Ontario trial judgment in Beckstead v. Ottawa (City) Chief of
Police (1995), 37 O.R. (3d) 62 (p. 64), no court of common law jurisdiction
in Canada, across the Commonwealth or in any state in the U.S. had found a
private law duty of care owed by police to suspects in respect of the
investigation of crime.  Indeed, in jurisdictions outside Ontario, and in
Ontario prior to Beckstead, courts have declined to recognize such a
duty in cases where the issue has arisen.  For authorities to this effect, see Reynen
v. Canada (1993), 70 F.T.R. 158, at para. 5; McGillivary v. New
Brunswick (1994), 149 N.B.R. (2d) 311 (C.A.), at para. 10; Al’s Steak
House & Tavern Inc. v. Deloitte & Touche (1994), 20 O.R. (3d) 673
(Gen. Div.); Collie Woollen Mills Ltd. v. Canada (1996), 107 F.T.R. 93, 
at para. 34; Stevens v. Fredericton (City) (1999), 212 N.B.R. (2d) 264
(Q.B.); Dix v. Canada (Attorney General) (2002), 315 A.R. 1, 2002 ABQB
580, at para. 557; Kleysen v. Canada (Attorney General) (2001), 159 Man.
R. (2d) 17, 2001 MBQB 205; and Avery v. Canada (Attorney General),
[2004] N.B.J. No. 391 (QL), 2004 NBQB 372, at para. 11.  See also A.A.D. v.
Tanner (2004), 188 Man. R. (2d) 15, 2004 MBQB 213, where at para. 148,
Duval J. explicitly declined to recognize the separate tort of negligent investigation
while nonetheless considering whether a claim for negligence was made out on
the particular facts of that case.   121                          
Australian authorities holding that no duty of care is owed to suspects
in the context of a police investigation are Emanuele v. Hedley (1997),
137 F.L.R. 339 (A.C.T.S.C.), at p. 359; Courtney v. State of Tasmania,
[2000] TASSC 83; Wilson v. State of New South Wales (2001), 53
N.S.W.L.R. 407, [2001] NSWSC 869, at para. 63; Tame v. New South Wales
(2002), 191 A.L.R. 449, [2002] HCA 35, at para. 231; Gruber v. Backhouse
(2003), 190 F.L.R. 122, [2003] ACTSC 18, at para. 41; Duke v. State of New
South Wales, [2005] NSWSC 632, at para. 23; and in New Zealand, Gregory
v. Gollan, [2006] NZHC 426, at paras. 16-17.  See also the discussion in Sullivan
v. Moody (2001), 183 A.L.R. 404, [2001] HCA 59, at para. 60.  Cases holding
that no duty of care is owed to individual members of the public in the broader
investigatory context are Cran v. State of New South Wales (2004), 62
N.S.W.L.R. 95, [2004] NSWCA 92, at para. 50 (leave to appeal to HCA denied,
[2005] HCA Trans 21); and in New Zealand, Simpson v. Attorney General,
[1994] 3 N.Z.L.R. 667 (C.A.).  122                          
For American authorities supporting the proposition that police do not
owe a duty of care to suspects, see Gregoire v. Biddle, 177 F.2d 579 (2d
Cir. 1949), at p. 581; Thompson v. Olson, 798 F.2d 552 (1st Cir.
1986), at p. 556; Kompare v. Stein, 801 F.2d 883 (7th Cir. 1986), at p.
890; Kelly v. Curtis, 21 F.3d 1544 (11th Cir. 1994), at p. 1551;
Orsatti v. New Jersey State Police, 71 F.3d 480 (3d Cir. 1995), at p. 484; Schertz
v. Waupaca County, 875 F.2d 578 (7th Cir. 1989), at p. 583.  Also relevant
are the remarks of Scalia J. in Castle Rock v. Gonzales, 125 S.Ct. 2796
(2005), at p. 2810.  123                          
I will mention some of these decisions later in my judgment, but first,
a word about Beckstead and the decision of the Court of Appeal for
Ontario in this case ((2005), 76 O.R. (3d) 481).  124                          
In Beckstead, the Court of Appeal for Ontario confirmed a trial
decision holding that a duty of care was owed by the investigating officer to
the suspect under investigation ((1997), 37 O.R. (3d) 62 (p. 63)).  Notably,
however, neither the trial judge nor the panel of the Court of Appeal in that
case carried out the Anns analysis to determine whether a duty of care
in respect of this new category should be found to exist.  This lack of any
prior authority to support such a holding and the lack of any principled
analysis in Beckstead prompted the Chief Justice of Ontario to create a
five-judge panel for the hearing of this case to determine whether Beckstead
was correctly decided (Court of Appeal judgment, at para. 2).  125                          
In support of his conclusion that Beckstead was correctly
decided, MacPherson J.A., writing for a unanimous court on this issue, relied
in part on the existence of a duty of care in an analogous category, stating
that “the duty of care exists in Ontario with respect to both suspects (Beckstead)
and victims (Jane Doe)” (para. 65 (emphasis added)).  He then
concluded that he could “see no principled basis for distinguishing the two
categories” (para. 65).  126                          
The question whether the relationship between the investigating officer
and the victim or potential victim of crime can give rise to a private duty of
care has never been considered by this Court and we are not deciding this issue
on this appeal.  However, given the reliance placed by the Court of Appeal on Jane
Doe v. Metropolitan Toronto (Municipality) Commissioners of Police (1998),
160 D.L.R. (4th) 697 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)), it is necessary to examine the
import of the finding in that case to determine whether the Court of Appeal was
correct in concluding that a general duty of care exists with respect to
victims and that the categories of victim and suspect are indistinguishable.  127                          
First, it is important to properly circumscribe the decision in Jane
Doe.  In order to do so, it may be helpful to briefly review the facts and
the findings of the court in that case.  From December 1985 to August 1986, a
series of sexual assaults took place in Toronto.  The sexual assaults shared
certain characteristics:  each took place in the same downtown Toronto
neighbourhood; all the female victims lived in second or third floor
apartments; each apartment contained an exterior balcony; and entry to the
women’s apartments had been effected via the balconies.  128                          
After the fourth incident, but prior to the sexual assault of Jane Doe,
the Metropolitan Toronto Police Force (“MTPF”) had grounds to believe that a
single individual was responsible for the sexual assaults.  However, while
anticipating that additional assaults were likely to occur, the MTPF
deliberately refrained from informing potential victims of the specific risk to
them on the grounds that doing so would cause the offender to flee.  The trial
judge, MacFarland J. (as she then was), found that the circumstances of the
case suggested that “the women were being used — without their knowledge or
consent — as ‘bait’ to attract a predator whose specific identity then was
unknown to the police, but whose general and characteristic identity most
certainly was” (p. 725).  129                          
According to MacFarland J., the MTPF’s decision not to inform members of
the public who had been identified as being at risk was grossly negligent. 
Importantly, however, MacFarland J. took care to delineate the scope of the
duty thus breached.  She was “satisfied on the evidence that a meaningful
warning could and should have been given to the women who were at particular
risk” (p. 730 (emphasis added)).  MacFarland J. went on to find that “the
police failed utterly in their duty to protect these women and the
plaintiff in particular from the serial rapist the police knew to be in
their midst by failing to warn so that they may have had the opportunity to
take steps to protect themselves” (p. 732 (emphasis added)).  MacFarland J.
concluded that “[h]ere police were aware of a specific threat or risk to
a specific group of women and they did nothing to warn those women
of the danger they were in, nor did they take any measures to protect them”
(p. 732 (emphasis added)).  130                          
Hence, the trial judge in Jane Doe held that where the police are
aware of a specific threat to a specific group of individuals,
the police have a duty to inform those individuals of the specific threat in
question so that they may take steps to protect themselves from harm.  As
Moldaver J. (as he then was) said, speaking for the Divisional Court in
confirming that the action could proceed to trial, “[w]hile the police owe
certain duties to the public at large, they cannot be expected to owe a private
law duty of care to every member of society who might be at risk”:  Jane Doe
v. Metropolitan Toronto (Municipality) Commissioners of Police (1990), 72
D.L.R. (4th) 580, at p. 584.  Hence, Jane Doe cannot be read to stand
for the wide proposition that the police owe a general duty of care to all
potential victims of crime.  Such an interpretation would ignore the fact
that there must be more than mere foreseeability of harm before a duty of care
will arise; there must also be sufficient proximity between the parties and the
absence of policy considerations negating the existence of any prima facie
duty of care.  131                          
Without further qualification, therefore, I find myself unable to
endorse MacPherson J.A.’s broad conclusion in this case that “the duty of care
exists in Ontario with respect to . . . victims” (para. 65).  I also
respectfully disagree with his assertion that there is no principled basis on
which to distinguish between the two categories.  To the contrary, there is
crucial distinction between victim and suspect.  The distinction resides in the
fact that the public interest in having police officers investigate crime for
the purpose of apprehending offenders and a potential victim’s interest in
being protected from the offenders are generally reconcilable.  In contrast,
the police officer’s duty to investigate crime and apprehend offenders is
diametrically opposed to the interests of the person under investigation.  This
is because the suspect’s interest, regardless of whether that suspect is the
actual perpetrator of the crime, is always to be left alone by the
state.  In other words, the suspect’s interest is always at odds with
the public interest in the context of a criminal investigation.  I will
explain.   133                          
Therefore, victims and suspects are not analogous categories.  134                          
The Court of Appeal also placed some reliance on this Court’s decision
in Odhavji in support of the approach it adopted (para. 71).  In my
view, however, Odhavji provides little assistance in determining the
question that occupies us on this appeal.  Odhavji involved a suit
brought against the Metropolitan Toronto Chief of Police by the family of an
individual who had been fatally shot by the police.  The plaintiffs alleged
that the Chief owed them a duty of care to ensure that officers co-operated
with the Special Investigations Unit, and that the Chief had breached that
duty, resulting in harm to the family.  This Court refused to strike the
plaintiff’s statement of claim as disclosing no cause of action, noting in
particular that s. 41(1)(b) of the Police Services Act imposed on the
Chief a “freestanding statutory obligation to ensure that the members of the
force carry out their duties in accordance with the provisions of the Police
Services Act and the needs of the community” (Odhavji, at para.
58).  This Court took this to support the finding of a relationship of
proximity.  By way of contrast, no similar specific statutory duty  can be
pointed to in the present case.  Consequently, Odhavji does not provide
us with an analogous category in which a duty of care has previously been found
to exist either.  135                          
Because this case does not fall either directly or by analogy within a
category of cases in which a duty of care has previously been recognized, it is
necessary to turn to the proximity inquiry under the Anns test to
determine whether the relationship between an investigating officer and a
suspect under investigation is sufficiently close to give rise to a prima
facie duty of care.  2.4.2           The Interests Engaged by the
Relationship Between the Investigator and the Investigated  136                          
As explained by my colleague (at paras. 26-30), the question at this
stage of the inquiry is whether the relationship between the investigating
officer and the suspect is such as “to make the imposition of legal liability
for negligence appropriate”.  Proximity is closely connected to the notion of foreseeability: 
the relationship must be sufficiently close and direct that the defendant ought
to have had the plaintiff in mind as a person who could potentially be harmed
by his or her conduct.  But proximity is not exhausted by foreseeability.  In
addition, other factors that may bear on the question of whether the
relationship between the defendant and the plaintiff is capable of supporting
legal liability must be considered (Cooper, at para. 37).  Such factors
may include expectations, representations, reliance and the nature of the
interests that characterize the relationship (Cooper, at para. 34). 
However, no definitive list of factors is possible and the list will vary
depending on the circumstances of the case (Cooper, at para. 35).  137                          
There is no question that the relationship between police officer and
suspect is sufficiently close and direct that the investigating officer ought
to have the targeted suspect in mind as a person potentially harmed by his
actions.  As I have noted, however, other factors engaged by the relationship
must also be considered in order to reach a conclusion regarding proximity.  In
my view, none of these further factors, either jointly or severally, is
sufficient to give rise to the required proximate relationship.  138                          
McLachlin C.J. identifies the expectations of the parties and the
interests engaged by the relationship as relevant factors giving rise to a
relationship of proximity. In respect of the first factor, my colleague
states:  “Viewed from the broader societal perspective, suspects may reasonably
be expected to rely on the police to conduct their investigation in a
competent, non-negligent manner” (para. 39).  From a logical standpoint, I take
no issue with this proposition.  Since society undoubtedly relies on police
officers to perform their public duty to investigate crime and apprehend
criminals in a competent, non-negligent manner, the suspect, as a member of
that society, may reasonably be said to share that expectation.  The critical
factor, however, and one which, in my view, strongly militates against
the recognition of a duty of care is the second one, the interests engaged by
the relationship.  139                          
McLachlin C.J. describes the high interests at stake for the targeted
suspect. As she states, the suspect “has a critical personal interest in the
conduct of the investigation.  At stake are his freedom, his reputation and how
he may spend a good portion of his life” (para. 34).  In addition, as the
Statement of Claim in this case reveals, the targeted suspect’s financial
interests are also engaged.  Mr. Hill claims loss of wages, decreased future
income earning ability and numerous out-of-pocket expenses.  My colleague
concludes that “[t]hese high interests support a finding of a proximate
relationship giving rise to a duty of care” (para. 34).  With respect, however,
the suspect’s interests are not the only interests engaged by the
relationship.  As aptly stated in Childs v. Desormeaux:  The law of negligence not only considers the
plaintiff’s loss, but explains why it is just and fair to impose the cost of
that loss on the particular defendant before the court.  The proximity
requirement captures this two-sided face of negligence. [para. 25]  In other words,
in assessing the proximity of the relationship between plaintiff and defendant,
we must pay attention not only to the plaintiff’s interests; we must also pay
attention to those of the defendant, in this case the investigating officers. 
This requires us to consider their role in the enforcement of the criminal law.  140                          
The enforcement of the criminal law is one of the most important aspects
of the maintenance of law and order in a free society.  Police officers are the
main actors who have been entrusted to fulfill this important function.  Often,
this requires police officers to make decisions that might adversely affect the
rights and interests of citizens. As the Canadian Association of Chiefs of
Police notes in its factum:  While there is a superficial similarity between liability in negligence
for police officers and liability in negligence for other professionals, there
is also a fundamental distinction.  Other professionals have a private law duty
to act in the best interests of their clients.  Police officers however are
public office holders, and have a public duty to act in the best interests of
society as a whole.  This public interest is not synonymous with the interests
of private citizens in a police investigation.  As stated in Odhavji Estate
[at para. 28], “[i]n a democracy, public officers must retain the authority to
make decisions that, where appropriate, are adverse to the interests of certain
citizens”.  [para. 22]  The importance
of maintaining the police officer’s authority to make decisions in the public
interest that are adverse to certain citizens is underscored in the case of
suspects. As I explained earlier, because society’s interest in having the
police investigate crime and apprehend criminals inevitably collides with the
suspect’s interest to be left alone by the state, the imposition of a private
duty of care would of necessity give rise to conflicting duties.  I am not
suggesting, as stated by the Chief Justice (at para. 42), that the police have
“a duty to leave people alone”.  I am saying that it is always in the interest
of individual members of society to be left alone rather than to be
investigated by the police.  This is because the individual, whether innocent
or not, always stands to lose from being targeted by the police.  Therefore,
the imposition on the police of  a legal duty to take reasonable care not to
harm the individual inevitably pulls the police away from targeting that
individual as a suspect.  In such circumstances, it is neither just nor fair to
the individual police officers, nor in the interest of society generally, to
impose on police officers a duty that brings in its wake a set of conflicting
duties.  141                          
By way of example, we need only consider the — unfortunately not
uncommon — occurrence of the suspected impaired driver.  If in acting to combat
impaired driving the police were duty-bound to take into account not only the
public interest but also the suspect’s interests, in all but the most obvious
cases of impairment, the officer might well be advised to simply let the
suspect go rather than risk harming the suspect by initiating a criminal law
process that may not result in a conviction.  By letting the suspect go, the
officer would also avoid the risk of time-consuming legal entanglements and
potential civil liability.  This cautionary approach may seem even more
advisable to the officer if the suspect in question is a person of stature and
means who may personally stand to lose more from being “wrongfully” dragged
into the criminal justice system.  142                          
I do not mean to suggest that if a duty of care towards suspects is
recognized, police officers will become “so apprehensive, easily dissuaded from
doing their duty and intent on preserving public funds from costly claims” that
they will be incapable of carrying out their assigned duties (Dorset Yacht
Co. v. Home Office, [1970] A.C. 1004 (H.L.), at p. 1033, per Lord
Reid).  Like Lord Reid, in my view, the police are made of sterner stuff. 
Rather, my point is that the overly cautious approach that may result from the
imposition of conflicting duties would seriously undermine society’s
interest in having the police investigate crime and apprehend offenders. 
Mr. Hill purports to answer this argument by denying that the police officer
would be faced with such concerns because, he argues, the officer could always
safely stand behind the reasonable and probable grounds standard.  I will have
more to say about the reasonable and probable grounds standard below.  For the
moment, however, let me simply say that I am dubious that a police officer, who
has spent time in impaired driving court and who has witnessed countless legal
debates about whether the arresting officer had the requisite reasonable and
probable grounds to believe the suspect had been driving while impaired, would
regard this standard as a sufficient safety net.  Therefore, I am not persuaded
that the potential ramifications of imposing on police these conflicting duties
can be so easily answered by an appeal to the reasonable and probable grounds
standard.  143                          
If authority is needed in support of the proposition that the imposition
of conflicting duties is to be avoided, we need to look no further than the
decisions of this Court in Cooper and Edwards.  In both cases,
the defendants were found to owe duties to the public at large, and private
claims against them were dismissed at the pleadings stage for failure to
disclose a reasonable cause of action.  144                          
In Cooper, the Registrar of Mortgage Brokers was sued for alleged
negligence in failing to exercise his statutory powers with appropriate care to
avoid or minimize a loss suffered by the plaintiff resulting from the improper
actions of a mortgage broker.  This Court found that there was no private duty
of care in part because “a duty to individual investors would potentially
conflict with the Registrar’s overarching duty to the public” (para. 44).  145                          
Edwards involved a similar claim against the Law Society of Upper
Canada for its alleged negligence in failing to protect a class of fraud
victims from improper conduct on the part of a solicitor.  This Court refused
to impose a private duty of care because imposing liability for negligence on
the Law Society would be inconsistent with the Society’s “public interest”
role.  The Court agreed with the following excerpt from Finlayson J.A.’s
judgment in the Court of Appeal for Ontario, at para. 6:  The public is well-served by refusing to fetter the investigative powers
of the Law Society with the fear of civil liability.  The invocation by the
plaintiffs of the “public interest” role of the Law Society seems to be
misconceived as it actually works to undermine their argument. . . .  [T]he Law
Society cannot meet this obligation if it is required to act according to a
private law duty of care to specific individuals such as the appellants.  The
private law duty of care cannot stand alongside the Law Society’s statutory
mandate and hence cannot be given effect to.  146                          
It might be objected that in each of Cooper and Edwards a
particular statutory scheme brought the parties together and that that
statutory scheme was what stood in the way of a finding of proximity.  However,
this provides no basis for declining to apply the same principle to this case. 
Although the police officer’s duty to investigate crime and apprehend suspects
is rooted in common law, it is also recognized, expressly or impliedly, by
statute.  Furthermore, the relationship between the investigating officer and
the suspect arises in the context of the criminal law and regulatory law, both
of which are governed almost entirely by statute.  In fact, in my view, the
conflicting duties that would arise in this case are far more acute than those
in Cooper or Edwards where, at least in some instances, the
interest of the potential victim can be reconciled with the interest of the
public.  After all, both the investing public and the private investor might
have as an interest the shutting down of unscrupulous mortgage brokers.  By
contrast, as I have explained earlier, it is never in the interest of
the targeted suspect that the police investigate him or her.  This suggests
again that the interests of the public in having  police officers investigate
crime and the interests of suspects are inherently and diametrically opposed.  147                          
This opposition of interests has been recognized by courts in other
countries as a sufficient reason not to impose a duty of care.  The imposition
of a duty of care in negligence owed to suspects has been held to be
inconsistent with a police officer’s duty to fully investigate the conduct in
question.  For example, Australian courts have reasoned that to impose a duty of
care in negligence to a person whose conduct is under investigation would
conflict with and constrain the proper performance of the police officers’ duty
to fully investigate the conduct in question:  see Tame v. New South Wales, 
at paras. 231 and 298-99; Gruber v. Backhouse, at paras. 29-30 and
35-39.  Similarly, in England, the House of Lords has refused to extend the
duty of care on the basis of a conflict with the “fearless and efficient
discharge by police officers of their vitally important public duty of
investigating crime”:  Calveley v. Chief Constable of the Merseyside Police,
at p. 1030; see also Hill v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire, at pp.
240-41; Brooks v. Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, at para. 30.  148                          
To sum up:  in my view, although in the present case there is
foreseeability of harm, there remains a lack of proximity.  Consequently, I
would conclude on the ground of lack of proximity alone that the relationship
between the investigating officer and the suspect does not give rise to a prima
facie duty of care.  However, even if some degree of proximity were found,
and even if this degree of proximity were held to be sufficient to give rise to
a prima facie duty of care, it is my position that a consideration of
additional policy considerations would militate against the recognition of such
a duty. This takes us to the second stage of the Anns test.  2.5     Residual
Policy Considerations  2.5.1  Potential
Impact on the Exercise of Police Discretion  149                          
It is at the second stage of the Anns test that so-called
residual policy considerations fall to be considered.  At this stage we are
“not concerned with the relationship between the parties, but with the effect
of recognizing a duty of care on other legal obligations, the legal system and
society more generally”  (Cooper, at para. 37; see also Edwards,
at para. 10).  I begin my analysis of the residual policy considerations with
the question of police discretion since discussion of this factor is more
closely related to the issue of conflicting duties we have just discussed. 
McLachlin C.J. finds that the discretion inherent in police work fails to
provide a convincing reason to negate the proposed duty of care because, in her
view, it is a factor to be “taken into account in formulating the standard
of care, not whether a duty of care arises” (para. 51 (emphasis in original)). 
I disagree.  The concern about police discretion in this context is not whether
courts will be able to properly distinguish between mere errors of judgment and
negligent acts.  Police discretion is a significant factor because the police
have the discretionary power not to investigate further or engage the criminal
process despite the existence of reasonable and probable grounds to believe
that an offence has been committed.  A concern therefore arises from the fact
that, should this Court recognize a private duty of care owed to the suspect
under investigation, this power could be exercised, not to advance the public
interest as it should be, but out of a fear of civil liability.  150                          
 The police discretionary power has been recognized by this Court as “an
essential feature of the criminal justice system”:  R. v. Beare, [1988]
2 S.C.R. 387, at p. 410.  As stated by La Forest J. in that case:  “A
system that attempted to eliminate discretion would be unworkably complex and
rigid.”  Equally important, however, is the need to properly circumscribe this
power so that it be exercised solely in the public interest.  This issue
arose recently in R. v. Beaudry, [2007] 1 S.C.R. 190, 2007 SCC 5.  This
Court recognized that the police officer’s duty to enforce the law and
investigate crimes is not absolute and is subject to the exercise of
discretion.  “Thus, a police officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that
an offence has been committed, or that a more thorough investigation might
produce evidence that could form the basis of a criminal charge, may exercise
his or her discretion to decide not to engage the judicial process” (para.
37).  The Court was quick to add, however, that the discretionary power itself
is not absolute and stated that “[f]ar from having carte blanche, police
officers must justify their decisions rationally.”  The exercise of the
discretion must first be justified subjectively:  it must have been exercised
honestly and transparently, and on the basis of valid and reasonable grounds. 
In addition, the exercise of discretion must also be justified on the basis of
objective factors.  151                          
At first blush, it may be thought that the imposition of a private duty
of care to the suspect and the consequent potential for civil liability should
give rise to no concern about the improper exercise of police discretion.  Just
as a decision based on favouritism, or on cultural, social or racial
stereotypes, cannot constitute a proper exercise of police discretion, so would
a police officer be precluded from deciding not to engage the criminal law
process simply to avoid potential civil liability.  Again, however, I am not
persuaded that we can so easily disregard the potential legal and societal
ramifications of imposing on police such a duty.  152                          
If this Court accepts Mr. Hill’s argument, the investigating officer
will be legally bound, not only to fulfill his or her public duty to
enforce the law, but also to take care not to harm the suspect by conduct that
may ultimately be found to fall below the relevant standard of care.  The law
should not impose a duty unless it expects that it will be fulfilled.  Of
course, the surest way of avoiding harm to the suspect is for the officer to
decide to not issue process and not engage the criminal law; in other words, in
order to reconcile the conflicting duties imposed by law, the police officer
may well choose to avoid any risk of harm to the suspect by the exercise of
“police discretion”.  Since there is a significant gap between the “reasonable
and probable grounds” standard to issue process and the “beyond a reasonable doubt”
standard to convict, the prudent officer who tries to reconcile his public duty
to enforce the law and his private duty not to harm the innocent suspect may be
well advised not to issue process except in cases where the evidence is
overwhelming.  How then would we distinguish between a proper exercise of
discretion based on a police officer’s desire to fulfill his legal duty of care
to the suspect and an improper one based on the selfish desire to avoid
potential civil liability?  153                          
There is significant public interest in maintaining the long-standing
reasonable and probable grounds standard so as to ensure a robust and efficient
enforcement of the law.  Once this standard is met, it is left to others within
the criminal justice system, namely the Crown prosecutor, the preliminary
hearing justice, and the ultimate finder of fact, to delve more deeply into the
legal and factual merits of a case. As this Court has recognized in R. v.
Storrey, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 241, at pp. 249-50, the reasonable and probable
grounds standard achieves a reasonable balance between the individual’s right
to liberty and the need for society to be protected from crime.  In my view,
because the imposition of a private duty of care as suggested in this case
could only impede the police officers’ ability to perform their public duties
fearlessly and with despatch, it would detrimentally upset this delicate
balance.  2.5.2     Identifying the Wrongfully Convicted for
the Purpose of Compensation  154                          
As stated earlier, Mr. Hill urges this Court to bring “[t]he law of
negligence . . . to bear on the problem of wrongful convictions” by recognizing
a new tort of negligent investigation.  McLachlin C.J. accepts his plea and, in
fact, relies on the need to compensate the wrongfully convicted as an important
factor in support of finding a duty of care (paras. 36-37).  It is noteworthy
that the proposed tort would also provide recourse to targeted suspects who,
short of being convicted, suffer a loss or injury as a result of a negligent
investigation.  Indeed, from the plaintiff’s viewpoint, it makes little sense
to limit the right of action to cases of wrongful conviction.  In the context
of an action for negligent investigation, the difference between a negligent
investigative process that results in a conviction and one that is terminated
at an earlier point would seem to go only to the question of the quantum of
damages.  155                          
Mr. Hill  relies on his ultimate acquittal in support of his claim that
the losses he suffered as a result of being subjected to the criminal justice
system should be compensable at law.  The Crown disputes the notion that this
is a case about providing a remedy for the wrongfully convicted, and states the
following (factum, at para. 6):  This case is not about preventing wrongful convictions.  Wrongfully
convicted persons would constitute only a tiny sub-set of the class who would
be in a position to sue for negligent investigation (the largest sub-set being
those who are acquitted at trial or against whom charges are dropped before
trial).  Even amongst the wrongfully convicted, few would be able to establish
that negligent police investigation caused their conviction.  156                          
No one is disputing the validity of Mr. Hill’s acquittal.  However, the
distinction between an acquittal and a finding of innocence must be considered
in assessing the potential ramifications of recognizing a tort of negligent
investigation.  The difficulty arises from the fact that our criminal justice
system is not focussed on identifying the innocent.  The verdict in a criminal
case is guilty or not guilty.  A verdict of not guilty is not a factual finding
of innocence; neither is an order on appeal overturning a conviction.  A
verdict of not guilty encompasses a broad range of circumstances, from factual
innocence to proof just short of beyond a reasonable doubt.  That reality about
our criminal justice system raises difficult questions of public policy when it
comes time to consider the issue of compensation.  Should compensation be
reserved to those accused who are factually innocent of the crime with which
they were charged or convicted?  If so, how should factual innocence be
determined?  The question whether any inquiry should be made into the
“true” status of the acquitted person is itself rather controversial.  The
controversy, in a nutshell, can be described as follows.  157                          
On the one hand, a compelling argument can be made that a not guilty
verdict should be considered as a determination of innocence for all purposes,
including compensation.  Under this first approach, all persons charged with a
criminal offence who are ultimately found not guilty could fall in the category
of potential plaintiffs.  The most powerful argument in support of this
approach is that any qualification of the verdict of acquittal would in effect 
introduce the third verdict of “not proven” which has not been accepted in our
criminal justice system.  The introduction of such a “Scotch verdict” would
create a lingering cloud over those persons who have been found not guilty or
in respect of whom the criminal process was terminated but whose innocence has
not been conclusively ascertained.  Professor H. A. Kaiser, in the context of
discussing possible statutory compensation schemes, explains the rationale for
having a more inclusive compensatory approach in his article “Wrongful
Conviction and Imprisonment:  Towards an End to the Compensatory Obstacle
Course” (1989), 9 Windsor Y.B. Access Just. 96, as follows (at p. 139):  It is argued that persons who have been wrongfully convicted and
imprisoned are ipso facto victims of a miscarriage of justice and should
be entitled to be compensated.  To maintain otherwise introduces the third
verdict of “not proved” or “still culpable” under the guise of a compensatory
scheme, supposedly requiring higher threshold standards than are necessary for
a mere acquittal.  As Professor MacKinnon forcefully maintains [in his article
“Costs and Compensation for the Innocent Accused” (1988), 67 Can. Bar Rev.
489, at pp. 497-98]:  . . . one who is acquitted or discharged is innocent in the eyes of the
law and the sights of the rest of us should not be set any lower. . . . There
is a powerful social interest in seeing acquitted persons do no worse than to
be restored to the lives they had before they were prosecuted.  158                          
On the other hand, an equally compelling argument can be made that any
compensation regime that is not limited to the “factually innocent” is
unacceptable because it would provide the persons who have in fact committed
the offence, but whose guilt could not be proven, with a possible means of
profiting from the commission of their crime.  Under the federal-provincial Guidelines:
Compensation for Wrongfully Convicted and Imprisoned Persons (agreed to and
adopted by federal and provincial justice ministers in March 1988), a clear
distinction is made between a finding of not guilty and a finding of innocence
for the purpose of compensation.  The following was  added to the listed
prerequisites for eligibility for compensation:  As
compensation should only be granted to those persons who did not commit the
crime for which they were convicted, (as opposed to persons who are found
not guilty) a further criteria would require:  a)    If a pardon is granted under Section 683 [of the Criminal
Code ], a statement on the face of the pardon based on an investigation,
that the individual did not commit the offence; or  b)    If a reference is made by the Minister of
Justice under Section 617(b), a statement by the Appellate Court, in response
to a question asked by the Minister of Justice pursuant to Section 617(c), to
the effect that the person did not commit the offence.  [Emphasis added.]  159                          
The Chief Justice alludes to this concern when she stresses, at para.
64, that any suspect suing the police “bears the burden of showing that police
negligence in the course of an investigation caused harm compensable at law”
and that “[e]vidence going to the factual guilt or innocence of the suspect,
including the results of any criminal proceedings that may have occurred, may
be relevant to this causation inquiry.”  My colleague takes the position,
however, that “[i]t is not necessary to decide here whether an acquittal should
be treated as conclusive proof of innocence in a subsequent civil trial” (para.
64).  While it is perhaps not necessary in order to dispose of this appeal to
decide whether an acquittal should be treated as conclusive proof of innocence,
it will certainly be necessary to do so in the next tort action where the
plaintiff succeeds in proving negligence in the conduct of a police
investigation.  These are precisely the sorts of ramifications that must be
considered at the second stage of the Anns test.  The question I ask,
therefore, is the following:  how are we to distinguish between treatment that
is “rightfully imposed by the law” and treatment that is “wrongful”
for the purpose of compensation?   If we adopt the first approach described
earlier, namely that an acquittal should be regarded as the equivalent of a
finding of innocence for the purpose of compensation, this could have
wide-ranging ramifications.  For example, every suspect, who is charged with an
offence but who is not convicted because the criminal justice system has worked
the way it should, would become a potential plaintiff if he can show that the
police conducted a substandard investigation.  This result would follow
regardless of whether the suspect has in fact committed the crime or not.  160                          
The issue is most pertinent in the context of a proposed right of action
where, as here, the alleged wrong is the conduct of a substandard police
investigation.  On the one hand, there is no question that negligent police
investigation may contribute to the wrongful conviction of a person who did not
commit the crime.  Negligent mishandling of physical evidence may lead to
erroneous forensic results.  Careless or incomplete investigations may fail to
yield evidence that would have exonerated the accused or raised a reasonable
doubt about his guilt.  On the other hand, a negligent investigation will often
be the effective cause of an acquittal — as indeed it should be in the criminal
context.  Numerous evidentiary and procedural safeguards are built in the
criminal trial process to guard against wrongful convictions.  Hence, evidence
may be excluded or disregarded because improper investigative techniques were
used in obtaining it.  Or, a substandard investigation may yield insufficient evidence
to support a conviction, even though the evidence may have been out there to be
found.  161                          
It is a principle of fundamental justice that the accused in a criminal
trial be given the benefit of any reasonable doubt.  Therefore, from a criminal
law perspective, there is no question that an acquittal must be regarded as
tantamount to a finding of innocence.  However, in the context of a tort
action, we must come to terms with the reality that the person who committed
the offence may well stand to benefit rather than lose from a botched-up
investigation.  The true victim in such cases is not the suspect but the public
at large.  Should the successful accused who actually committed the offence be
entitled to use the acquittal brought about by the negligent conduct of police
investigators as a basis to claim compensation?  A simple example may assist in
understanding how this difficulty may easily arise and why it cannot simply be
resolved by a careful tailoring of the appropriate standard of care.  162                          
Let us assume that a complainant is the victim of a brutal sexual
assault.  The perpetrator is unknown to her.  However, she provides a detailed
description to the police which leads them to pick from police files a photo of
a suspect matching her description. The complainant is shown the single photo
and she positively identifies the person in the photo as her assailant. 
Fearing the assailant may strike again, the police quickly apprehend the
suspect.  The police later arrange for a physical lineup comprised of several
persons, including the suspect in the photo.  The other persons in the lineup
bear questionable resemblance to the suspect.  The complainant views the
lineup, and again identifies the suspect as her assailant.  The suspect is
charged.  As it turns out at trial, there is little else connecting the suspect
to the crime, and the case for the prosecution essentially turns on the
complainant’s eyewitness identification.  The complainant is firm in her
identification of the accused at trial.  However, because of the inherent
frailties of eyewitness identification and the risk that the identification
made by the complainant may have been tainted by the improper police techniques
adopted in this case, the trial judge concludes that he cannot be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused.  The accused is
acquitted.  163                          
The accused commences a civil action in negligence against the police
alleging that the improper identification techniques caused the complainant to
wrongfully identify him as the perpetrator which, in turn, led to his wrongful
arrest and prosecution. He claims damages for loss of reputation, nervous
shock, and the legal expenses he incurred in defending himself against the
charge.  164                          
In defence of the claim, the defendant proposes to call the complainant
to identify the plaintiff as her assailant.  The defendant argues that any
negligent conduct on his part did not cause the harm.  Rather, the plaintiff’s
own conduct in committing the sexual assault occasioned his loss.  The
defendant argues further that, even if causation is proven, none of the damages
should be compensable at law unless the plaintiff proves that he did not in
fact commit the offence.  165                          
 How is the civil claim to be adjudicated?  Is the acquittal to be
considered as the legal equivalent of factual innocence in the civil trial
thereby precluding the defendant from advancing this line of defence?  If that
approach is adopted, the action in negligence is easily made out.  The duty of
care would exist as a matter of law.  The breach of standard is proven because,
quite clearly, the identification techniques fell below acceptable standards. 
The causal link is inevitably made out because, if the plaintiff must be
regarded as innocent of the crime, one can only conclude that it is the
negligent conduct of the police that caused the complainant to wrongfully
identify him as her assailant, which identification in turn caused him to be
subjected to the entire criminal process.  Upon proof of his loss, the
plaintiff is assured of compensation.  This result appears entirely just, if
the plaintiff in fact is not the person who assaulted the complainant.  On the
other hand, if he is in fact the assailant, many would view it as unthinkable
that his loss should be regarded as compensable at law, given that the true
victim who was harmed as a result of the police officer’s substandard conduct
was society, not the plaintiff.  166                          
Adopting the second approach, according to which a finding of not guilty
is distinguished from factual innocence, could also bring about undesirable
results if the plaintiff did not in fact commit the crime with which he was
charged.  If the acquittal is not conclusive of factual innocence, the
plaintiff, who bears the burden of proving his claim on a balance of
probabilities, would have to prove that he is not the assailant in order to
succeed in his civil action.  Meeting this burden may prove impossible to do. 
It also seems unjust that, having already been acquitted, he should be put
through this additional hurdle.  It would also necessitate a retrial of the
case which may well lead to conflicting findings and put an aura of suspicion
on his acquittal.  167                          
Quite clearly, this Court would have to choose one approach or the other
on the question of compensability of harm.  Whichever approach is adopted,
there may be unforeseen and undesirable ramifications in the criminal context. 
If the first approach is adopted, would triers of fact be less inclined to
arrive at a verdict of not guilty on the basis of deficiencies in the police
investigation, knowing that this result could give the accused the right to
claim damages?  Conversely, if the second approach is adopted and one branch of
the law draws a distinction between a finding of not guilty and a finding of
innocence, would this undermine the overall meaning of an acquittal?  These are
the sorts of residual policy considerations to which the tort of negligent investigation
gives rise.  In my view, they provide us with reasons to be cautious about
imposing on police officers a novel duty of care towards suspects.  2.5.3     Competing Policy Concerns not Resolved
by Defining the Standard of Care  168                          
The Court of Appeal was of the opinion that the policy concerns weighing
against imposing a duty of care could be addressed by a “carefully tailored”
standard of care (para. 70).  The court went on however to simply adopt the
standard of “the reasonable police officer in like circumstances” as the
appropriate standard, adding:  “In an arrest and prosecution context, the
standard becomes more specific and is directly linked to statutory and common
law duties, namely did the police have reasonable and probable grounds to
believe that the plaintiff had committed a crime?” (para. 83). McLachlin C.J.
agrees that this is the correct standard (para. 67).  169                          
With respect, I fail to see how the ordinary negligence standard, even
if linked to the reasonable and probable grounds standard, can reconcile the
conflicting standards at play.   In my view, the usual negligence standard
cannot easily co-exist with governing criminal standards.  By way of
illustration, I will refer, first, to the hypothetical fact situation I have just
discussed and, second, to the analysis in the courts below in this case.  170                          
In the hypothetical example I have discussed earlier, the plaintiff’s
action in negligence against the police is based on the allegation that the
improper identification techniques caused the complainant to wrongfully
identify him as the perpetrator which, in turn, led to his wrongful arrest and
prosecution.  As I have stated earlier, I believe there is no question in this
hypothetical example that the identification techniques used by the police fell
below acceptable standards.  By showing the complainant a single photo of a
suspect and by constructing a lineup with stand-ins who bore questionable
resemblance with the suspect, the police investigator clearly did not meet the
standard of the reasonable police officer in like circumstances.  Therefore,
under the usual negligence paradigm, this breach of standard of care could well
result in civil liability, presumably — if one accepts the plaintiff’s argument
on causation — for all the damages that flowed from the initiation of criminal
proceedings and the process that followed.  171                          
The problem that arises, however, is that in focussing on the
investigating officer’s conduct and the civil standard of negligence, we easily
lose sight of both the complainant’s role and the criminal standard for
initiating process.  In this hypothetical example, it could not seriously be
disputed, from a criminal law standpoint, that the complainant’s detailed
description of her assailant as a person matching the suspect’s appearance,
together with her positive identification of the suspect as her assailant,
amply meet the reasonable grounds standard for laying a criminal charge under
s. 504  of the Criminal Code .  Under s. 504, “[a]ny one who, on
reasonable grounds, believes that a person has committed an indictable offence
may lay an information” before a justice and where territorial jurisdiction is
established, “the justice shall receive the information”. Even if the
police chose not to lay a charge, the complainant would be entitled to lay the
information herself.  It is further noteworthy that the complainant’s
identification evidence, potentially flawed as it may be (a matter to be
determined at trial), would not only meet the standard to lay a charge,
but would also meet the standard for committal at the preliminary
hearing under s. 548(1) (a) of the Criminal Code .  172                          
Similarly, it is instructive to consider how the negligence analysis
played out in the courts below in this case.  While all five members of the
panel in the Court of Appeal for Ontario agreed on the standard to be applied,
the court was divided on the application of that standard on the facts before
them.  Of particular relevance to the point I am making is how the criminal
standard for initiating process all but gets lost in the negligence analysis. 
I will explain.  173                          
Much as in my hypothetical example, Mr. Hill’s claim is based on alleged
deficiencies in police identification techniques.  In turn, he submits that these
deficiencies led to his misidentification by witnesses, his wrongful arrest,
and his conviction for the January 23, 1995 robbery.  In particular, he alleges
that the police failed to follow their own internal guidelines with respect to
the presentation of photo lineups to witnesses and that the photo lineup of
eleven Caucasians and one aboriginal person was structurally biased against
him.  In determining whether there was a breach of standard in this case, it
therefore became incumbent upon the court to inquire whether the police, in
using these identification techniques, met the “reasonable police officer in
the same circumstances” standard.  While all justices below proceeded with that
analysis, they were divided on the result.  The trial judge found that there
was no breach of the standard ((2003), 66 O.R. (3d) 746), and this finding was
upheld by three of the five justices in the Court of Appeal. The two dissenting
justices were of the opinion that the identification techniques used by the
police fell below this standard.  174                          
However, despite the Court of Appeal expressly acknowledging that, in an
arrest and prosecution context, the ordinary negligence standard must be linked
to the reasonable and probable grounds standard, none of the judges below
considered the criminal standard for initiating process in their analysis.  In
other words, beyond inquiring into the identification techniques used by the
police, none of the judges asked themselves whether the charges were
nonetheless laid on the basis of reasonable and probable grounds.  The latter
standard, of course, is the one by which the police are governed in the conduct
of their criminal investigation and, it is important to stress,  it is in the
public interest that it be maintained as the operative standard.  As this Court
has observed in  Storrey, at pp. 249-50:  The importance of this requirement [that police have
reasonable grounds in order to affect an arrest] to citizens of a democracy is
self-evident.  Yet society also needs protection from crime.  This need
requires that there be a reasonable balance achieved between the individual’s
right to liberty and the need for society to be protected from crime.  Thus the
police need not establish more than reasonable and probable grounds for an
arrest.  175                          
Therefore, if the civil standard for liability is to be “carefully
tailored” so as to complement and not conflict with governing criminal
standards, the presence of reasonable and probable grounds for laying the
charge must constitute a bar to any civil liability.  It cannot be sufficient
for the plaintiff to show that identification techniques used by the police
were substandard.  Rather, it must be established that the identification
process was so flawed that it destroyed the reasonable and probable
grounds for laying the charge.  It is only when this standard is met that the
plaintiff can be said to have suffered, as McLachlin C.J. puts it “compensable
damage that would not have occurred but for the police’s negligent conduct”
(para. 92).  176                          
MacPherson J.A. alluded to this notion that process would have issued in
any event, not in his discussion on standard of care, but in considering the
question of causation.  He stated as follows (at para. 97):  There is a complete answer, on the facts, to this
submission [that the unfair line-up tainted the entire identification
procedure].  The appellant was originally charged with ten robberies, one of
which took place on January 23, 1995.  Ultimately, he faced a trial in relation
to only this robbery.  The photo line-up that the appellant attacks was not
part of the evidence concerning this robbery.  Rather, the identification
evidence about the January 23 robbery was the sighting by P.C. Stewart and the
positive identification of the appellant by two bank tellers based on a
newspaper photograph on their desks.  It follows that there is no causal link
between the photo line-up and the appellant’s arrest, detention and trial on
the charge relating to the January 23 robbery.  He would have been arrested on
January 27, detained and tried regardless of any negligence in preparing the
photo line-up.  However, because the trial judge addressed the photo line-up
issue, I will also consider it on the merits.  [Emphasis in original.]  177                          
The Chief Justice, it seems, also alludes to the fact that a charge may
have been laid regardless of any substandard conduct when she observes (at
para. 78):  “Nor is it clear that if these incidents [i.e., the alleged
negligent conduct] had not occurred, Hill would not have been charged and
convicted.”  The question of reasonable and probable grounds obviously goes to
causation, in the sense that the claim in negligence is not made out if the
criminal proceedings would have issued regardless of the negligent conduct in
question.  Indeed, the law would be rather incoherent if the investigating
officer could be civilly liable for any harm to the suspect flowing from the
initiation and continuation of criminal proceedings, even when such proceedings
are not merely authorized but are in fact desirable under the standards
set by the criminal law.  In my view, however, it is not sufficient to consider
the governing criminal standard simply on the issue of causation.  To the
contrary, the criminal standard for initiating process must also inform the
standard of care itself.  In other words, even if the impugned lineup
had in fact been used with respect to the January 23, 1995 robbery, it would
not be sufficient for the purposes of the tort action to show that the
identification techniques used by the police fell below the standard of the
reasonable police officer.  Such an approach would ignore the significant
public interest in having criminal process issue on the basis of reasonable
grounds to believe that an offence has been committed.  Again, the
determinative question would therefore have to be whether the identification
process was so flawed as to destroy the reasonable and probable grounds
provided by the witnesses’ positive identification of Mr. Hill as the robber.  178                          
The two dissenting justices not only failed to incorporate the
reasonable and probable grounds standard in their analysis; they adopted a very
expansive view of causation.  Even though the impugned photo lineups did not
even form part of the evidence on the charge in respect of which Mr. Hill was
convicted, the two justices were nonetheless satisfied that a sufficient causal
link could be established between the lineups and the conviction for the following
reasons, at para. 158:  First, as noted by the trial judge in his reasons, on
January 17, 1995, Detective Loft showed this photo line-up to a number of
witnesses to the robberies.  Most identified Mr. Hill as the robber, although
they thought he did not have a goatee.  It is apparent that these witnesses’
misidentification of Mr. Hill as the robber materially contributed to Detective
Loft’s fixation on Mr. Hill as the perpetrator of the plastic bag robberies,
and therefore to his initial arrest of Mr. Hill.  It was because he was
convinced that the witnesses had identified the right person that Detective
Loft neglected to do any reinvestigation of the robberies in the face of the
emerging exculpatory evidence.  The misidentification from the photo line-up contributed
to Detective Loft’s tunnel vision on the issue of Mr. Hill, which resulted in
Mr. Hill’s arrest, detention, wrongful prosecution and the ensuing miscarriage
of justice.  Accordingly, we believe there is a clear causal link between the
photo line-up and Mr. Hill’s wrongful conviction.  179                          
The dissenting justices further relied on the fact that the trial judge
also appeared to find that causation was made out.  Although the trial judge
did not provide any analysis on the question of causation, he expressed the
view that the only element of the tort action which was in issue in this case
was whether the standard of care had been met.  180                          
As evidenced by the above, the private nature of the tort action
necessarily narrows the focus of the criminal investigation to the individual
rights of the parties and, in the process, it is almost inevitable that courts
lose sight of the broader public interests at stake.  In short, tort law simply
does not fit.  In his article, Professor Kaiser aptly notes the following at p.
112:  . . . as
Professor[s] Cohen and Smith have argued [in their article “Entitlement and the
Body Politic: Rethinking Negligence in Public Law” (1986), 64 Can. Bar Rev.
1], private law in general and torts in particular are singularly ill-suited to
deal with issues which fundamentally concern the nature of the state and the
relationship of the individual to the state and the law:  . . . the
legislatures and courts, in developing rules of public conduct and
responsibility premised on private law tort concepts, have failed to consider a
wide range of factors which should be recognized in articulating the
relationship of the private individual and the state. . . . [p.
5]  . . . rights against the state are qualitatively different from rights
against individuals.  [p. 12]  2.5.4   Other Existing Remedies  181                          
By contrast to the proposed action in negligence, the existing torts of
false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution and misfeasance in
public office do not give rise to the policy concerns we have just discussed. 
With respect to each of these torts, where a police officer is acting within
the scope of his or her powers, there can be no tort liability for simple
negligence in the performance of his duty.  The torts of false arrest and false
imprisonment are properly circumscribed in recognition of the limited role of
the police officer in the overall criminal process, and any interposition of
judicial discretion effectively ends any civil liability.  By contrast, how
does the proposed tort action account for the fact that, once a criminal charge
has been laid, the Crown controls the proceedings, not the police? 
(Indeed, in some jurisdictions, the Crown takes control earlier in the process
— all charges are vetted by the Crown before they are laid.)  How is the
intervening verdict of a neutral third party to be considered in the negligence
action?  Is it a novus actus interveniens that breaks the chain of
causation between the act of negligence and the injury?  Does the answer depend
on the strength of the evidence which was not tainted by the negligent conduct
in question?  Since the ultimate issue on the question of duty of care is
whether it is fair and just to impose it, is it fair to saddle the police with
the entire cost when responsibility for wrongful convictions has been
attributed to all players in the justice system, including witnesses,
scientists, Crown attorneys, judges and juries, none of whom is exposed to
liability, with the exception of Crown Attorneys, for the tort of malicious
prosecution?  182                          
The torts of malicious prosecution and misfeasance in public office
concern allegations of misuse and abuse of the criminal process
and of the police officer’s position.  These torts do not invite a
second-guessing of the police officer’s judgment in the investigation of a case
but deal rather with the deliberate and malicious use of the police officer’s
position for ends that are improper and inconsistent with the public duty
entrusted upon him or her.  In short, there is no conflict between the duties
imposed by the existing torts and the police officer’s public duty to
investigate crime and apprehend offenders.  The creation of the new tort of
negligent investigation would effectively subsume all the existing torts and
risk upsetting the necessary balance between the competing interests at play.  2.5.5    Civil Law in Quebec  183                          
Finally, a word must be said about the existing state of the civil law
in Quebec.  MacPherson J.A. found support for his conclusion that there was a
common law duty of care in two decisions of the Quebec Court of Appeal:  Lacombe
v. Andr_, [2003]
R.J.Q. 720, and Jauvin v. Procureur général du Québec, [2004] R.R.A. 37,
stating that he was “impressed by the reasoning and the balanced results”
achieved in those two cases (para. 66).  In both cases, the court recognized a
duty of care on police towards suspects based on the general provision found in
art. 1457 of the Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64.  Article 1457
provides:  Every person has a duty to abide by the rules of conduct which lie
upon him, according to the circumstances, usage or law, so as not to cause injury
to another.  Where he is endowed with reason and fails in this duty, he is
responsible for any injury he causes to another person by such fault and is
liable to reparation for the injury, whether it be bodily, moral or material in
nature.  He is also liable, in certain cases, to reparation
for injury caused to another by the act or fault of another person or by the
act of things in his custody.  184                          
I will briefly review the facts and findings in these two cases.  In Lacombe,
Alain André was charged with sexually assaulting his adopted daughter.  Eight
months later, after the charges were withdrawn prior to the commencement of a
preliminary inquiry, Mr. Andr_
brought a suit against the police, claiming that they did not have reasonable
and probable grounds for his arrest.  At trial, damages in the amount of
$326,100 were awarded and a further appeal was dismissed, the Quebec Court of
Appeal holding that the police did not have reasonable and probable grounds when
they arrested Mr. Andr_.  185                          
In Jauvin, the accused John Jauvin was charged with conspiracy to
commit fraud but, eventually, all the charges against him were dropped.  Mr.
Jauvin brought a suit against the police, claiming that the police inquiry and
investigation had caused him great harm and seeking damages exceeding $4
million.  Jauvin’s suit was dismissed at trial, as was his appeal to the Quebec
Court of Appeal.  However, while the court held that there was no fault on the
part of the respondent Attorney General of Quebec, the court did hold, that
simple negligence on the part of the police could engage art. 1457 of the Civil
Code of Québec, which concerns extra-contractual civil liability.  In
determining the standard of care, the court referred to its decision in Lacombe
and stated that the conduct of a police officer was to be that of the
normally competent, prudent and diligent officer in the same situation.  186                          
Both cases, in my view, provide little assistance in deciding the
present appeal.  There is no question that Lacombe and Jauvin provide
some support for the proposition that police officers owe suspects a duty of
care.  However, three things are worth noting in this regard.  First, in both Jauvin
and Lacombe the duty owed arises primarily out of the codified
provision in art. 1457 of the Civil Code of Québec.  Thus, while
interesting, neither case directly supports the proposition that police should
owe suspects a common law duty of care.  Second, Lacombe turned on
whether the police had reasonable and probable grounds to arrest Mr. Andr_; in the view of the courts, they did
not.  This is by no means a novel legal principle.  Third, no liability was
found in Jauvin and, while the Court of Appeal reiterated its finding in
Lacombe that civil liability in negligence can be imposed, none of the
policy considerations raised in this case were considered or discussed.  3.       Conclusion  187                          
For these reasons, I conclude, as have other courts of common law
jurisdictions, that the common law tort of negligent investigation should not
be recognized in Canada.  The recognition that the civil tort system is not the
appropriate vehicle to provide compensation for the wrongfully convicted should
not be viewed as undermining the importance of achieving that important goal. 
However, how this goal is to be achieved is a complex issue that has been
discussed in the context of a number of inquiries and governmental studies: 
see for example The Inquiry Regarding Thomas Sophonow:  The Investigation,
Prosecution and Consideration of Entitlement to Compensation (2001) (the
Sophonow Inquiry); Royal Commission on the Donald Marshall, Jr.,
Prosecution:  Findings and Recommendations (1989) (the Marshall Inquiry); The
Commission on Proceedings Involving Guy Paul Morin: Report (1998) (the
Morin Inquiry); Commission of Inquiry into the Wrongful Conviction of David
Milgaard (ongoing) (the Milgaard Inquiry); Report of the Commission of
Inquiry into Certain Aspects of the Trial and Conviction of James Driskell
(2007) (the Driskell Inquiry); The Lamer Commission of Inquiry into the
Proceedings Pertaining to: Ronald Dalton, Gregory Parsons and Randy Druken:
Report and Annexes (2006) (the Lamer Inquiry).  It may be that compensation
for the wrongfully convicted is a matter better left for the legislators in the
context of a comprehensive statutory scheme.  It is certainly not a matter that
should be left to the vagaries of the proposed tort action.  188                          
I would allow the Crown’s cross-appeal and dismiss Mr. Hill’s appeal.     Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada:  Attorney
General of Canada, Ottawa.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario: 
Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Aboriginal Legal Services of Toronto
Inc.:  Aboriginal Legal Services of Toronto Inc., Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Association in Defence of the
Wrongly Convicted:  Falconer Charney, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Canadian Association of Chiefs of
Police:  Edmonton Police Service, Legal Advisors’ Section, Edmonton.  Solicitors for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association
(Ontario):  Cooper, Sandler & West, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties
Association:  Blake, Cassels & Graydon, Toronto.  Solicitors for the interveners the Canadian Police Association and the
Police Association of Ontario:  Paliare, Roland, Rosenberg, Rothstein, Toronto.   