Augustus v. Gosset, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 268  Gloria Augustus                                                                                 Appellant  v.  Communauté urbaine de Montréal                                                   Respondent  and  Allan Gosset                                                                                       Respondent  and  Orberth Griffin             Mis en
cause  Indexed as:  Augustus v. Gosset  File No.:  24607.  1996:  June 10; 1996:  October 3.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec   Damages -- Right of parenthood -- Victim mortally
wounded by shot fired by police officer -- Mother claiming damages for
interference with her right of parenthood -- Whether Charter of Human Rights
and Freedoms or Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  protects right to
maintain and continue parent-child relationship.      After reviewing the evidence, the trial judge found
that G was negligent in aiming his weapon with his finger on the trigger while
running and that this negligence was the direct cause of the victim’s death. 
Since the CUM had admitted its liability as G’s employer, the judge ordered G
and the CUM jointly and severally to pay the appellant $10,795 in compensatory
damages:  $9,000 for loss of moral and financial support, and
$1,795 for funeral expenses.  The trial judge dismissed the appellant’s
claim for solatium doloris and refused to compensate her, as her son’s
heir, for his loss of life expectancy and suffering, of which he would not have
been aware.  The judge ordered G to pay the appellant $4,000 in exemplary
damages.  Although he found that G had not intended to kill the victim, the
judge found that the way G handled his weapon when he knew or ought to have
known that he was placing the victim’s security in jeopardy constituted wanton
or reckless misconduct and amounted to “unlawful and intentional interference”
within the meaning of s. 1 and the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter
of Human Rights and Freedoms.  The Court of Appeal, in a majority decision,
allowed the appellant’s appeal in part and increased the compensatory damages
to $16,795, including $15,000 as solatium doloris, but refused both
to recognize interference with her right of parenthood and to award her
compensation as her son’s heir for his loss of life expectancy and the
interference with his right to life and security.  The majority of the court
also allowed G’s appeal and quashed the order that he pay exemplary damages. 
The court pointed out that in aiming his weapon at the victim, G did not intend
to kill him, but to keep him under control at a distance, and held that G’s
actions did not constitute “intentional interference” within the meaning of the
second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter.  Held:  The appeal should be allowed in part.  (1)  Solatium doloris  Solatium doloris is a
compensable head of moral prejudice in Quebec civil law under arts. 1053
and 1056 C.C.L.C.  In civil law, any prejudice, whether moral or
material, even if it is difficult to assess, is compensable if proven.  From
this perspective, compensation for the grief and distress felt when someone
close dies is clearly consistent with the civil law’s full recognition of moral
damages.  Furthermore, it is French law, not English law, that must be applied
in deciding whether to recognize solatium doloris in Quebec civil law. 
French law has always recognized that compensation is available for the moral
prejudice resulting from the death of a close relative or friend, and this is
also the case in Quebec civil law.  In granting an award for solatium doloris, the
Court of Appeal considered all the elements of moral prejudice.  However, it
erred in its assessment of the moral prejudice suffered by the appellant.  The
Court of Appeal based its assessment on the amounts generally awarded by Quebec
courts and the awards provided for in various social statutes.  The Quebec
jurisprudence does not reflect the principle of restitutio in integrum,
as the courts have considered themselves bound by the rule that solatium
doloris is not available as a head of compensable damage.  Furthermore, a
comparison with the indemnities provided for in certain pieces of social
legislation can only be of limited relevance; such statutes generally allow
smaller awards in order to provide compensation to a larger number of persons
who might not receive compensation under the general principles of civil
liability.  By recognizing that compensation for solatium doloris is
available in Quebec civil law yet failing to develop new tests for assessing
prejudice in that form, the Court of Appeal thus deprived the appellant of her
right to be fully compensated for the moral prejudice she suffered as a result
of her son’s death.  Furthermore, due to the need for certainty and
predictability in the law concerning the amounts awarded for this type of
prejudice, appropriate parameters of assessment must be established.  Although
a parent’s grief over the death of a child cannot be compensated adequately,
the assessment of the moral prejudice depends on the assessment of the evidence
presented to the court.  From this perspective, it is appropriate to develop
criteria in order to preserve the objectivity of the process.  Furthermore,
while remaining sensitive to the particular circumstances of each case, such a
process cannot ignore the limits of the principle of restitutio in integrum
in this area in which moderation and predictability must always be fostered. 
In assessing the moral prejudice resulting from the death of a loved one, a
court should consider the following factors, inter alia:  the circumstances
of the death, the ages of the deceased and the parent, the nature and quality
of the relationship between the deceased and the parent, the parent’s
personality and ability to manage the emotional consequences of the death, and
the effect of the death on the parent’s life in light, inter alia, of
the presence of other children or the possibility of having others.  In this
case, taking these factors into account, an award in the order of
$25,000 might be fair and reasonable in the circumstances, although it
remains to the Court of Appeal to fix the quantum, after hearing the parties on
this point.  (2) Right of parenthood   (3) Loss of life or of life expectancy   (4) Exemplary damages   Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Act for compensating the
Families of Persons killed by Accidents (U.K.), 9
& 10 Vict., c. 93 (Lord Campbell’s Act).  Act for compensating the
Families of Persons killed by Accident, and for other purposes therein
mentioned, S. Prov. Can. 1847, 10 & 11 Vict.,
c. 6 [later R.S.C. 1859, c. 78].  Administration of Justice Act
1982 (U.K.), 1982, c. 53, s. 1(1)(a).   Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms, s. 7 .   Civil Code of Lower Canada, arts. 626 [repl. 1915, c. 74, s. 6], 1053, 1054
[am. 1977, c. 72, s. 7], 1056 [am. 1930, c. 98, s. 1; am.
1970, c. 62, s. 11; am. 1980, c. 39, s. 42].  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, arts. 3, 1457.   Family Law Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. F.3.    Authors Cited     Baudouin, Louis.  Le droit
civil de la province de Québec.  Montréal:  Wilson & Lafleur, 1953. Baudouin, Louis. «Le Solatium
doloris» (1955), 2 C. de D. 55.  Caron, Madeleine.  «Le Code civil
québécois, instrument de protection des droits et libertés de la personne?»
(1978), 56 Can. Bar Rev. 197.  Dupichot, Jacques.  Des
préjudices réfléchis nés de l’atteinte à la vie ou à l’intégrité corporelle.
Paris:  L.G.D.J., 1969.   Gardner, Daniel.  L’évaluation
du préjudice corporel.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais,  1994.  Luntz, Harold.  Assessment of
Damages, 3rd ed.  Melbourne:  Butterworths, 1990.  Mayrand, Albert.  «Les chefs
d’indemnité en cas d’accident mortel» (1968), 9 C. de D. 639.  McClurg, Andrew Jay.  «It’s a
Wonderful Life:  The Case for Hedonic Damages in Wrongful Death Cases» (1990),
66 Notre Dame L. Rev. 57.   Poirier, Jean Sébastien. 
«Autopsie d’une disposition disparue; l’article 1056 du Code civil du Bas
Canada et le solatium doloris» (1995), 29 R.J.T. 657.   Viney, Geneviève.  «Responsabilité
civile», J.C.P. 1995, éd. G, I, 3853.     Walker, David M.  Principles
of Scottish Private Law, vol. 2, 4th ed. Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1988.   APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[1995] R.J.Q. 335, 68 Q.A.C. 127, 27 C.C.L.T. (2d) 161, reversing in part a
judgment of the Superior Court, [1990] R.J.Q. 2641.  Appeal allowed in part. James Murphy, Patrice
Deslauriers and Reevin Pearl, for the appellant.   Mario Létourneau and Janine
Kean, for the respondent Gosset.  //L’Heureux-Dubé J.//  The judgment of the Court was delivered by   I.  Facts  2         
At about 5:30 a.m. on November 11, 1987, Anthony Griffin having taken a
taxi refused to pay the fare upon arriving at his destination.  At about
6:30 a.m., the respondent Allan Gosset, a police officer in the employ of
the respondent Communauté urbaine de Montréal (“CUM”), and Constable Kimberley
Campbell were sent to the scene in response to a call from the taxi driver. 
When asked by the respondent Gosset to identify himself, the suspect answered
that his name was Tony Bowers.  After a check with the police station revealed
this to be a lie, the respondent Gosset searched him and found a paper bearing
the name Anthony Griffin.  He learned from a second check that Griffin was
wanted and that a warrant had been issued against him.  The respondent Gosset
consequently arrested Anthony, who was already sitting in the back of the
police car, but neither handcuffed nor searched him further.  3         
At about 7:00 a.m., the police car left the scene for the police
station.  When they arrived, the respondent Gosset, who was seated on the
passenger side, got out of the car and opened the door for Anthony, who upon
getting out, started to run.  The respondent Gosset began chasing him.  At the
same time, he drew his revolver, and ordered Anthony to stop running, shouting
for the first time, “Stop”.  Anthony immediately stopped and turned to face the
respondent Gosset, shifting his weight from foot to foot; he did not stand
perfectly still.  The respondent shouted “Stop” a second time and then, aiming
his revolver at Anthony, shouted “Stop or I’ll shoot”.  At that instant, a
gunshot hit Anthony in the head.  The victim was taken to the Jewish General
Hospital, where he never regained consciousness, and died at 11:45 a.m.
the same day.  Criminal proceedings were instituted, and, after this Court had
ruled on an appeal therefrom (R. v. Gosset, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 76),  the
respondent Gosset was acquitted in the end.  4         
Anthony’s mother, the appellant Gloria Augustus, brought a civil
liability action against the respondents Gosset and CUM, claiming $858,591 in
compensatory and exemplary damages for her son’s death.  Anthony’s father, the mis
en cause Orberth Griffin, intervened in the action and himself claimed
$760,000 from the respondents.  5         
During the trial, the appellant filed a motion to amend her declaration,
inter alia to permit her to claim damages for interference with her
“right of parenthood” under the Charter.  That application was dismissed
by interlocutory judgment dated May 22, 1990.  6         
On July 20, 1990, the Superior Court of Quebec allowed the
appellant’s action in part: [1990] R.J.Q. 2641.  The respondents Gosset
and CUM were ordered jointly and severally to pay $10,795 and $3,795 in
compensatory damages to the appellant and the mis en cause,
respectively.  As for exemplary damages, only the respondent Gosset was ordered
to pay $4,000 to each of the victim’s parents.  7         
All the parties except the CUM appealed that decision.  On
January 13, 1995, the Quebec Court of Appeal rendered three judgments:  it
dismissed the appeal of the victim’s father, while the majority allowed the
appellant’s appeal in part and allowed the appeal of the respondent Gosset (the
reasons of the majority with respect to the latter two appeals were written in
English and French, respectively): [1995] R.J.Q. 335, 68 Q.A.C. 127, 27
C.C.L.T. (2d) 161.  The majority ordered the respondents Gosset and CUM to pay
the appellant $16,795 in compensatory damages, including $15,000 under the
head of solatium doloris, but refused both to recognize interference
with her “right of parenthood” and to award her compensation as her son’s heir
for his loss of life expectancy and interference with his right to life and
security.  The majority of the court also refused to order the respondent
Gosset to pay any amount whatsoever in exemplary damages and reversed the
Superior Court’s decision on this point.  The appellant is appealing that
judgment; the victim’s father did not appeal it to this Court.  II.  Relevant Statutory Provisions  8         
The possibility of claiming compensatory damages in Quebec for solatium
doloris is based on arts. 1053 and 1056 C.C.L.C.  Those
provisions, which have now been replaced by the single art. 1457 of the Civil
Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, read as follows:  1053.  Every person capable of discerning
right from wrong is responsible for the damage caused by his fault to another,
whether by positive act, imprudence, neglect or want of skill.   9         
The recognition of parental rights is said to be based, inter alia,
on s. 39 of the Charter, which reads as follows:  39.  Every child has a right to the protection, security and
attention that his parents or the persons acting in their stead are capable of
providing.  10     
Finally, questions relating to compensation for loss of life or of life
expectancy and the awarding of exemplary damages relate to ss. 1  and 49 of
the Charter, which read as follows:  1.  Every human being has a right to life, and to
personal security, inviolability and freedom.  He also possesses juridical personality.  49.  Any unlawful interference with any right or
freedom recognized by this Charter entitles the victim to obtain the cessation
of such interference and compensation for the moral or material prejudice
resulting therefrom.  In case of unlawful and intentional interference,
the tribunal may, in addition, condemn the person guilty of it to exemplary
damages.  III.  Judgments  Superior Court  11     
After reviewing the evidence, and in particular the testimony of
Constable Kimberley Campbell concerning the events immediately before the shot
was fired, Guthrie J. found that the respondent Gosset was negligent in
aiming his weapon with his finger on the trigger while running and that this
negligence was the direct cause of the victim’s death.  In his view, such a use
of force was neither necessary nor justified in the circumstances.  The judge
concluded, however, that the evidence did not support the allegations of racial
discrimination.  Since the CUM had admitted that, as the respondent Gosset’s
employer, it was liable for his negligence, the judge, therefore, held them
jointly and severally liable for compensatory damages under arts. 1053 and
1054 C.C.L.C.  12     
On the issue of the quantum of compensatory damages, the trial judge
dismissed the appellant’s claim for solatium doloris under
arts. 1053 and 1056 C.C.L.C.  In his view, this head of damage is
not compensable in Quebec.  He also refused to compensate the appellant, as her
son’s heir, for his loss of life expectancy and suffering, as it appeared from
the evidence that he would not have been aware of this suffering.  However, the
trial judge held that the appellant should receive $9,000 for loss of moral and
financial support.  On this point, he noted that Anthony, who was 19 and the
appellant’s only child, was no longer living with her.  Furthermore, in light
of the victim’s problems with the law and the fact that he had neither a diploma
nor known employment at the time, the judge considered it unlikely that he
would have provided financial support.  As for the victim’s father, since after
leaving the appellant he had not been in contact with his son from 1972 to
1985, until Anthony himself took the initiative to visit him on two occasions,
the judge awarded him $2,000.  Finally, each of the victim’s parents was
awarded $1,795 for funeral expenses.  13     
Although the trial judge found that the respondent Gosset had not
intended to kill Anthony, the claim for exemplary damages against him was
granted.  According to the judge, while gross negligence is not sufficient to
justify awarding exemplary damages, wanton or reckless misconduct, such as that
of the respondent Gosset in the case at bar, should be.  Thus, the way the
respondent Gosset handled his weapon when he knew or ought to have known that
he was placing the victim’s security in jeopardy amounted to “unlawful and
intentional interference” within the meaning of s. 1 and the second paragraph
of s. 49 of the Charter.  He added that the right to claim
exemplary damages was, by its very nature, transmissible to Anthony’s parents
as his heirs and that this right arose the instant the respondent Gosset aimed
his weapon at the victim.  However, the judge refrained from awarding damages
under this head against the respondent CUM on the ground that an employer
cannot be required to pay exemplary damages unless it expressly or implicitly
authorized or ratified the employee’s reprehensible act.  In this case, the
respondent CUM did not authorize the force used by the respondent Gosset and,
since it immediately suspended him from his duties and subsequently dismissed
him, neither did it ratify his actions.  14     
Concerning the quantum of exemplary damages, the trial judge considered
that this must be calculated on the basis of the following criteria:  the
preventive and deterrent role such damages play, the conduct of the person
guilty of interference, the seriousness of the prejudice suffered by the
victim, the financial resources of the person guilty of interference, the
amount of compensatory damages awarded, the duration of the reprehensible
conduct, any punishment already meted out to the person guilty of interference,
the amount of any profit or benefit derived by the person guilty of
interference from his or her reprehensible behaviour, and any provocation on
the part of the victim.  He accordingly set the quantum of the exemplary
damages at $8,000, which was to be divided equally between the victim’s parents
in accordance with art. 626 C.C.L.C.  Court of Appeal (Vallerand, Fish (dissenting in part) and
Deschamps JJ.A.), [1995] R.J.Q. 335  15     
The court began by disposing of the appeal from the interlocutory
judgment dismissing the appellant’s motion to amend her declaration in order, inter
alia, to insert a claim for interference with her parental rights under the
Charter.  After explaining that leave is not required to appeal such a
judgment on an appeal from the final judgment, the court agreed with the trial
judge that parental rights are protected by neither the Quebec Charter
nor the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and held that the
interlocutory judgment was accordingly well founded.  16     
Since the civil liability of the respondents Gosset and CUM was not
contested, the Court of Appeal limited its discussion to the issue of the
prejudice and its quantum.  17     
On the issue of the amount of compensatory damages, the majority of the
court refused to grant the appellant’s claim, as her son’s heir, for his loss
of life expectancy under art. 1053 C.C.L.C.  According to the
court, the law as it now stands in Quebec establishes a right to compensation
only if the prejudice is proven and, on the basis of the functional approach it
considered this Court to have adopted, the victim is capable of appreciating
that compensation.  In the case at bar, the victim lost consciousness almost
immediately after being shot and died a few hours later.  As a result, the
right to recover damages under this head did not become part of his patrimony
and could not be transmitted to his heirs.     21     
On the issue of exemplary damages, the majority of the court held that
the respondent Gosset’s actions did not constitute “intentional interference”
within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter. 
In their view, the element of intent does not encompass reckless or negligent
interference, no matter how serious, but implies that the person guilty of
interference intended the consequences of his or her actions.  Thus, in the
majority’s view, the trial judge erred in law in holding that the state of mind
of a person who ought reasonably to have foreseen the consequences of his or
her actions is equivalent to that of a person who actually does foresee the
consequences of his or her actions and embarks upon them wilfully.  In the
circumstances, since in aiming his weapon at Anthony the respondent Gosset did
not intend to kill him, but to keep him under control at a distance and to
ensure that he not resist arrest, the majority held that there was no
“intentional interference” within the meaning of the second paragraph of
s. 49 of the Charter, reversing the trial judge’s decision on this
point.  The court further held, for essentially the same reasons as the trial
judge, that the respondent CUM could not be ordered to pay exemplary damages
because it had neither expressly nor implicitly authorized or ratified its
employee’s reprehensible act.  22     
Fish J.A. agreed with the trial judge that the respondent Gosset
knowingly and deliberately used his firearm without justification and,
accordingly, interfered unlawfully and intentionally with the victim’s right to
security, as opposed to his right to life.  It was therefore proper in his view
to order the respondent Gosset to pay exemplary damages.  Stressing that trial
judges must be accorded sufficient freedom in exercising their discretion when
assessing the quantum of such damages, Fish J.A. felt that the trial
judge’s decision to award $8,000, to be divided equally between the victim’s
parents, involved no error that would justify the intervention of the Court.  IV.  Issues  23     
This Court granted leave to appeal the Court of Appeal’s decision solely
on the following three issues:  1.                Did the majority of the Court of
Appeal err in law in refusing to find that the appellant is personally entitled
to claim compensatory damages for her son’s death under the head of solatium
doloris pursuant to arts. 1053 and 1056 C.C.L.C. or for
interference with her parental rights pursuant to ss. 1 , 39 and 49 of the Charter?  2.                Did the majority of the Court of
Appeal depreciate the right to life by refusing to recognize the appellant’s
right as her son’s heir to obtain compensatory damages for his loss of life or
of life expectancy under ss. 1  and 49 of the Charter? 3.                Did the majority of the Court of
Appeal err in law in determining what constitutes “intentional interference”
within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter,
and was the result of this error to deny the appellant the right to exemplary
damages?  I shall deal
with each of these questions in the above order.  V.  Analysis  A.  Solatium Doloris  24     
I note that the trial judge refused to award the appellant moral damages
for solatium doloris but that he nevertheless awarded her $9,000 for
loss of moral and financial support.  The Court of Appeal, unanimous on this
point, held that solatium doloris is a type of moral prejudice that is
compensable in Quebec civil law, also finding that, in the circumstances, the
appellant should receive a larger award of $15,000, according to the majority,
and $50,000, according to Fish J.A.  25     
The appellant pointed out that the question in respect of which leave to
appeal was granted is framed incorrectly.  She conceded to this Court that the
Court of Appeal correctly recognized solatium doloris as a head of
prejudice that is compensable in Quebec civil law.  She now submits instead
that the Court of Appeal erred in law in refusing to recognize her right to
full compensation for the moral prejudice she actually suffered.  More
specifically, the appellant criticized the Court of Appeal for holding that solatium
doloris is the only head of moral prejudice that can result from a person’s
death and, in the alternative, for awarding the minimum compensation under that
head.  26     
Before disposing of these arguments, it would be interesting, even
though the principle is no longer at issue in this appeal, to consider the
origins of solatium doloris as a recoverable head of damage in Quebec
civil law.    From this perspective, compensation for the grief and distress felt
when someone close to us dies — the prejudice commonly referred to as solatium
doloris or injury to feelings — is clearly consistent with the civil law’s
full recognition of moral damages.  28     
The situation at common law was entirely different at that time.  In
1846, the English Parliament enacted a statute known as Lord Campbell’s Act
(U.K.), 9 & 10 Vict., c. 93, which listed those persons to whom an
action was available as the result of a person’s death.  A similar statute,
which applied uniformly throughout Upper and Lower Canada, was passed by the
Canadian Parliament the following year:  Act for compensating the Families
of Persons killed by Accident, and for other purposes therein mentioned, S.
Prov. Can. 1847, 10 & 11 Vict., c. 6 (later R.S.C. 1859, c. 78). 
It was after this that art. 1056 C.C.L.C. was adopted in Quebec in
the 1866 codification.  For the sake of convenience, I will repeat the text
here:          36     
In so doing, the appellant argued, the Court of Appeal itself committed
an error of  law — which this Court must correct — in holding that solatium
doloris was the only compensable head of moral prejudice and in awarding
her an insufficient amount under that head.  37     
Contrary to the appellant’s submission, it seems clear to me that the
Court of Appeal considered all the elements of moral prejudice in granting the
appellant a higher award for solatium doloris.  According to the
majority, the solatium doloris concept includes all extrapatrimonial
damage, both immediate grief and the loss of future moral
support, resulting from the death of a loved one.  Deschamps J.A. stated
the following (at p. 368):  Even though the suffering and the tears of a mother can theorically [sic]
be distinguished from the loss of her child’s smile or companionship, all of
these injured feelings can be broadly included in the solatium doloris
notion. [Emphasis added.] Fish J.A.
instead appears to have considered solatium doloris to represent only
one aspect of moral prejudice.  On this basis, he wrote the following about the
$50,000 he would have awarded the appellant as compensation for material and
moral damage (at p. 349):  It would provide more than a nominal indemnity for the other elements
of appellant’s affective prejudice, including solatium doloris in the
strict sense of pain, grief and sorrow.  38     
It would be possible to hold a lengthy discussion on the exact meaning
of the Latin expression solatium doloris (a literal translation of which
is “solace for grief”) in contemporary legal language.  Whatever meaning it is
given, however, what matters most is that the moral prejudice actually suffered
by the appellant be compensated in full.  Since the definition of solatium
doloris adopted by the majority of the Court of Appeal does not in itself
make this impossible, the appellant’s first argument must be dismissed.  39     
In my view, the Court of Appeal’s error lies not in its definition of solatium
doloris but in its assessment of the moral prejudice suffered by the
appellant.  I disagree with the court, which was unanimous on this point, that
the trial judge in reality granted the appellant an award for moral damage that
was, for all practical purposes, equivalent to an award for solatium doloris. 
Whatever his conception of solatium doloris may have been, the trial
judge, in expressly dismissing this head of damage, essentially held that the
appellant was not entitled to full compensation for her entire loss.  Similarly,
although it recognized solatium doloris, the majority of the Court of
Appeal, in referring to the amounts generally awarded by Quebec courts in
respect of solatium doloris and the awards provided for in various
social statutes, did not have full compensation in mind when considering the
appellant’s claim under that head.   41     
Thus, the existing jurisprudence cannot guide the courts where the
assessment of prejudice in the form of solatium doloris is concerned,
for it is based on a serious error in principle.  Furthermore, for the same
reason, a comparison with the indemnities provided for in certain pieces of
social legislation can only be of limited relevance; such statutes generally
allow smaller awards in order to provide compensation to a larger number of
persons who might not receive compensation under the general principles of
civil liability.   In my view, the claim of $100,000 is exaggerated
and totally unrealistic.  It is out of proportion with any of the amounts
generally granted by Quebec Courts.  As any moral damages, an exact calculation
is impossible.  That is not to say that the Court should depart from guided
evaluation.  Guidelines must be found in contemporary legislation and
jurisprudence. [Emphasis added.]  43     
By recognizing that compensation for solatium doloris is
available in Quebec civil law yet failing to develop new tests for assessing
prejudice in that form, the majority of the Court of Appeal deprived the
appellant of her right to be fully compensated for the moral prejudice she
suffered as a result of her son’s death.  Furthermore, due to the need for
certainty and predictability in the law concerning the amounts awarded for this
type of prejudice, appropriate parameters of assessment must be established. 
As a result, even though this Court refused the appellant leave to appeal the
amount of her award of moral damages specifically, the issue concerning solatium
doloris is sufficiently broad for this Court to give its views on this
aspect of the case, while still leaving it to the Court of Appeal to assess the
quantum thereof in light of the evidence in the record and the principles we
articulate.     47     
It is not hard to understand that the death of one’s own child is in all
respects an extremely distressing, indeed even traumatizing, event.  The
suffering that accompanies this unnatural event has no equivalent in intensity
aside from the immeasurable joy that can result from the birth of a child. 
Such suffering is so acute that it seems impossible even to assess it in
monetary terms.     I emphasize the importance that the award be
reasonably predictable so that the parent who might find it objectionable and
demeaning to publicly articulate his grief will not be less compensated than
the one who more easily exteriorizes his emotions.  [Emphasis added.]  Rice J.A.
focused more on the extent of the evidence presented in each case (at
p. 344):  In this province, grief was added by the
Legislature as an award to be assessed.  In such an evaluation, mental anguish
with its related pang and pain predominates.  In my view, in order to assess
grief it is incumbent on the trial judge to hear evidence from the person who
suffered the grief.  All parents will sustain grief on the death of their
children, but as pointed out by Dr. Fleming, the degree of the pain will vary
with the relationships and personalities of the parents and other factors such
as stresses, support of friends and family, religious and cultural background. 
A case by case approach is inevitable in my judgment.  Such an assessment
invites the description of the pain, mental anguish or other sequelae, which by
necessity will require some probing into a survivor’s feelings and the impact
the death has had on his or her life.  While it is desirable that conventional awards be
reached so that there could be predictability in assessing damages for grief,
courts should not be hindered or restricted in both their prerogative and duty
assigned to them by the Legislature in evaluating grief.  It seems to me that
if the Legislature had intended such a conventional assessment, it would have
done so itself by setting a predetermined amount for grief as was done in the
Province of Alberta.  [Emphasis added.]  50     
These two passages place particular emphasis on the seemingly
contradictory objectives of the difficult role of the courts in assessing the
moral prejudice resulting from the death of a loved one:  on the one hand, full
compensation for the grief unique to an individual, and on the other hand, the
assessment of each case from a broader perspective, so as to ensure, inter
alia, an appropriate relationship between the moral damages awarded in
different contexts.  Since this exercise is subject to the particular
circumstances of each case, the courts should consider the following factors, inter
alia:  the circumstances of the death, the ages of the deceased and the
parent, the nature and quality of the relationship between the deceased and the
parent, the parent’s personality and ability to manage the emotional
consequences of the death, and the effect of the death on the parent’s life in
light, inter alia, of the presence of other children or the possibility
of having others.  Since monetary compensation of any nature will not mitigate
the parent’s grief, the figure will necessarily be arbitrary to a great extent.  51     
In the case at bar, there is extensive evidence of the grief caused to
the appellant by the death of her only surviving child, exacerbated by the
facts that, in 1983, she experienced the death of a little girl who had been
born very sick and, that, at her age, she cannot hope to have other children
owing.  Despite her son’s trouble with the law and the fact that he had neither
a diploma nor known employment, the trial judge considered that the appellant
had nevertheless done everything she could to support and educate him when he
was living with her.  In addition, owing to the unforeseeable circumstances of
Anthony’s death, the appellant was unprepared for her ensuing grief.  I would
also add that the extensive publicity given to the unfortunate facts at the
root of this case certainly did not make it easier for the appellant to resume
a normal life.  Although I recognize that it is impossible out of context
to appraise the feelings resulting from the irreparable circumstance of the
death of one’s own child, it is my view that an award in the order of
$25,000 might be fair and reasonable in the circumstances of this case;
that being said, it remains to the Court of Appeal to fix the quantum, after
hearing the parties on this point.  52     
In addition to claiming compensatory damages for her son’s death under
arts. 1053 and 1056 C.C.L.C., the appellant argued that she is entitled
to compensation for interference with her parental rights under the Charter. 
She submitted that her right to continue her association with her son as a
parent was taken from her as a result of the respondent Gosset’s wrongful
acts.  At trial, this submission was the subject of a motion to amend, which
was dismissed in an interlocutory judgment dated May 22, 1990.  The Court
of Appeal unanimously affirmed that decision, holding that parental rights are
protected neither by the Quebec Charter nor by the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms .  Speaking for the Court on this point, Deschamps J.A.
wrote the following (at p. 357):  On the contrary, if parental status entails
responsabilities [sic], it is the source of few rightso [sic]. 
Indeed, the Charter enshrines the right of a child to the protection,
security and safety that his parent is capable of providing.  These are rights
of the child not of the parent.  I am therefore of the opinion that no claim for
deprivation of a right of parenthood may be presented under either of the
Charters because it is not a protected right.  [Footnotes omitted; emphasis
added.]   54     
The second issue in this appeal concerns the appellant’s claim as her
son’s heir in respect of his loss of life or of life expectancy and, more
specifically, the meaning that must be given to the right to life protected by
s. 1  of the Charter .  B.  Loss of Life or of Life Expectancy  55     
I should begin by explaining that this argument by the appellant does
not concern any pain her son may have suffered before dying.  Since the victim
lost consciousness immediately after being shot, no evidence was adduced in
this respect and, accordingly, the trial judge found that the very existence of
the prejudice had not been established.   [translation] 
The general rule is that the patrimony of the deceased, that is, all the rights
and obligations of the de cujus on which a money value can be placed,
vests in the heirs.  The whole of that property constitutes a legal
universality.  The only property included in the patrimony is that with
economic value; such property is patrimonial property and is clearly
transmissible to the heirs.  In addition, there are extrapatrimonial rights
that are of monetary value only to the holder thereof and are accordingly not
transmissible.  They are extinguished at death and are not included in the body
or mass of the succession that opens.  It is correct to say that property in
respect of which the holder had no claim while living is not included in the
succession, and the logical result is that the heir cannot be seised of it.                                                                     .
. .   The result would therefore, as stated by Galipeault C.J., be a claim
the heirs wish to make for Beverley Driver’s loss of life.  I am clearly of the
opinion that the victim never held this right, which was not transmissible. 
She could certainly not sue for the loss of her own life.  [Emphasis
added.]   [translation] 
In my view, there is still no claim for loss of life aside from that granted
by art. 1056 C.C. to those mentioned therein, and the terms of
art. 1053 of the said Code cannot be extended or expanded to give the
deceased a claim for the loss of his or her life that is transmitted to his or
her heirs.  It is quite clear that if the child Beverley had
lived a certain time after the accident and had not obtained compensation or
satisfaction while alive, her heirs could have made a claim against the person
who committed the delict for suffering, loss of earnings and deprivation of the
pleasures or amenities of life until her death, but that claim would result not
from the victim’s death but from an asset that would have become part of the
property of the succession or the patrimony of the deceased before her death. 
[Emphasis added.]  57     
The appellant argued before this Court that these decisions became
limited to their historical interest upon the enactment of the Charter,
ss. 1 and 49 of which now confer on the heirs of a person who dies through
the fault of another the right to obtain compensatory damages for loss of life
or of life expectancy.   It is understood that the moral and material damages awarded by a court
following a Charter violation are strictly compensatory in nature.  The
wording of the provision leaves no doubt in this regard, since it entitles the
victim of an unlawful interference with a protected right to obtain
"compensation for the moral or material prejudice resulting
therefrom".  Compensation so awarded will thus comply with the fundamental
principle of restitutio in integrum.  This means that for a given fact
situation, the Charter cannot authorize double compensation or be a
basis for awarding damages separate from those that could have been obtained
under the general law.  The violation of a guaranteed right does not change
the general principles of compensation or in itself create independent
prejudice.  The Charter does not create a parallel compensation system. 
[Emphasis added.]                                                                       .
. .  Moreover, not only does the nature of this human
rights and freedoms legislation call for a large and liberal interpretation,
but s. 53 of the Charter also provides that “(i)f any doubt arises
in the interpretation of a provision of the Act, it shall be resolved in
keeping with the intent of the Charter”.  This provision has been relied upon
to ensure that statutes are interpreted in a manner consistent with the rights
guaranteed in the Charter. . . . [Emphasis added.]   61     
The Charter did not create the right to life, which has always
been valued and recognized in Quebec civil law.  As Vallerand J.A. stated
(at p. 341):  [translation] 
The Charter clearly created new rights, and new remedies to assert them. 
But it is obvious to me that it did not create the right to life.  Nor did
it create the action for damages of the victim of a delict.  It is my view that
both the right to life of s. 1  of the Charter  and the action for
compensation of s. 49 existed before the advent of the Charter and that
the instructions of the Supreme Court of Canada, which are binding upon us
here, are applicable thereto.  [Emphasis added.]  The validity
of this statement can no longer be in doubt today in light of art. 3 C.C.Q.,
which reads as follows:  3.  Every person is the holder of
personality rights, such as the right to life, the right to the inviolability
and integrity of his person, and the right to the respect of his name,
reputation and privacy.  These rights are inalienable.   63     
The fact that a person’s death does not add to the patrimony transmitted
to his or her heirs, whoever they are and whatever their relationship with the
victim, does not imply that the victim’s right to life has no value.  On the
contrary, it is precisely because of the respect due to the right to life that
compensation is available only to those persons to whom the right was in fact
of value.  On this point, there can no longer be any question that the distress
felt by those close to a person who loses his or her life through the fault of
another is fully compensable under the head of solatium doloris. 
Underlying the recognition of such a head of damage is nothing other than a
recognition of the very value of the right to life.   65     
How can a value be placed on the prejudice a person suffers by dying? 
Should the victim’s personal characteristics, such as his or her intellectual
and physical capacity, be taken into consideration?  Where a person is
suffering, for example, from an incurable illness that has a substantial effect
on his or her quality of life, what would be the impact of the person’s
perception of his or her own life?  I stop this exercise here, for the
ramifications are preposterous; they are clearly inconsistent with the idea
that every individual’s right to life is of equal value regardless of his or
her condition and potential.    68     
In that case, this Court affirmed the trial judge’s finding that the
patients of a hospital for the mentally disabled had the necessary capacity to
suffer the moral prejudice of discomfort, which they did in fact suffer as a
result of illegal strikes by the hospital’s staff.  Although that type of
prejudice is clearly compensable if suffered by persons without disabilities,
the issue in Syndicat was whether the patients should, owing to their
mental disability, be denied their right to compensation in light of their
inability to appreciate and enjoy such compensation.  Stressing the
compensatory function of civil liability, the Court concluded as follows (at
para. 71):  [I]n the civil law . . . the
reason that damages may be recovered is not because the victim may benefit from
them, but rather because of the very fact that there is a moral prejudice.  The
victim’s
condition or capacity to perceive are, therefore, irrelevant in relation to the
right to compensation for the moral prejudice.   [translation] 
Finally, it is therefore the movement in favour of the “patrimonialization” of
the compensation of moral damage that seems to provide the strongest support
for the transmissibility argument.  However, the whole question is in fact
how far this trend should go and whether it should not be qualified to avoid
excessive “commercialization” of feelings and moral values.  Thus, none of the arguments made by those in favour
of transmissibility seem conclusive.  On the other hand, the opposing argument
is supported by very strong considerations.  First of all, it cannot be denied that compensation
for moral prejudice has a specific function of either giving the victim
satisfaction intended to remedy the pain caused by his or her suffering or
imposing a sort of civil sanction on the person who caused the suffering that
meets a need, if not for revenge, at least for public affirmation that the
person who suffers has a right against the person who caused that suffering. 
It is quite clear that, if it is actually to fulfil this function, the
compensation must be claimed and obtained by the victim him or herself.  If it
is claimed by the victim’s heirs, it provides no relief for the suffering and
gives no moral satisfaction to the sufferer.  Its only effect is to enable
the successors to make money off a suffering they did not endure and for which
their predecessor in title may not personally have wished to claim relief,
which seems especially disagreeable, and maybe even downright immoral.
[Footnotes omitted; emphasis added.]   71     
It is indisputable that the respondent Gosset’s wrongful conduct
resulted in unlawful interference with Anthony’s right to life.  However, the Charter
is no more capable than the general law of protecting the right to life once a
person has died.  Thus, for the judicial policy considerations set out earlier,
no compensation can be awarded in respect of the appellant’s claim for
interference with her son’s right to life under either art. 1053 C.C.L.C.
or ss. 1  and 49 of the Charter.  The fact that the appellant
stressed the shortening of the life of her son, who survived for four hours
after being injured, rather than the loss of his life, is in my view not
relevant here.  These two heads of damage are indissociable where the victim
dies instantaneously owing to the wrongful act or survives without regaining
consciousness before dying.  72     
Furthermore, contrary to the appellant’s submission, her son’s right to
security was not interfered with independently of his right to life when the respondent
Gosset trained his weapon upon him, according to his testimony, in the aim of
keeping him under control at a distance for the purpose of arrest.  Without
deciding whether these are distinct rights, to accept the opposite argument in
the circumstances would amount to holding that this practice universally
accepted by the police is necessarily, as the appellant contends, an unlawful
interference with the suspect’s right to personal security on the basis of
which compensatory and exemplary damages can be claimed under s. 49 of the
Charter.  This is surely not the Charter’s objective.  73     
Having said this, it is clear that the Charter has reiterated the
protection of the right to life, to which every person is inherently entitled,
as recognized by the general law of civil liability.  As Deschamps J.A.
pointed out at p. 364, the exemplary damages remedy provided for in the
second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter is a tool for protecting
the right to life that should not be underestimated:    Despite [its dual objective
of punishment and deterrence], an action for exemplary damages based on the
second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter
cannot be dissociated from the principles of civil liability.  Such an action
can only be incidental to a principal action seeking compensation for moral or
material prejudice.  The second paragraph of s. 49 clearly states that in case of unlawful and
intentional interference with a protected right, "the tribunal may, in
addition, condemn the person guilty of it to exemplary damages"
[emphasis in original].  This wording clearly shows that, even if it were
admitted that an award of exemplary damages is not dependent upon a prior award
of compensatory damages, the court must at least have found that there was an
unlawful interference with a guaranteed right.  Some wrongful conduct that
gives rise to civil liability will therefore be identified and further
consideration given to the intention of the person responsible.  It is the
combination of unlawfulness and intentionality that underlies the decision to
award exemplary damages.  The necessary connection with the wrongful conduct
that gives rise to civil liability leads one to associate the remedy of
exemplary damages with the principles of civil liability.  [Emphasis added.]  75     
This discussion leads us to the final question to be discussed, namely
the element of intent to which an award of exemplary damages under the second
paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter is subject.  C.  Unlawful and Intentional Interference  76     
As I have already mentioned, the facts of this case show beyond the
shadow of a doubt that Anthony’s right to life was infringed as a result of the
respondent Gosset’s wrongful conduct.  Unlawful interference with a right
protected by the Charter having been established, it must now be
determined whether that interference can be characterized as “intentional”
within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter. 
This must be so for exemplary damages to be awarded.   [T]here will be unlawful
and intentional interference within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter
when the person who commits the unlawful interference has a state of mind that
implies a desire or intent to cause the consequences of his or her wrongful
conduct, or when that person acts with full knowledge of the immediate and
natural or at least extremely probable consequences that his or her conduct
will cause.      Having
regard to the foregoing, I do not believe that section 49 paragraph 2 of the
Charter leaves any room for the introduction of the concept of recklessness which
the trial judge seems to have applied. [Emphasis added.]  Thus, since the trial judge recognized that the respondent Gosset
used his weapon with the intent not to kill Anthony but to keep him under
control at a distance to ensure his consent to arrest, the majority concluded
that there was no “unlawful and intentional interference” within the meaning of
the second paragraph of s. 49 of the Charter.  79     
The trial judge erred in law in holding that the merely negligent
conduct of the respondent Gosset was sufficient to constitute “unlawful and
intentional interference” within the meaning of the second paragraph of
s. 49 of the Charter.   81     
The unlawful interference with Anthony’s right to life was accordingly
not “intentional” within the meaning of the second paragraph of s. 49 of
the Charter.  This means that the majority of the Court of Appeal was
right to reverse the trial judgment on this point and to refuse to award
exemplary damages to the appellant.  VI.  Conclusion  82     
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal in part solely to refer the
matter back to the Quebec Court of Appeal so that it may determine the quantum
of compensatory damages for solatium doloris after hearing the parties
on this point and in accordance with the criteria established in this judgment,
the whole with costs throughout.  Appeal allowed in part with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Pearl & Associés, Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondent the Communauté urbaine de Montréal: 
Leduc, Bélanger, Boisvert, Laurendeau, Rivard, Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondent Gosset:  Alarie, Legault, Beauchemin,
Paquin, Jobin & Brisson, Montréal.    