Bazley v.  Curry, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 534  The Children’s Foundation, the Superintendent of Family and Child Services in the Province of British Columbia and Her Majesty The Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia as represented by the Ministry of Social Services and Housing                                                             Appellants  v.  Patrick Allan Bazley                                                                          Respondent  and  Her Majesty The Queen in Right of Alberta as represented by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Alberta, the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops, the United Church of Canada, the General Synod of the Anglican Church of Canada, Wunnumin Lake First Nation, William Richard Blackwater et al., and Barrie Caldwell, Samuel McNab and Glen Pelletier                                                                Interveners  Indexed as:  Bazley v. Curry  File No.:  26013.  1998:  October 6; 1999:  June 17.   on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia    Held:  The appeal should be dismissed and the matter remitted to trial.  Pursuant to the Salmond test, employers are
vicariously liable for both employee acts authorized by the employer and
unauthorized acts so connected with authorized acts that they may be regarded
as modes (albeit improper modes) of doing authorized acts.  In determining
whether an employer is vicariously liable for an employee’s unauthorized,
intentional wrong in cases where precedent is inconclusive, courts should be
guided by the following principles.  First, they should openly confront the
question of whether liability should lie against the employer, rather than
obscuring the decision beneath semantic discussions of “scope of employment”
and “mode of conduct”.  Second, the fundamental question is whether the
wrongful act is sufficiently related to conduct authorized by the employer to
justify the imposition of vicarious liability.  Vicarious liability is
generally appropriate where there is a significant connection between the
creation or enhancement of a risk and the wrong that accrues therefrom, even if
unrelated to the employer’s desires.  Where this is so, vicarious liability
will serve the policy considerations of the provision of an adequate and just
remedy and of deterrence.  Incidental connections to the employment enterprise,
like time and place (without more), will not suffice.  Once engaged in a
particular business, it is fair that an employer be made to pay the generally
foreseeable costs of that business.  In contrast, to impose liability for costs
unrelated to the risk would effectively make the employer an involuntary
insurer.  Third, in determining the sufficiency of the connection between the
employer’s creation or enhancement of the risk and the wrong complained of,
subsidiary factors may be considered.  These may vary with the nature of the
case.  When related to intentional torts, the relevant factors may include, but
are not limited to, the following:  (a) the opportunity that the enterprise
afforded the employee to abuse his or her power; (b) the extent to which the
wrongful act may have furthered the employer’s aims (and hence be more likely
to have been committed by the employee); (c) the extent to which the wrongful
act was related to friction, confrontation or intimacy inherent in the
employer’s enterprise; (d) the extent of power conferred on the employee in
relation to the victim; and (e) the vulnerability of potential victims to the
wrongful exercise of the employee’s power. Applying these general considerations to sexual abuse
by employees, the test for vicarious liability for an employee’s sexual abuse
of a client should focus on whether the employer’s enterprise and empowerment
of the employee materially increased the risk of the sexual assault and hence
the harm.  The test must not be applied mechanically, but with a sensitive view
to the policy considerations that justify the imposition of vicarious liability
__ fair and efficient compensation for wrong and deterrence.  This
requires trial judges to investigate the employee’s specific duties and
determine whether they gave rise to special opportunities for wrongdoing. 
Because of the peculiar exercises of power and trust that pervade cases such as
child abuse, special attention should be paid to the existence of a power or
dependency relationship, which on its own often creates a considerable risk of
wrongdoing.   Here the Foundation is vicariously liable for the
sexual misconduct of its employee. The opportunity for intimate private control
and the parental relationship and power required by the terms of employment
created the special environment that nurtured and brought to fruition the
sexual abuse.  The employer’s enterprise created and fostered the risk that led
to the ultimate harm.  Fairness and the need for deterrence in this critical
area of human conduct __ the care of vulnerable children __
suggest that as between the Foundation that created and managed the risk and
the innocent victim, the Foundation should bear the loss.  Cases Cited  Disapproved:  S.T.
v. North Yorkshire County Council, [1999] I.R.L.R. 98; referred to: 
London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd., [1992] 3
S.C.R. 299; Kay v. I.T.W. Ltd., [1968] 1 Q.B. 140; Ryan v. Fildes,
[1938] 3 All E.R. 517; Daniels v. Whetstone Entertainments, Ltd., [1962]
2 Lloyd’s Rep. 1; Dyer v. Munday, [1895] 1 Q.B. 742; Lakatosh v.
Ross (1974), 48 D.L.R. (3d) 694; Cole v. California Entertainment
Ltd., [1989] B.C.J. No. 2162 (QL); Lloyd v. Grace, Smith & Co.,
[1912] A.C. 716; The Queen v. Levy Brothers Co., [1961] S.C.R. 189; Boothman
v. Canada, [1993] 3 F.C. 381; Warren v. Henlys, Ltd., [1948] 2 All E.R.
935; G.J. v. Griffiths, [1995] B.C.J. No. 2370 (QL); Palsgraf v. Long
Island R. Co., 162 N.E. 99 (1928); Plains Engineering Ltd. v. Barnes
Security Services Ltd. (1987), 43 C.C.L.T. 129; Poland v. John Parr and
Sons, [1927] 1 K.B. 236; Morris v. C. W. Martin & Sons Ltd.,
[1966] 1 Q.B. 716.  Authors Cited  Atiyah, P. S.  Vicarious
Liability in the Law of Torts.  London:  Butterworths, 1967.  Feldthusen, Bruce.  “Vicarious
Liability for Sexual Torts”.  In Nicholas J. Mullany and Allen M. Linden, eds.,
Torts Tomorrow:  A Tribute to John Fleming.  Sydney:  LBC Information
Services, 1998.  Fleming, John G.  The Law of
Torts, 9th ed.  Sydney:  LBC Information Services, 1998.  Fridman, G. H. L.  The Law of
Torts in Canada, vol. 2.  Toronto:  Carswell, 1990. Laski, Harold J.  “The Basis of
Vicarious Liability” (1916), 26 Yale L.J. 105.  Prosser and Keeton on the Law
of Torts, 5th ed.  W. Page Keeton, General Editor. 
St. Paul, Minn.:  West Publishing Co., 1984.  Salmond and Heuston on the Law
of Torts, 19th ed.  By R. F. V. Heuston and R. A.
Buckley.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1987.  Sykes, Alan O.  “The Boundaries of
Vicarious Liability:  An Economic Analysis of the Scope of Employment Rule and
Related Legal Doctrines” (1988), 101 Harv. L. Rev. 563.  Williams, Glanville.  “Vicarious
Liability:  Tort of the Master or of the Servant?” (1956), 72 L.Q. Rev. 522.  APPEAL from a judgment of the British Columbia Court
of Appeal (1997), 30 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1 (sub nom. B. (P.A.) v. Curry),
89 B.C.A.C. 93, 145 W.A.C. 93, 146 D.L.R. (4th) 72, [1997] 4 W.W.R. 431, 26
C.C.E.L. (2d) 161, 34 C.C.L.T. (2d) 241, [1997] B.C.J. No. 692 (QL) (sub
nom. P.A.B. v. Curry), affirming a decision of the British Columbia
Supreme Court (1995), 9 B.C.L.R. (3d) 217, [1995] 10 W.W.R. 339, 12 C.C.E.L.
(2d) 228, 25 C.C.L.T. (2d) 302, [1995] B.C.J. No. 1468 (QL), finding the
appellant Foundation vicariously liable for its employee’s tortious conduct. 
Appeal dismissed.  William M. Holburn,
Q.C., and Dale Stewart, for the appellant Children’s Foundation.  Richard J. Meyer
and J. Douglas Eastwood, for the appellant Her Majesty the Queen in
Right of British Columbia.  D. Brent Adair,
for the respondent.  William C. Olthuis
and Tim Hurlburt, for the intervener Her Majesty the Queen in Right of
Alberta.  William J. Sammon, for
the intervener the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops.  Christopher E. Hinkson, Q.C., and Elizabeth Campbell, for the intervener the
United Church of Canada.  George E. H. Cadman, Q.C., and Heather Craig, for the intervener the
General Synod of the Anglican Church of Canada.  Susan M. Vella and
Jonathan Eades, for the intervener Wunnumin Lake First Nation.  Peter R. Grant and
Diane Soroka, for the interveners William Richard Blackwater et
al.  Robert G. Richards and Dana
Schindelka, for the interveners Barrie Caldwell, Samuel McNab and Glen
Pelletier.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  //McLachlin J.//  McLachlin J.
__   I.  Introduction  1                                  
It is tragic but true that people working with the vulnerable
sometimes abuse their positions and commit wrongs against the very people they
are engaged to help.   The abused person may later seek to recover damages for
the wrong.  But judgment against the wrongdoer may prove a hollow remedy.  This
raises the question of whether the organization that employed the offender
should be held liable for the wrong.  The law refers to such liability as
“vicarious” liability.  It is also known as “strict” or “no-fault” liability,
because it is imposed in the absence of fault of the employer.  The issue in
this case is whether such liability lies for an employee’s sexual abuse of
children in his care.    II.  Facts  2                                  
The appellant, the Children’s Foundation, is a non-profit
organization.  It operated two residential care facilities for the treatment of
emotionally troubled children between the ages of six and twelve.  As
substitute parent, it practised  “total intervention” in all aspects of the
lives of the children it cared for. The Foundation authorized its employees to
act as parent figures for the children.  It charged them to care for the
children physically, mentally and emotionally.  The employees were to do
everything a parent would do, from general supervision to intimate duties like
bathing and tucking in at bedtime.  3                                  
The Foundation hired Mr. Curry, a pedophile, to work in its
Vancouver home.  The Foundation did not know he was a pedophile.  It checked
and was told he was a suitable employee.  Into this environment, too, came the
child Patrick Bazley, young and emotionally vulnerable.  Curry began a
seduction.  Over the months, step by subtle step, bathing became sexual exploration;
tucking in in a darkened room became sexual abuse.  4                                  
Someone complained about Curry.  The Foundation inquired and upon
verifying that Curry had abused a child in one of its homes, immediately
discharged him.  In 1992, Curry was convicted of 19 counts of sexual abuse, two
of which related to Bazley.  Curry has since died.  5                                  
       Bazley sued the Foundation for compensation for the injury
he suffered while in its care.  The Foundation took the position that since it
had committed no fault in hiring or supervising Curry, it was not legally
responsible for what he had done. The parties stated a case to determine
whether (assuming the appellant was not, in fact, negligent) the appellant was
nonetheless vicariously liable for its employee’s tortious conduct.  The chambers
judge found that it was and the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.   III.  Judgments  A.  British
Columbia Supreme Court (1995), 9 B.C.L.R. (3d) 217  6                                  
The chambers judge, Lowry J., applied the common law test known
as the Salmond test (from Salmond and Heuston’s treatise on torts: see,
e.g., Salmond and Heuston on the Law of Torts (19th ed.
1987), at pp. 521-22) to determine the Foundation’s strict liability for its
employee’s conduct.  Under this test, employers are vicariously liable for
employee torts falling within the “scope of employment” (at p. 220):  An employee’s wrongful conduct is said to fall within the course and
scope of his or her employment where it consists of either (1) acts authorized
by the employer or (2) unauthorized acts that are so connected with acts that
the employer has authorized that they may rightly be regarded as modes --
although improper modes -- of doing what has been authorized:  Canadian
Pacific Railway Co. v. Lockhart, [1942] A.C. 591 at 599 (P.C.).   The Foundation
clearly had not authorized Curry’s sexual abuse.  Therefore the only question
was whether the wrong was so connected to an authorized act that it could be
regarded as a mode of doing that act.  Lowry J. said that it was.  The
Foundation had authorized Curry to put the child to bed.  Curry committed the
sexual abuse while putting the child to bed. Therefore the sexual abuse could
be viewed as a mode, however improper, of doing an authorized act.  Lowry J.
accordingly ruled that the Foundation was vicariously liable for Curry’s sexual
torts.  B.  British
Columbia Court of Appeal (1997), 30 B.C.L.R. (3d) 1  7                                  
The Court of Appeal affirmed this ruling, but did not content
itself with merely examining the phrase “unauthorized modes of authorized
acts”.   The four sets of reasons, while divergent in emphasis and detail,
reflect general agreement that: (1) it is better to confront the question of
whether liability should rest with the employer directly than to bury it
beneath the semantics of phrases like “unauthorized modes of authorized acts”;
(2) a useful focus for inquiry is the closeness of the connection between
authorized acts and the injury suffered; (3) factors relevant to assessing this
connection in cases like this one include power, trust and the extent to which
the employment enabled or cloaked the wrong;  (4) policy considerations, such
as deterrence and which of  two “innocent” parties should bear the loss, should
also be taken into account in finding liability; and (5) there should be no
special rule for non-profit employers.  8                                  
The various reasons in the Court of Appeal present a
sophisticated and nuanced review of this difficult issue and the considerations
that may properly bear on it.  Given that many of the ideas will be discussed
in the analysis that follows, I content myself with sketching their respective themes. 
Huddart J.A. emphasized the power-trust relationship as key to finding the
necessary connection between an authorized act and the wrong.  Newbury J.A.,
while relying on the trust inherent in Curry’s duties, included in the analysis
other factors like spatial, temporal and “formal” connections (employer
objectives permitting or encouraging the wrong).   Hollinrake J.A. (Donald J.A.
concurring) agreed with both Huddart J.A. and Newbury J.A., and stressed the
need for a sufficient connection between the duties of the employee and the
wrong.  Finally, Finch J.A., who also agreed with both Huddart J.A. and Newbury
J.A. (and, by implication, also Hollinrake J.A. (Donald J.A. concurring)), took
the view that outcomes in this area of the law rest more on policy
considerations than on coherent legal principle, and advocated a case-by-case,
policy-oriented approach.  IV.  Issues  9                                  
The issue in this appeal is whether the Foundation is vicariously
liable for its employee’s sexual assault of a child in its care.  This poses
two sub-issues:  (1)       May employers be held vicariously liable
for their employees’ sexual assaults on clients or persons within their care?  (2)       If so, should non-profit employers be
exempted from liability?  V.   Analysis  A.       
May Employers Be Held Vicariously Liable for Their Employees’
Sexual Assaults on Clients or Persons Within Their Care?    10                              
Both parties agree that the answer to this question is governed
by the Salmond test, which posits  that employers are vicariously liable
for (1) employee acts authorized by the employer; or (2) unauthorized acts so
connected with authorized acts that they may be regarded as modes (albeit
improper modes) of doing an authorized act.  Both parties also agree that we
are here concerned with the second branch of the test.  They diverge, however,
on what the second branch of the test means.  The Foundation says that its
employee’s sexual assaults of Bazley were not “modes” of doing an authorized
act.  Bazley, on the other hand, submits that the assaults were a mode of
performing authorized tasks, and that courts have often found employers
vicariously liable for intentional wrongs of employees comparable to sexual
assault.  11                              
The problem is that it is often difficult to distinguish between
an unauthorized “mode” of performing an authorized act that attracts liability,
and an entirely independent “act” that does not.  Unfortunately, the test
provides no criterion on which to make this distinction.  In many cases, like
the present one, it is possible to characterize the tortious act either as a
mode of doing an authorized act (as the respondent would have us do), or as an
independent act altogether (as the appellants would suggest).  In such cases,
how is the judge to decide between the two alternatives? 12                              
One answer is to look at decided cases on similar facts.  As
Salmond and Heuston, supra, put it, “the principle is easy to state but
difficult to apply.  All that can be done is to provide illustrations on either
side of the line” (p. 522).   The problem is that only very close cases may be
useful. Fleming observes that “[n]o statistical measurement is possible [of
when such torts are properly said to be within the “scope of employment”], and
precedents are helpful only when they present a suggestive uniformity on
parallel facts” (J. G. Fleming, The Law of Torts  (9th ed. 1998), at p.
421). 13                              
Where decided cases do not help, Salmond and Heuston, supra,
at p. 522, suggest the impasse may be resolved by the devices of a prima
facie case and shifting evidentiary burden.  If the plaintiff establishes
that the employee’s act was done on the  employer’s premises, during working
hours, and that it bears a close connection with the work that the employee was
authorized to do, then the responsibility shifts to the employer to show that
the act is one for which it was not responsible.  But this is not so much a
test as a default position, and it remains unclear exactly what the employer
would need to show to escape responsibility.  14                              
Increasingly, courts confronted by issues of vicarious liability
where no clear precedent exists are turning to policy for guidance, examining
the purposes that vicarious liability serves and asking whether imposition of
liability in the new case before them would serve those purposes:  see
Fleming,  supra, at p. 410; London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel
International Ltd., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299, per La Forest J.  15                              
This review suggests that the second branch of the Salmond
test may usefully be approached in two steps.  First, a court should determine
whether there are precedents which unambiguously determine on which side of the
line between vicarious liability and no liability the case falls.  If prior
cases do not clearly suggest a solution, the next step is to determine whether
vicarious liability should be imposed in light of the broader policy rationales
behind strict liability.  This Court has an additional duty: to provide
guidance for lower tribunals.  Accordingly, I will try to proceed from these
first two steps to articulate a rule consistent with both the existing cases
and the policy reasons for vicarious liability.  1.    Previous Cases  16                              
This is one of those difficult cases where there is little
helpful precedent to guide the Court in determining whether the employee’s
tortious act should be viewed as an unauthorized mode of an authorized act, or
as an altogether independent act.   Apart from one recent case in the United
Kingdom, the issue before us appears not to have been previously considered in
depth by higher tribunals.  Nevertheless, it may be useful to review the
situations where courts have held employers vicariously liable for the
unauthorized torts of employees.  At very least, they may suggest recurring
concepts and policy considerations that shed light on how the issue should be
resolved.  17                              
The relevant cases may usefully be grouped into three general
categories: (1) cases based on the rationale of “furtherance of the employer’s
aims”; (2) cases based on the employer’s creation of a situation of friction;
and (3) the dishonest employee cases.  If we can find a common thread among
these three categories of cases, it may suggest how the test should be
interpreted.  18                              
The cases confirming vicarious liability on the basis that the
employee was acting in furtherance of the employer’s aims rely on the agency
rationale implicit in the Salmond test:  see, e.g., Kay v. I.T.W.
Ltd., [1968] 1 Q.B. 140 (C.A.).  Because the employee was acting in
furtherance of the employer’s aims, he or she is said to have “ostensible” or
“implied” authority to do the unauthorized act. This rationale works well
enough for torts of negligent accident.  It does not suffice for intentional
torts, however.    It is difficult to maintain the fiction that an employee who
commits an assault or theft was authorized to do so, even “ostensibly”:  see H.
J. Laski, “The Basis of Vicarious Liability” (1916), 26 Yale L.J. 105. 
I would put the line of cases addressing the distinction between a “frolic” and
a “detour” in this group.  19                              
The cases based on the employer’s creation of a situation of
friction rest on the idea that if the employer’s aims or enterprise
incidentally create a situation of friction that may give rise to employees
committing tortious acts, an employee’s intentional misconduct can be viewed as
falling within the scope of the employment and the employer is vicariously
liable for ensuing harm.  This rationale was used to extend vicarious liability
to intentional torts like a provoked bartender’s assault on an obnoxious
customer.  While it does not rest on ostensible or implied authority, it builds
on the logic of risk and accident inherent in the cases imposing vicarious
liability on the basis that the employee was acting to further the employer’s
aims.  Intentional torts arising from situations of friction are like accidents
in that they stem from a risk attendant on carrying out the employer’s aims. 
Like accidents, they occur in circumstances where such incidents can be
expected to arise because of the nature of the business, and hence their
ramifications appropriately form part of the cost of doing business.   See, e.g.,
Ryan v. Fildes, [1938] 3 All E.R. 517 (K.B.D.) (schoolteachers’
discipline); Daniels v. Whetstone Entertainments, Ltd., [1962] 2 Lloyd’s
Rep. 1 (C.A.) (dance hall “bouncer”); Dyer v. Munday, [1895] 1 Q.B. 742
(C.A.) (furniture repossessor); Lakatosh v. Ross (1974), 48 D.L.R.
(3d) 694 (Man. Q.B.) (bouncer); Cole v. California Entertainment Ltd.,
[1989] B.C.J. No. 2162 (QL) (C.A.) (bouncer).  20                              
Neither furtherance of the employer’s aims nor creation of
situations of friction, however, suffice to justify vicarious liability for
employee theft or fraud, according to cases like Lloyd v. Grace, Smith &
Co., [1912] A.C. 716 (H.L.), and The Queen v. Levy Brothers Co.,
[1961] S.C.R. 189. The language of authority, whether actual or ostensible, is
inappropriate for intentional, fraudulent conduct like the theft of a client’s
property.   A bank employee stealing a client’s money cannot be said to be
furthering the bank’s aims.  Nor does the logic of a situation of friction
apply, unless one believes that any money-handling operation generates an
inexorable temptation to steal.  Nevertheless, courts considering this type of
case have increasingly held employers vicariously liable,  even when the
employee’s conduct is antithetical to the employer’s business:  see, e.g., Boothman
v. Canada, [1993] 3 F.C. 381 (T.D.) (unauthorized intentional infliction of
nervous shock by supervisory employee on his subordinate found to invoke
vicarious liability for the employer, albeit it based on statutory, as opposed
to common law, principles).  21                              
At the heart of the dishonest employee decisions is consideration
of fairness and policy:  see Laski, supra, at p. 121.   As P. S. Atiyah,
Vicarious Liability in the Law of Torts (1967), at p. 263, puts it,
“certain types of wilful acts, and in particular frauds and thefts, are only
too common, and the fact that liability is generally imposed for torts of this
kind shows that the courts are not unmindful of considerations of policy.”  The
same logic dictates that where the employee’s wrongdoing was a random act
wholly unconnected to the nature of the enterprise and the employee’s
responsibilities, the employer is not vicariously liable.  Thus an employer has
been held not liable for a vengeful assault by its store clerk:  Warren v.
Henlys, Ltd., [1948] 2 All E.R. 935 (K.B.D.).  22                              
Looking at these three general classes of cases in which
employers have been held vicariously liable for employees’ unauthorized torts,
one sees a progression from accidents, to accident-like intentional torts, to
torts that bear no relationship to either  agency-like conduct or accident.  In
search of a unifying principle, one asks what the three classes of cases have
in common.  At first glance, it may seem little.  Yet with the benefit of
hindsight it is possible to posit one common feature: in each case it can be
said that the employer’s enterprise had created the risk that produced the
tortious act.   The language of  “furtherance of the employer’s aims” and the
employer’s creation of  “a situation of friction” may be seen as limited
formulations of the concept of enterprise risk that underlies the dishonest
employee cases.   The common theme resides in the idea that where the employee’s
conduct is closely tied to a risk that the employer’s enterprise has placed in
the community, the employer may justly be held vicariously liable for the
employee’s wrong.  23                              
If employers are vicariously liable for acts like employee theft,
why not for sexual abuse?  That was the question before the English Court of
Appeal in S.T. v. North Yorkshire County Council, [1999] I.R.L.R. 98,
where the court applied the Salmond test to reverse a finding of
vicarious liability against a school council for a teacher who sexually
accosted a mentally handicapped student during a school field trip to the
continent.   It held that the sexual tort was not an unauthorized mode of
performing an authorized act; it was an independent act, outside the scope of
the teacher’s authority.  The court recognized the difficulty of saying that
some intentional acts, like a store clerk’s assault, do not attract vicarious
liability, while other intentional acts, like theft, do.   In the end, however,
it did not confront the underlying policy of vicarious liability, preferring to
reason that sexual abuse was closer to the store clerk’s assault than to a
solicitor’s clerk’s theft.   It interpreted the stolen property cases of Levy
Brothers and Lloyd, thought by many to be developing law, as a minor
off-shoot of a line of cases concerning entrustment of goods __ a
departure from the “general” rule.  24                              
The S.T. decision thus fails to successfully integrate the
dishonest employee cases.  It also rests on the questionable conclusion that
sexual torts by caretakers against children are closer to a shop assault than a
bank employee’s conversion.  (While a molestation is a physical attack, it is
equally arguable that the trust-abusing character of child abuse fits more in
the dishonesty genre.)   Furthermore, the opinion’s reasoning depends on the
level of generality with which the sexual act is described.  Instead of
describing the act in terms of the employee’s duties of supervising and caring
for vulnerable students during a study trip abroad, the Court of Appeal cast it
in terms unrelated to those duties.   Important legal decisions should not turn
on such semantics.  As Atiyah points out (supra, at p. 263):  “conduct
can be correctly described at varying levels of generality, and no one
description of  the “act” on which the servant was engaged is necessarily more
correct than any other.”  Finally, the reasoning in S.T. leads to
anomalies.  Lowry J.’s question in the chambers decision appealed from (at p.
223) remains unanswered:  “If a postal clerk’s theft and a solicitor’s clerk’s
fraud can be said to have been committed in the course of their employment, I
can see no sound basis in principle on which it can be concluded that Curry’s
criminal conduct should not attract vicarious liability.”  Or, as Wilkinson J.
expressed more bluntly in the companion appeal (G.J. v. Griffiths,
[1995] B.C.J. No. 2370 (QL) (S.C.), at para. 76), “[s]urely a distinction is
not to be drawn attributing a higher standard to the way society looks after
its jewellery than its children.”  25                              
To return to the  approach suggested earlier, precedent does not
resolve the issue before us.  We must therefore proceed to the second stage of
the inquiry __ a consideration of the policy reasons for vicarious
liability, in the hope of discerning a principle to guide courts in future
cases.  2.    Policy Considerations   26                              
Vicarious liability has always been concerned with policy: 
Fleming,  supra, at pp. 409 et seq.   The view of early English
law that a master was responsible for all the wrongs of his servants (as well
as his wife’s and his children’s) represented a policy choice, however
inarticulate, as to who should bear the loss of wrongdoing and how best to
deter it.  The narrowing of vicarious responsibility with the expansion of
commerce and trade and the rise of industrialism also represented a policy
choice.  Indeed, it represented a compromise between two policies __
the social interest in furnishing an innocent tort victim with recourse against
a financially responsible defendant, and a concern not to foist undue burdens
on business enterprises:  Fleming, ibid.  The expansion of vicarious
liability in the 20th century from authorization-based liability to broader
classes of ascription is doubtless driven by yet other policy concerns.  
“[V]icarious liability cannot parade as a deduction from legalistic premises, but
should be frankly recognised as having its basis in a combination of policy
considerations” (Fleming, at p. 410).  27                              
A focus on policy is not to diminish the importance of legal
principle.  It is vital that the courts attempt to articulate general legal principles
to lend certainty to the law and guide future applications.  However, in areas
of jurisprudence where changes have been occurring in response to policy
considerations, the best route to enduring principle may well lie through
policy.  The law of vicarious liability is just such a domain.  28                              
Recognizing the policy-driven perspective of the law of vicarious
liability, La Forest J. in London Drugs, supra, opined that
vicarious liability was traditionally considered to rest on one of two logical
bases:  (1) that the employee’s acts are regarded in law as being authorized by
the employer and hence as being the employer’s acts (the “master’s tort theory”
or “direct liability theory”); or (2) that the employer was the employee’s
superior in charge or command of the employee (the “servant’s tort theory”) (at
pp. 335-36, citing G. H. L. Fridman, The Law of Torts in Canada (1990),
vol. 2, at pp. 314-15; Atiyah, supra, at pp. 6-7; G. Williams,
“Vicarious Liability:  Tort of the Master or of the Servant?” (1956), 72 L.Q.
Rev. 522).  La Forest J., quoting Fridman (at p. 315), went on to note,
however, that  “neither of the logical bases for vicarious liability succeeds
completely in explaining the operation of the doctrine . . . ‘express[ing] not
so much the true rationale of vicarious liability but an attempt by the law to
give some formal, technical explanation of why the law imposes vicarious
liability’” (p. 336).  Faced with the absence in the existing law of a coherent
principle to explain vicarious liability, La Forest J. found its basis in
policy (at p. 336):  “the vicarious liability regime is best seen as a response
to a number of policy concerns.   In its traditional domain, these are
primarily linked to compensation, deterrence and loss internalization.” 29                              
Fleming has identified similar policies lying at the heart of
vicarious liability.  In his view, two fundamental concerns underlie the
imposition of vicarious liability:  (1) provision of a just and practical
remedy for the harm; and (2) deterrence of future harm.  While different
formulations of the policy interests at stake may be made (for example, loss
internalization is a hybrid of the two), I believe that these two ideas
usefully embrace the main policy considerations that have been advanced.  30                              
First and foremost is the concern to provide a just and practical
remedy to people who suffer as a consequence of wrongs perpetrated by an
employee.  Fleming expresses this succinctly (at p. 410):  “a person who
employs others to advance his own economic interest should in fairness be
placed under a corresponding liability for losses incurred in the course of the
enterprise”.  The idea that the person who introduces a risk incurs a duty to
those who may be injured lies at the heart of tort law.  As Cardozo C.J. stated
in Palsgraf v. Long Island R. Co., 162 N.E. 99 (N.Y. 1928), at p. 100, 
“[t]he risk reasonably to be perceived defines the duty to be obeyed, and risk
imports relation; it is risk to another or to others within the range of apprehension.”
This principle of fairness applies to the employment enterprise and hence to
the issue of vicarious liability.  While charitable enterprises may not employ
people to advance their economic interests, other factors, discussed below,
make it fair that they should bear the burden of providing a just and practical
remedy for wrongs perpetrated by their employees.  This policy interest
embraces a number of subsidiary goals.  The first is the goal of effective
compensation.  “One of the most important social goals served by vicarious
liability is victim compensation.  Vicarious liability improves the chances
that the victim can recover the judgment from a solvent defendant.”  (B.
Feldthusen, “Vicarious Liability for Sexual Torts”, in Torts Tomorrow (1998),
221, at p. 224.)  Or to quote Fleming, the master is “a more promising source
of recompense than his servant who is apt to be a man of straw” (p. 410).  31                              
However, effective compensation must also be fair, in the sense
that it must seem just to place liability for the wrong on the employer. 
Vicarious liability is arguably fair in this sense.  The employer puts in the
community an enterprise which carries with it certain risks.  When those risks
materialize and cause injury to a member of the public despite the employer’s
reasonable efforts, it is fair that the person or organization that creates the
enterprise and hence the risk should bear the loss.  This accords with the
notion that it is right and just that the person who creates a risk bear the loss
when the risk ripens into harm.  While the fairness of this proposition is
capable of standing alone, it is buttressed by the fact that the employer is
often in the best position to spread the losses through mechanisms like
insurance and higher prices, thus minimizing the dislocative effect of the tort
within society. “Vicarious liability has the broader function of transferring
to the enterprise itself the risks created by the activity performed by its
agents” (London Drugs, per La Forest J., at p. 339).  32                              
The second major policy consideration underlying vicarious
liability is deterrence of future harm.  Fixing the employer with
responsibility for the employee’s wrongful act, even where the employer is not
negligent, may have a deterrent effect.  Employers are often in a position to
reduce accidents and intentional wrongs by efficient organization and
supervision.  Failure to take such measures may not suffice to establish a case
of tortious negligence directly against the employer.  Perhaps the harm cannot
be shown to have been foreseeable under negligence law.   Perhaps the employer
can avail itself of the defence of compliance with the industry standard.  Or
perhaps the employer, while complying with the standard of reasonable care, was
not as scrupulously diligent as it might feasibly have been.  As Wilkinson J.
explained in the companion appeal’s trial judgment (at para. 69):  If the scourge of sexual predation is to be stamped
out, or at least controlled, there must be powerful motivation acting upon
those who control institutions engaged in the care, protection and nurturing of
children.  That motivation will not in my view be sufficiently supplied by the
likelihood of liability in negligence.  In many cases evidence will be lacking
or have long since disappeared.  The proof of appropriate standards is a
difficult and uneven matter.   33                              
I agree.   Beyond the narrow band of employer conduct that
attracts direct liability in negligence lies a vast area where imaginative and
efficient administration and supervision can reduce the risk that the employer
has introduced into the community.  Holding the employer vicariously liable for
the wrongs of its employee may encourage the employer to take such steps, and
hence, reduce the risk of future harm.  A related consideration raised by
Fleming is that by holding the employer  liable, “the law furnishes an
incentive to discipline servants guilty of wrongdoing” (p. 410).  34                              
The policy grounds supporting the imposition of vicarious
liability __ fair compensation and deterrence __ are
related.  The policy consideration of deterrence is linked to the policy
consideration of fair compensation based on the employer’s introduction or
enhancement of a risk.  The introduction of the enterprise into the community
with its attendant risk, in turn, implies the possibility of managing the risk
to minimize the costs of the harm that may flow from it.  35                              
Policy considerations relating to the fair allocation of loss to
risk-creating enterprises and the deterrence of harms tend to support the
imposition of vicarious liability on employers.  But, as Fleming notes, there
often exists a countervailing concern.  At one time the law held masters
responsible for all wrongs committed by servants.  Later, that policy
was abandoned as too harsh in a complex commercial society where masters might
not be in a position to supervise their servants closely.  Servants may commit
acts, even on working premises and during working hours, which are so
unconnected with the employment that it would seem unreasonable to fix an
employer with responsibility for them.   For example, if a man assaults his
wife’s lover (who coincidentally happens to be a co-worker) in the employees’
lounge at work, few would argue that the employer should be held responsible. 
Similarly, an employer would not be liable for the harm caused by a security guard
who decides to commit arson for his or her own amusement: see, e.g., Plains
Engineering Ltd. v. Barnes Security Services Ltd. (1987), 43 C.C.L.T. 129
(Alta. Q.B.).  36                              
On further analysis, however, this apparently negative policy
consideration of when liability would be appropriate is revealed as nothing
more than the absence of the twin policies of fair compensation and deterrence
that justify vicarious liability.   A wrong that is only coincidentally linked
to the activity of the employer and duties of the employee cannot justify the
imposition of vicarious liability on the employer.  To impose vicarious
liability on the employer for such a wrong does not respond to common sense
notions of fairness.  Nor does it serve to deter future harms.  Because the
wrong is essentially independent of the employment situation, there is little
the employer could have done to prevent it.  Where vicarious liability is not
closely and materially related to a risk introduced or enhanced by the
employer, it serves no deterrent purpose, and relegates the employer to the
status of an involuntary insurer.  I conclude that a meaningful
articulation of when vicarious liability should follow in new situations ought
to be animated by the twin policy goals of fair compensation and deterrence
that underlie the doctrine, rather than by artificial or semantic distinctions.  3.    From Precedent and Policy to Principle  37                              
Underlying the cases holding employers vicariously liable for the
unauthorized acts of employees is the idea that employers may justly be held
liable where the act falls within the ambit of the risk that the employer’s
enterprise creates or exacerbates.  Similarly, the policy purposes underlying
the imposition of vicarious liability on employers are served only where the
wrong is so connected with the employment that it can be said that the employer
has introduced the risk of the wrong (and is thereby fairly and usefully
charged with its management and minimization).  The question in each case is
whether there is a connection or nexus between the employment enterprise and
that wrong that justifies imposition of vicarious liability on the employer for
the wrong, in terms of fair allocation of the consequences of the risk and/or
deterrence.  38                              
Where the risk is closely associated with the wrong that
occurred, it seems just that the entity that engages in the enterprise (and in
many cases profits from it) should internalize the full cost of operation,
including potential torts.  See generally A.  O. Sykes, “The Boundaries of
Vicarious Liability: An Economic Analysis of the Scope of Employment Rule and
Related Legal Doctrines” (1988), 101 Harv. L. Rev. 563.  On the other
hand, when the wrongful act lacks meaningful connection to the enterprise, liability
ceases to flow:  Poland v. John Parr and Sons, [1927] 1 K.B. 236 (C.A.)
(noting that the question is often one of degree).  As Prosser and Keeton sum
up (Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts (5th ed. 1984), at pp.
500-501), when the harm is connected to the employment enterprise:  The losses caused by the torts of employees, which as a practical
matter are sure to occur in the conduct of the employer’s enterprise, are
placed upon that enterprise itself, as a required cost of doing business.  They
are placed upon the employer because, having engaged in an enterprise, which
will on the basis of all past experience involve harm to others through the
torts of employees, and sought to profit by it, it is just that he, rather than
the innocent injured plaintiff, should bear them; and because he is better able
to absorb them, and to distribute them, through prices, rates or liability
insurance, to the public, and so to shift them to society, to the community at
large.    39                              
The connection between the tort and the employment is broad.  To
say the employer’s enterprise created or materially enhanced the risk of the
tortious act is therefore different from saying that a reasonable employer
should have foreseen the harm in the traditional negligence sense, making it
liable for its own negligence.  As Fleming explains (supra, at p. 422):   Perhaps inevitably, the familiar notion of
foreseeability can here be seen once more lurking in the background, as
undoubtedly one of the many relevant factors is the question of whether the
unauthorised act was a normal or expected incident of the employment.  But one
must not confuse the relevance of foreseeability in this sense with its usual
function on a negligence issue.  We are not here concerned with attributing
fault to the master for failing to provide against foreseeable harm (for
example in consequence of employing an incompetent servant), but with the
measure of risks that may fairly be regarded as typical of the enterprise in
question.  The inquiry is directed not at foreseeability of risks from
specific conduct, but at foreseeability of the broad risks incident to a whole
enterprise.  [Emphasis added.]   40                              
On the other hand, this analysis’s focus on what might be called
“general cause”, while broader than specific foreseeability, in no way implies
a simple “but-for” test:  but for the enterprise and employment, this harm
would not have happened.  This is because reduced to formalistic premises, any
employment can be seen to provide the causation of an employee’s tort.  
Therefore, “mere opportunity” to commit a tort, in the common “but-for”
understanding of that phrase, does not suffice:  Morris v. C. W. Martin
& Sons Ltd., [1966] 1 Q.B. 716 (C.A.) (per Diplock L.J.).  The
enterprise and employment must not only provide the locale or the bare
opportunity for the employee to commit his or her wrong, it must materially
enhance the risk, in the sense of significantly contributing to it, before it
is fair to hold the employer vicariously liable.  Of course, opportunity to
commit a tort can be “mere” or significant.   Consequently, the emphasis must
be on the strength of the causal link between the opportunity and the wrongful
act, and not blanket catch-phrases.  When the opportunity is nothing more than
a but-for predicate, it provides no anchor for liability.  When it plays a more
specific role __ for example, as permitting a peculiarly
custody-based tort like embezzlement or child abuse __ the
opportunity provided by the employment situation becomes much more salient.  41                              
Reviewing the jurisprudence, and considering the policy issues
involved, I conclude that in determining whether an employer is vicariously
liable for an employee’s unauthorized, intentional wrong in cases where
precedent is inconclusive, courts should be guided by the following principles:  (1) They should openly confront the question of whether liability
should lie against the employer, rather than obscuring the decision beneath
semantic discussions of “scope of employment” and “mode of conduct”.  (2) The fundamental question is whether the wrongful act is sufficiently
related to conduct authorized by the employer to justify the imposition of
vicarious liability.  Vicarious liability is generally appropriate where there
is a significant connection between the creation or enhancement of a risk
and the wrong that accrues therefrom, even if unrelated to the employer’s
desires.  Where this is so, vicarious liability will serve the policy
considerations of provision of an adequate and just remedy and deterrence. 
Incidental connections to the employment enterprise, like time and place
(without more), will not suffice.  Once engaged in a particular business, it is
fair that an employer be made to pay the generally foreseeable costs of that
business.  In contrast, to impose liability for costs unrelated to the risk
would effectively make the employer an involuntary insurer.  (3) In determining the sufficiency of the connection between the
employer’s creation or enhancement of the risk and the wrong complained of,
subsidiary factors may be considered.  These may vary with the nature of the
case.  When related to intentional torts, the relevant factors may include, but
are not limited to, the following:  (a)       the opportunity that the enterprise afforded the employee to
abuse his or her power;  (b)       the extent to which the wrongful act may have furthered the
employer’s aims (and hence be more likely to have been committed by the
employee);  (c)       the extent to which the wrongful act was related to friction,
confrontation or intimacy inherent in the employer’s enterprise;  (d)       the extent of power conferred on the employee in relation to
the victim;  (e)       the vulnerability of potential victims to wrongful exercise
of the employee’s power.  42                              
Applying these general considerations to sexual abuse by
employees, there must be a strong connection between what the employer was
asking the employee to do (the risk created by the employer’s enterprise) and
the wrongful act.  It must be possible to say that the employer significantly
increased the risk of the harm by putting the employee in his or her position
and requiring him to perform the assigned tasks.  The policy considerations
that justify imposition of vicarious liability for an employee’s sexual
misconduct are unlikely to be satisfied by incidental considerations of time
and place.  For example, an incidental or random attack by an employee that
merely happens to take place on the employer’s premises during working hours
will scarcely justify holding the employer liable.  Such an attack is unlikely
to be related to the business the employer is conducting or what the employee
was asked to do and, hence, to any risk that was created.  Nor is the
imposition of liability likely to have a significant deterrent effect; short of
closing the premises or discharging all employees, little can be done to avoid
the random wrong.  Nor is foreseeability of harm used in negligence law the
test.  What is required is a material increase in the risk as a consequence of
the employer’s enterprise and the duties he entrusted to the employee, mindful
of the policies behind vicarious liability.  43                              
What factors are relevant to whether an employer’s enterprise has
introduced or significantly exacerbated a risk of sexual abuse by an employee? 
(Again, I speak generally, supplementing the factors suggested above.)  It is
obvious that the risk of an employee sexually abusing a child may be materially
enhanced by giving the employee an opportunity to commit the abuse.  There are
many kinds of opportunity and the nature of the opportunity in a particular
case must be carefully evaluated in determining whether it has, in fact, materially
increased the risk of the harm that ensued.  If an employee is permitted or
required to be with children for brief periods of time, there may be a small
risk of such harm __ perhaps not much greater than if the employee
were a stranger.  If an employee is permitted or required to be alone with a
child for extended periods of time, the opportunity for abuse may be greater. 
If in addition to being permitted to be alone with a child for extended
periods, the employee is expected to supervise the child in intimate activities
like bathing or toiletting, the opportunity for abuse becomes greater still. 
As the opportunity for abuse becomes greater, so the risk of harm increases.  44                              
The risk of harm may also be enhanced by the nature of the
relationship the employment establishes between the employee and the child.  
Employment that puts the employee in a position of intimacy and power over the
child (i.e., a parent-like, role-model relationship) may enhance the
risk of the employee feeling that he or she is able to take advantage of the
child and the child submitting without effective complaint.  The more the
employer encourages the employee to stand in a position of respect and suggests
that the child should emulate and obey the employee, the more the risk may be
enhanced.  In other words, the more an enterprise requires the exercise of
power or authority for its successful operation, the more materially likely it
is that an abuse of that power relationship can be fairly ascribed to the
employer.  See Boothman v. Canada, supra.  45                              
Other factors may be important too, depending on the nature of
the case.  To require or permit an employee to touch the client in intimate
body zones may  enhance the risk of sexual touching, just as permitting an
employee to handle large sums of money may enhance the risk of embezzlement or
conversion.  This is the common sense core of the “mode of conduct” argument
accepted by the trial judge in this case.  (The same factor might of course be
analyzed in terms of enhanced opportunity.)   Time and place arguments may also
be relevant in particular cases.  The mere fact that the wrong occurred during
working hours or on the jobsite may not, standing alone, be of much importance;
the assessment of material increase in risk cannot be resolved by the
mechanical application of spatial and temporal factors.  This said, spatial and
temporal factors may tend to negate the suggestion of materially
enhanced risk of harm, insofar as they suggest that the conduct was essentially
unrelated to the employment and any enhanced risk it may have created (for
example, the employee’s tort occurred offsite and after hours).  The policy
considerations of fair compensation and deterrence upon which vicarious
liability is premised may be attenuated or completely eliminated in such
circumstances.  46                              
In summary, the test for vicarious liability for an employee’s
sexual abuse of a client should focus on whether the employer’s enterprise and
empowerment of the employee materially increased the risk of the sexual assault
and hence the harm.  The test must not be applied mechanically, but with a
sensitive view to the policy considerations that justify the imposition of
vicarious liability __ fair and efficient compensation for wrong and
deterrence.  This requires trial judges to investigate the employee’s specific
duties and determine whether they gave rise to special opportunities for
wrongdoing.  Because of the peculiar exercises of power and trust that pervade
cases such as child abuse, special attention should be paid to the existence of
a power or dependency relationship, which on its own often creates a
considerable risk of wrongdoing.  B.  Should
There Be an Exemption for Non-Profit Organizations?  47                              
In the alternative, the Foundation submits that even if vicarious
liability should presumptively attach for Curry’s torts, this Court should
exempt non-profit organizations.  None of the judges below accepted this
suggestion.  Nor would I.  48                              
In support of a charitable or non-profit exemption from
liability, the Foundation argues:  (1) that it is unfair to fix liability
without fault on non-profit organizations performing needed services on behalf
of the general public; (2) that non-profit organizations are less able to
control and supervise the conduct of their agents, many of whom are volunteers,
which enhances the unfairness of imposing vicarious liability and diminishes
its deterrent effect; and (3) that the practical effect of making non-profit
organizations vicariously liable for the misconduct of their agents will be to
make it difficult or impossible for such organizations to carry out their
important work.   The Foundation suggests that the body that should bear the
responsibility for Curry’s sexual abuse of the respondent is the provincial
government, which placed him in the society’s care.  49                              
The first submission is that it is unfair to fix liability
without fault on non-profit organizations performing needed services on behalf
of the community as a whole.  It is difficult not to be sympathetic to this
plea.  Churches and aid societies undertake to care for society’s most needy. 
They do work few others would, and they do it in a selfless, generous manner. 
In the case at bar, the Children’s Foundation took in the respondent when no
one else seemed ready or able to do so and undertook the difficult task of
providing him with the love and guidance that other children receive from their
parents.  That non-profit organizations do important work is beyond question. 
They are funded by the government and by donations from the public.  It is
unjust, the appellant argues, that they be made to pay damages when, through no
legal fault of their own, an unscrupulous employee or volunteer abuses his
position with one of the wards.  50                              
There is, however, another perspective to be considered __
that of the innocent child who was the victim of the abuse.  From his
perspective, the appellant’s institution, however meritorious, put him in the
intimate care of Mr. Curry and in a very real sense enhanced the risk of his
being abused.   From his perspective, it is fair that as between him and the
institution that enhanced the risk, the institution should bear legal
responsibility for his abuse and the harm that befell him.  It may also deter
other incidents of sexual abuse by motivating charitable organizations
entrusted with the care of children to take not only such precautions as the
law of negligence requires, but all possible precautions to ensure that their children
are not sexually abused.  51                              
When all perspectives are considered, it is difficult to conclude
that the fact that the appellant does good work in the community without
expectation of profit makes it unjust that it should be held vicariously
responsible for the abuse of the respondent.  These facts, therefore, do not
constitute a sound basis by themselves for exempting non-profit organizations
from legal liability that would otherwise fall on them.  52                              
The second argument is that non-profit charitable organizations
often work with volunteers and are thus less able than commercial enterprises
to supervise what their agents do.  This, it is said, diminishes the fairness
of holding such organizations vicariously liable, and lessens any deterrent
effect that liability might bring.  This position rests on the premise that an
organization’s responsibility and control over its operations diminish when it
employs volunteers, a premise I cannot accept.  Indeed, it is not suggested
that non-profit organizations do not have a duty to screen or supervise those
whom they entrust with their important work.  Accordingly, the same
considerations of fairness and deterrence arise, whether the organization is
non-profit or commercial.  53                              
The third argument, essentially a variation on the first, is that
vicarious liability will put many non-profit organizations out of business or
make it difficult for them to carry on their good work.  It is argued that
unlike commercial organizations, non-profit organizations have few means of
distributing any loss they are made to assume, since they cannot increase what
they charge the public and cannot easily obtain insurance for liability arising
from sexual abuse.  While in this case, it may be that the loss can be
distributed to the public (since the province pays the Foundation for caring
for children like the respondent), many non-profit organizations may have no
way to obtain contribution from other sources to cover judgments against them. 
In sum, attaching liability to charities like the Foundation will, in the long
run, disadvantage society.  54                              
I cannot accept this contention.  It is based on the idea that
children like the respondent must bear the cost of the harm that has been done
to them so that others in society may benefit from the good work of non-profit
organizations.  The suggestion that the victim must remain remediless for the
greater good smacks of crass and unsubstantiated utilitarianism.  Indeed, it is
far from clear to me that the “net” good produced by non-profit institutions
justifies the price placed on the individual victim, nor that this is a fair
way for society to order its resources.  If, in the final analysis, the choice
is between which of two faultless parties should bear the loss __
the party that created the risk that materialized in the wrongdoing or the
victim of the wrongdoing __ I do not hesitate in my answer.  Neither
alternative is attractive.  But given that a choice must be made, it is fairer
to place the loss on the party that introduced the risk and had the better
opportunity to control it.  55                              
Finally, it seems to me artificial to suggest that Bazley could
have claimed against the government because, by making the initial placement
order, it was the cause-in-fact for Curry’s torts.  The connection between the
original government order and the sexual abuse is too remote to support
liability.  56                              
I conclude that the case for exempting non-profit institutions
from vicarious liability otherwise properly imposed at law has not been
established.  I can see no basis for carving out an exception from the common
law of vicarious liability for a particular class of defendants, non-profit
organizations.  The record before us does not support crafting such a
status-based exemption from liability, and I am unconvinced that such a course
would be appropriate.  The Court’s task is to clarify the general legal
principles that govern vicarious liability.  The common law backdrop thus
established, it is for the legislature to consider whether relief should be
granted to limit the legal exposure of non-profit organizations to prosecution
for sexual abuse.  C.  Application
to the Case at Bar  57                              
The appropriate inquiry in a case such as this is whether the
employee’s wrongful act was so closely connected to the employment relationship
that the imposition of vicarious liability is justified in policy and
principle.  From the point of view of principle, a prime indicator is whether
the employer, by carrying on its operations, created or materially enhanced the
risk of the wrong that occurred, such that the policy considerations of fair
recovery and deterrence are engaged.  In answering this question, the court
must have regard to how the employer’s enterprise increased opportunity to commit
the wrong, and how it fostered power-dependency relationships that materially
enhanced the risk of the harm.  There is no special rule for non-profit
corporations.  58                              
Applying these considerations to the facts in the case at bar,
the Foundation is vicariously liable for the sexual misconduct of Curry. The
opportunity for intimate private control and the parental relationship and
power required by the terms of employment created the special environment that
nurtured and brought to fruition Curry’s sexual abuse.  The employer’s
enterprise created and fostered the risk that led to the ultimate harm.  The
abuse was not a mere accident of time and place, but the product of the special
relationship of intimacy and respect the employer fostered, as well as the
special opportunities for exploitation of that relationship it furnished. 
Indeed, it is difficult to imagine a job with a greater risk for child sexual
abuse.  This is not to suggest that future cases must rise to the same level to
impose vicarious liability.  Fairness and the need for deterrence in this
critical area of human conduct __ the care of vulnerable children __
suggest that as between the Foundation that created and managed the risk and
the innocent victim, the Foundation should bear the loss.  VI.  Conclusion  59                              
I would dismiss the appeal with costs and remit the matter to
trial.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant the Children’s
Foundation:  Alexander, Holburn, Beaudin & Lang, Vancouver.  Solicitor for the appellant Her Majesty the Queen in Right of
British Columbia:  The Ministry of the Attorney General, Victoria.  Solicitor for the respondent:  D. Brent Adair, Trail, B.C.  Solicitor for the intervener Her Majesty the Queen in Right of
Alberta:  Alberta Justice, Edmonton.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Conference of Catholic
Bishops:  Barnes, Sammon, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the intervener the United Church of Canada:  Harper
Grey Easton, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the intervener the General Synod of the Anglican
Church of Canada:  Boughton Peterson Yang Anderson, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the intervener Wunnumin Lake First Nation:  Goodman
& Carr, Toronto.  Solicitors for the interveners William Richard Blackwater et al.: 
Hutchins, Soroka & Grant, Vancouver.  Solicitors for the interveners Barrie Caldwell, Samuel McNab and
Glen Pelletier:  MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman, Regina.   