 an infant by her mother and guardian ad litem, Rosetta Carmela Toneguzzo                                              Appellant  and  Rosetta Carmela Toneguzzo                                                             (Plaintiff)  v.  Nelson Savein              Respondent  and  Burnaby Hospital         Respondent   File No.:  23195.  1993:  November 1;
1994:  January 27.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                       Held:  The appeal should be
allowed in part.                      Owing to the manner
in which the case was presented at trial, this Court is not in a position to
entertain the appellant's new arguments that the future income loss award
should be calculated on male earnings tables.  Given that the only evidence on
the record before the trial judge were the earning tables for women, and given
that he was asked by the appellant's counsel to apply only these tables, the
trial judge did not err in using a female earnings table in determining the
appellant's future income loss.  The most the trial judge could do, and has
done, was take into account as a positive contingency the expectation that as
greater equality is achieved between men and women in our society, women's
earnings will increase.  The appellant's alternative claim that the trial judge
and the Court of Appeal erred in failing to make adequate allowance for loss of
marriage benefits raises similar evidentiary problems.  On the state of the
record, it is not open to this Court to say the courts below were in error and
substitute its own view.                     The Court of Appeal
did not err in deducting 50 per cent for living expenses in the "lost
years" from the award for loss of future earning capacity.  A deduction
for personal living expenses must be made not only for the years the appellant
will actually live but also for the years after her projected death.  Had the
appellant been in a position to earn the monies represented by an award for
lost earning capacity, she would have had to spend a portion of them for living
expenses.  Not to recognize this is to introduce an element of duplication and
to put the appellant in a better position than she would have been in had she
actually earned the monies in question.  Cases Cited                     Referred to:  P. (D.) v. S. (C.),
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 141; Geffen v. Goodman Estate, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 353; Stein
v. The Ship "Kathy K", [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802; Croke (a minor) v.
Wiseman, [1981] 3 All E.R. 852; Semenoff v. Kokan (1991), 59
B.C.L.R. (2d) 195; Pickett v. British Rail Engineering Ltd., [1979] 1
All E.R. 774; Skelton v. Collins (1966), 115 C.L.R. 94.  Authors Cited                       Darrell W.
Roberts, Q.C.,
Susan A. Griffin and W. A. Baker, for the
appellant.                     C. E. Hinkson, Q.C., and Cheryl L.
Talbot, for the respondent Savein.                     John G. Dives and P. A. Washington,
for the respondent Burnaby Hospital.                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered by                     McLachlin
J. -- This is a claim for
injuries suffered by a child due to oxygen deprivation during her birth.  The
oxygen deprivation resulted in severe disabilities, including mental
retardation, blindness and a seizure disorder.  The trial judge summarized her
situation as follows:  ". . .  the child for all intents and purposes is,
and will continue to exist until her death, totally incapacitated and incapable
of displaying any cognition beyond that of a reflexive nature".  Unrelated
to these impairments, Jessica also suffered from a hip abnormality, which was
surgically corrected.  The attending physician, Nelson Savein, and the Burnaby
Hospital admitted liability for her injuries.  The only issue before the trial
judge was the assessment of damages.                     The trial judge
awarded the followings:  Non-Pecuniary Damages                                                                                                                                              $   
20,000 Past Care                                                                                                                                             $   
50,000 Future Income Loss                                                                                                                              $  
292,758 Future Care                                                                                          $
1,524,746 Management Fees                                                                                                                                            $   
94,375                                        Total                                                               $
1,981,879                     The Court of Appeal
reduced this award on grounds that the trial judge had overestimated Jessica's
life expectancy by seven years and had failed to make a deduction for personal
living expenses from the portion of the award relating to lost earning capacity
for the years after Jessica's death (i.e., the "lost years").   The
Court of Appeal dismissed a cross-appeal which alleged the damages awarded by
the trial judge were too low:  (1992), 73 B.C.L.R. (2d) 116.   Jessica and her
mother now appeal to this Court.                     This appeal raises
the following issues:  (1) The validity of the assessment of
life expectancy;  (2) The use of female earning tables
and the treatment of loss of marriage benefits in fixing the award for lost
earning capacity;  (3) The deduction of 50 per cent for
personal living expenses from the award for lost earning capacity during the
"lost years".                     I will deal with
each issue in turn.  1.  The Validity of the Assessment
of Life Expectancy                     The trial judge
heard evidence from three experts on Jessica's life expectancy.  Dr. MacLean, a
paediatrician with 35 years experience, testified that, with the continuation
of the care currently enjoyed by Jessica, she could expect to live to 25 or 30
years of age.  Dr. Van Rijn, an expert in the assessment of clinically impaired
disabled persons, was of the view that survival to 10 years of age was
critical, and that once that age passed, the child could live into her
forties.  The third expert was a paediatric neurologist, Dr. Crichton, who was
of the view that the appellant's life expectancy was 7.6 years, although he
testified it could be longer with excellent care.  Dr. Crichton relied on a
study published in the New England Journal of Medicine on the life
expectancy of profoundly handicapped persons (the "Eyman Study"). 
Dr. MacLean had been referred to the Eyman Study, but had not read it.                     In addition to the
expert evidence, the trial judge heard evidence attesting to the devotion of
Jessica's mother to Jessica and the very high level of care which Jessica was
receiving as a result of that devotion.                     The trial judge
concluded that the best estimate of Jessica's life expectancy was 25 years from
birth, or 22 1/2 years from the date of trial.  He concluded that home care was
a major factor in the child's continued well-being.  In considering the
evidence presented by the experts, the trial judge noted that the plaintiff had
not called Dr. Hill, the neurological paediatrician who had cared for Jessica
since birth.  He stated that he was prepared to draw the adverse inference from
the failure to call Dr. Hill that his evidence as to life expectancy would not
favour the plaintiff.  He assessed the differing expert opinions as follows:                     I
have sifted and weighed the evidence on the issue of life expectancy and I have
come to the conclusion that it is the evidence of Dr. MacLean that impresses me
the most.  Notwithstanding the able observations of Dr. Crichton and his
reference to the Eyman Article, there are too many variables involved to apply
its informative contents to the case at bar, or to give it the weight required
to take it from the general to the particular, that is to say, from the
statistical sphere into the realm of specific application.  Had Dr. Crichton
expressed the view that from his personal experience, the life expectancy of
the child was 7.6 years and later referred to the Eyman Study as corroborative
of this opinion, I would have given his evidence more weight, but as it stands,
it appeared to me he more or less reflected largely, but not entirely, what was
indicated by the Article.  The matter is too grave to be resolved by statistics
when such evidence as that of Dr. MacLean, supported to some extent by Dr. Van
Rijn, is available.                     Nevertheless,
I feel I must give some effect to the Study and, as a result, cannot accept the
evidence of Dr. MacLean to its fullest extent. . . .                     It will be seen
from the above passage that the trial judge was reluctant to put too much
weight on the statistical evidence, found in the Eyman Study, an American
article which suggested much lower survival rates than the life expectancy
which Dr. MacLean forecast for Jessica.                     The Court of Appeal
saw the matter differently. It faulted the trial judge for failing to place
proper weight on the statistical evidence and in particular, on the Eyman
Study.  Goldie J.A., speaking for the court, began by pointing out that the
failure to call Dr. Hill led to the inference that his evidence on life
expectancy would not have supported that of Dr. MacLean.  He then proceeded to
examine the expert evidence in depth.  He noted that Dr. MacLean's estimate was
based on experience with children unaffected by seizure disorder and that
similar children that he had dealt with in the two years prior to his testimony
had died between three and ten years of age. He further noted that Dr.
MacLean's experience with children with similar conditions was limited to 20
children.  Goldie J.A. found it significant that Dr. MacLean had not read the
Eyman Study, although he had been referred to it.  As a direct result, Goldie
J.A. found that the trial judge "misapprehended the significance of the
Eyman study as well as attributing greater weight to Dr. MacLean's evidence
than was warranted" (p. 127).                     In conclusion,
Goldie J.A. held that the trial judge did not make full or correct use of the
evidence before him, and that there was "virtually no basis for his
conclusion that Jessica would survive another 22 1/2 years" (p. 127). 
Goldie J.A. reduced the life expectancy by seven years.  He noted that this was
higher than warranted by the Eyman Study for immobile persons but gave effect
to the optimal care enjoyed by the appellant.                     The question is
whether the Court of Appeal was justified in substituting its assessment of
life expectancy for that of the trial judge.                     It is by now well
established that a Court of Appeal must not interfere with a trial judge's
conclusions on matters of fact unless there is palpable or overriding error. 
In principle, a Court of Appeal will only intervene if the judge has made a
manifest error, has ignored conclusive or relevant evidence, has misunderstood
the evidence, or has drawn erroneous conclusions from it:  see P. (D.) v. S.
(C.), [1993] 4 S.C.R. 141, at pp. 188-89 (per L'Heureux-Dubé J.),
and all cases cited therein, as well as Geffen v. Goodman Estate, [1991]
2 S.C.R. 353, at pp. 388-89 (per Wilson J.), and Stein v. The Ship
"Kathy K",  [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802, at pp. 806-8 (per Ritchie
J.).  A Court of Appeal is clearly not entitled to interfere merely because it
takes a different view of the evidence.  The finding of facts and the drawing
of evidentiary conclusions from facts is the province of the trial judge, not
the Court of Appeal.                     The Court of Appeal
justified its intervention on the ground that it was in as good a position to
draw inferences from the evidence as was the trial judge (at pp. 121-22):                     There
is no issue with respect to the veracity of these expert witnesses.  As the
trier of fact the trial judge was free to reject or adopt in whole or in part
the evidence of experts he found qualified but in the absence of findings of
credibility this court is in as good a position as the trial judge to review
the expert evidence and to draw inferences of fact therefrom: New Brunswick
(Workmen's Compensation Board) v. Greer (1973), [1975] 1 S.C.R. 347, 7
N.B.R. (2d) 171, 42 D.L.R. (3d) 595, 1 N.R. 99.   It should undertake this task
if the trial judge has failed to take into account some obvious feature of the
evidence or has misapprehended its significance: Croke (A Minor) v. Wiseman,
[1982] 1 W.L.R. 71, [1981] 3 All E.R. 852 (C.A.),  per Griffiths L.J. at p. 859
(All E.R.).                       I agree that the
principle of non-intervention of a Court of Appeal in a trial judge's findings
of facts does not apply with the same force to inferences drawn from
conflicting testimony of expert witnesses where the credibility of these
witnesses is not in issue.  This does not however change the fact that the
weight to be assigned to the various pieces of evidence is under our trial
system essentially the province of the trier of fact, in this case the trial
judge.                     The different
conclusions of the trial judge and the Court of Appeal in this case arise
mainly from the differing weight they  put upon the Eyman Study.  It was far
from clear what weight this study should carry.  The study was based on figures
from a different country with a different health care system from that which
Jessica enjoyed.  Nor did it disclose the level of care which the children who
made up the statistics received.  These are factors which, if Dr. MacLean was
believed, were of great importance.  Moreover, there was no unanimity on the
importance of the extraordinarily high quality of care Jessica would receive on
her life expectancy.  In short,  the issue was  what weight should be put on
disparate pieces of potentially conflicting evidence.   This, as I have
indicated, is the province of the trier of fact.                     Nor am I persuaded
that the trial judge, in the case at bar, failed to consider or misapprehended
some obvious feature of the evidence, the error discussed in Croke (a minor)
v. Wiseman, [1981] 3 All E.R. 852,  at pp. 859-60.  The trial judge
carefully considered the evidence of all the experts on the question of life
expectancy, as well as the Eyman study.  Concerns with respect to the
applicability of the Eyman study led him to discount it to a greater degree
than the Court of Appeal would have.  But this does not support the conclusion
that the trial judge ignored the Eyman study, in the absence of a demonstration
that his concerns about its applicability were totally without foundation.                     The matter of the
adverse inference from the failure to call Dr. Hill remains to be considered. 
The trial judge drew the inference from the failure to call Dr. Hill that his
evidence would not have favoured the plaintiff.  Despite drawing this
inference, the trial judge concluded that he should accept Dr. MacLean's
evidence.   As trier of fact, it was open to him to do so.  It is trite law
that the trier of fact may accept such evidence as he or she finds convincing,
and that an appellate tribunal ought not to interfere unless it is persuaded
that the result  amounts to a "palpable or overriding error".                     I conclude that the
Court of Appeal erred in interfering with the trial judge's conclusion on life
expectancy.  2.The
Use of Female Earning Tables and the Treatment of Loss of Marriage Benefits in
Fixing the Award for Lost Earning Capacity                     In order to
determine the award for Jessica's lost earning capacity, the trial judge was
required to consider what Jessica would have earned had she not been injured at
birth.  Counsel for Jessica at trial asked the judge to base the award for lost
earning capacity on earning tables for women with post-secondary non-university
training.  Counsel, through the expert witness Carson, introduced male earning
tables, but advised the judge that this was done "simply for comparative
purposes" and further assured the judge "we're not going to rely upon
[them]".  The judge accordingly drew a line through them, striking them
from the record.                     The trial judge,
noting that assessing loss of future earning capacity involves many
hypotheticals, based his analysis in the main on the assumptions proposed by
Jessica's counsel: that Jessica, had she not been injured, would have received
non-university post-secondary education; and that she would have entered the
workforce at the age of 19 and remained in it until the age of 65.  This
resulted in an award, when discounted for present value, of $292,758.                     But the trial judge
went further.  Jessica's counsel had not asked him to increase the award to
compensate for the fact that the earning tables for women reflect past
inequities which have historically resulted in women on average earning less
than men, inequities which arguably should not be imposed on Jessica. 
Nevertheless, the trial judge took this matter into consideration.  Given the
conduct of the case, he had no evidence before him of what people would earn in
the future, assuming income parity between females and males.  Indeed, he did
not have the male earnings tables in evidence before him.  This absence of
evidence precluded a detailed calculation on a "gender neutral"
basis.  But the trial judge did consider this factor as one of the positive
contingencies which justified a higher award than might otherwise be the case,
stating that he was weighing "other contingencies such as the possibility
of family income, early retirement packages and the trend to increase and
equalize the salaries of women with those of men" (emphasis added). 
The Court of Appeal generally affirmed the trial judge's conclusions on this
point.                     Before us, counsel
for Jessica argued that both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal had
erred.  She urged this Court to set aside their award for lost future earning
capacity and to substitute an award based on male earning tables.                    Any attempt to
implement this submission on this appeal runs squarely up against the
impediment that, on the record and submissions of counsel before the trial
judge, it is impossible to say that the trial judge erred, much less that his
conclusion on the award for lost future earning capacity was wholly erroneous. 
The trial judge in fact went further than counsel for Jessica urged him to do
in considering the potential inequity of applying earning tables based on past
earnings of women.  Given that the only evidence on the record before the trial
judge was the earning table for women, and given that he was asked to apply
only this table, the most the trial judge could do was take into account as a
positive contingency the expectation that as greater equality is achieved
between men and women in our society, women's earnings will increase.  This
Court is in no better position.  Due to the manner in which this case was
presented at trial, we are not in a position to entertain the arguments
advanced for the first time in this Court that female earning tables should be
replaced by other alternatives.  Consideration of these arguments must await
another case, where the proper evidentiary foundation has been laid.                     Counsel for the
appellant submits in the alternative that the trial judge and the Court of
Appeal erred in failing to make adequate allowance for loss of marriage
benefits.  This claim raises similar evidentiary problems.  On the state of the
record before us, it is not open to us to say the courts below were in error
and substitute our own view.  3.The
Deduction of 50 Per Cent for Personal Living Expenses from the Award for Lost
Earning Capacity during the "Lost Years"                     Jessica is entitled
to an award for the loss of earning capacity, not only for the years she will
actually live, but for the years she would have lived had she not been injured
at birth.  It is established that a deduction for personal living expenses must
be made from the award for lost earning capacity for the years she will
actually live.  This is necessary to avoid duplication with the award for cost
of future care.  The question is whether a similar deduction should be made
from the award for lost earning capacity for the years after the plaintiff's
projected death.  In this case, the bulk of the earnings fall into the latter
category.                     The trial judge
made no deduction for personal expenses.  The Court of Appeal deducted 50 per
cent on this account.  In so ruling, the Court of Appeal followed its earlier
decision in Semenoff v. Kokan (1991), 59 B.C.L.R. (2d) 195.  This
approach reflects the view taken in England (Pickett v. British Rail
Engineering Ltd., [1979] 1 All E.R. 774 (H.L.)) and in Australia (Skelton
v. Collins (1966), 115 C.L.R. 94 (H.C.)).                     A number of
considerations suggest that a deduction for personal living expenses should be
made from the award for lost earning capacity during the "lost
years".  The first is the fact that the projected earnings could not have
been earned except on the supposition that the plaintiff would have been alive
to earn them.  There can be no capacity to earn without a life.  The
maintenance of that life requires expenditure for personal living expenses. 
Hence the earnings which the award represents are conditional on personal
living expenses having been incurred.  It follows that such expenses may
appropriately be deducted from the award.  Against this, it is argued that if
Jessica had been born a millionaire, her personal living expenses during the
"lost years" would have been met from other sources.  But this does
not negate the fact that in order to earn income one must live and incur the
attendant expenses.                     It can be argued
that not to make a deduction for personal living expenses is to introduce into
the award for lost earning capacity for the "lost years" a measure of
overcompensation akin to the duplication which the law avoids in the case of an
award for lost earnings during the plaintiff's actual lifespan.  This deduction
has been justified for the years before the plaintiff's actual projected death,
on the ground that it avoids duplication between the award for cost of care and
the award for lost earning capacity.  But in fact, the "lived years" and
the "lost years" cannot be so easily distinguished.  The same
reasoning applies to both: had the plaintiff been in a position to earn the
monies represented by the award for lost earning capacity, she would have had
to spend a portion of them for living expenses.  Not to recognize this is to
introduce an element of duplication and to put the plaintiff in a better
position than she would have been in had she actually earned the monies in
question.                     The
logic of the making of a deduction for personal living expenses on the lost
years in the case of a child is also supported by the argument that since
Jessica's care is fully provided for under another head of the award, the award
for lost earning capacity will serve but one purpose: to enrich her heirs.  It
will do little to improve her life.  As Cooper-Stephenson and Saunders
persuasively argue in Personal Injury Damages in Canada (1981), at p.
244, the amount by which heirs can ordinarily expect to be enriched by a
victim's putative earnings is small indeed:   . .
. the award of damages to a very young child for prospective loss of earnings
during the lost years should reflect only that portion of the entire lifetime
earnings which the court estimates would have been saved by the child for his
estate, at the end of his pre-accident life expectancy.  It may result in a
very small award. . . .                     I conclude that
logical and functional considerations combine to suggest that it is appropriate
to make a deduction for personal living expenses from the award for lost earning
capacity during the "lost years".  4.  Conclusion                     I would allow the
appeal in part.   I would restore the decision of the trial judge that the
appellant's life expectancy is 22 1/2 years from the date of trial.  I would
maintain the Court of Appeal's deduction of 50 per cent from the award for lost
earning capacity.                     Costs here and
below should be assessed in accordance with the disposition of the respective
issues.                     Appeal allowed in
part.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Roberts, Muir & Griffin, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
respondent Savein:  Harper Grey Easton, Vancouver.                     Solicitors
for the respondent Burnaby Hospital:  Bull, Housser & Tupper,
Vancouver.  