BG Checo International Ltd. v.
British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12  British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority                                  Appellant  v.  BG Checo International Limited                                                       Respondent  and between  BG Checo International Limited                                                       Appellant  v.  British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority                                              Respondent  Indexed as:  BG Checo
International Ltd. v. British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority  File Nos.:  21939, 21955.  1992:  January 28;
1993:  January 21.   on appeal from the court of appeal for british
columbia                        Checo sued Hydro seeking
damages for negligent misrepresentation, or, in the alternative, for breach of
contract.  The evidence at trial indicated that Hydro had contracted the
clearing out to another company, and that, to Hydro's knowledge, the work was
not done adequately.  There was no direct discussion between the
representatives of Checo and Hydro concerning this issue.  During the trial
Checo amended its statement of claim to include a claim in fraud.  The trial
judge found that Hydro had acted fraudulently in its dealings with Checo and
awarded damages to Checo.  Hydro appealed to the Court of Appeal, which
rejected the finding of fraud, but found that there had been a negligent
misrepresentation which induced Checo to enter into the contract.  The Court of
Appeal awarded damages for the misrepresentation, but reduced the trial judge's
damage award, and referred the question of breach of contract and damages
flowing therefrom back to the trial court.                      Held (Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting in
part):  The appeal should be dismissed and the cross-appeal allowed
in part.                      The contract does not preclude
Checo from suing in tort.  The general rule emerging from this Court's decision
in Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse is that where a given wrong prima
facie supports an action in contract and in tort, the party may sue in
either or both, subject to any limit the parties themselves have placed on that
right by their contract.  This limitation on the general rule of concurrency
arises because it is always open to parties to limit or waive the duties which
the common law would impose on them for negligence.  The mere fact that the
parties have dealt with a matter expressly in their contract does not mean that
they intended to exclude the right to sue in tort.  It all depends on how they
have dealt with it.  In so far as the tort duty is not contradicted by the
contract, it remains intact and may be sued upon.                     This principle is illustrated
by consideration of the three situations that may arise when contract and tort
are applied to the same wrong.  The first class of case arises where the
contract stipulates a more stringent obligation than the general law of tort
would impose.  In that case, the parties are hardly likely to sue in tort,
since they could not recover in tort for the higher contractual duty.  The vast
majority of commercial transactions fall into this class.  The right to sue in
tort is not extinguished, however, and may remain important, as where suit in
contract is barred by expiry of a limitation period.  The second class of case
arises where the contract stipulates a lower duty than that which would be
presumed by the law of tort in similar circumstances.  This occurs when the
parties by their contract indicate their intention that the usual liability
imposed by the law of tort is not to bind them.  The most common means by which
such an intention is indicated is the inclusion of a clause of exemption or
exclusion of liability in the contract.  Generally, the duty imposed by the law
of tort can be nullified only by clear terms.  The third class of case arises
where the duty in contract and the common law duty in tort are co-extensive. 
In this class of case, like the others, the plaintiff may seek to sue
concurrently or alternatively in tort to secure some advantage peculiar to the
law of tort, such as a more generous limitation period.  The case at bar falls
into this third category.  Hydro's common law duty not to negligently
misrepresent that it would have the right-of-way cleared by others is not
excluded by the contract, which confirmed Hydro's obligation to clear the right-of-way.                     The availability of concurrent
liability in contract and tort should not be predicated on whether the
contractual term is express or implied.  Using the express-implied distinction
as a basis for determining whether there is a right to sue in tort poses a
number of problems.  The law has always treated express and implied terms as
being equivalent in effect, and it is difficult to distinguish between them in
some cases.  It is not evident that if parties to a contract choose to include
an express term in the contract dealing with a particular duty relevant to the
contract, they intended to oust the availability of tort remedies in respect of
that duty.  Finally, the test will be difficult to apply in situations where
the express contractual term does not exactly overlap the tort duty.  Neither
principle, the authorities nor the needs of contracting parties support the
conclusion that dealing with a matter by an express contract term will, in
itself, categorically exclude the right to sue in tort.                     The contract did not limit the
duty of care owed by Hydro to Checo, nor did Checo waive its common law right
to bring such tort actions as might be open to it.  Checo is thus entitled to
claim against Hydro in tort.                     In situations of concurrent
liability in tort and contract it would seem anomalous to award a different
level of damages for what is essentially the same wrong on the sole basis of
the form of action chosen, though particular circumstances or policy may
dictate such a course.                     Checo is entitled to be
compensated for all reasonably foreseeable loss caused by the tort.  The Court
of Appeal was justified in finding that had the misrepresentation not been
made, Checo would have entered into the contract, but with a higher bid.  It
was of the view that Checo would have increased its bid by an amount equal to
the cost of the extra work made necessary by the improperly cleared work site
plus profit and overhead.  To compensate only for the direct costs of clearing,
however, is to suggest that the only tort was the failure to clear.  The real
fault is that Hydro misrepresented the situation and Checo may have relied on
that representation in performing its other obligations under the contract. 
Having to devote its resources to that extra work might have prevented Checo
from meeting its original schedule, thereby resulting in Checo incurring
acceleration costs in order to meet the contract completion date.  Such costs
would also arguably be reasonably foreseeable.  The matter should be referred back
to the trial court for determination of whether any such indirect losses were
the foreseeable result of the misrepresentation.                     The breach of contract claims
should be referred to the trial court for determination.  Checo is to be put in
the position it would be in had the work site been cleared properly, and is
therefore to be reimbursed for all expenses incurred as a result of the breach
of contract, whether expected or not, except to the extent that those expenses
may have been so unexpected that they are too remote to be compensable for
breach of contract.  The damages in contract would thus include not only the
costs flowing directly from the improperly cleared work site, but also
consequent indirect costs such as acceleration costs due to delays in construction.                     There was no evidence of an
intention on the part of Hydro to deceive, and the Court of Appeal therefore
correctly concluded that Hydro should not be liable for fraudulent
misrepresentation.                     Per Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ. (dissenting in part):  In
the circumstances of the case, Hydro may be liable in contract for the
representations which Checo complains of, but it cannot be liable in tort. 
While as a general rule, the existence of a contract between two parties does
not preclude the existence of a common law duty of care, contractual exclusion
or limitation clauses can operate either to exclude or limit liability, or to
limit the duty owed by one party to the other, whether in contract or in tort. 
In neither case will the plaintiff be permitted to use an action in tort to
circumvent the limitation of liability or of duty in the contract.  The
contractual relationship can bring the parties into sufficient proximity to
give rise to a duty of care, but no duty of care in tort can be concurrent with
a duty of care created by an express term of the contract.  If the duty is
defined by an express term of the contract, the plaintiff will be confined to
whatever remedies are available in the law of contract.  A claim in tort is not
foreclosed in all circumstances, however.  A contextual approach should be
adopted which takes into account the context in which the contract is made, and
the position of the parties with respect to one another.  The policy reasons in
favour of the rule are strongest where the contractual context is commercial
and the parties are of equal bargaining power.  Here there is no question of
unconscionability or inequality of bargaining power.  If such issues, or others
analogous to them, were to arise, however, a court should be wary not to
exclude too rapidly a duty of care in tort on the basis of an express term of
the contract, especially if the end result for the plaintiff would be a wrong
without a remedy.                       There was insufficient
evidence to support a finding of deceit. The Court of Appeal properly concluded
that Hydro should not be liable for fraudulent misrepresentation.  Cases Cited  By La Forest and McLachlin JJ.   By Iacobucci J. (dissenting in part)   Authors Cited  Baker,
J. H.  An Introduction to English Legal History.  London: 
Butterworths, 1979.  Blom, Joost. 
"Remedies in Tort and Contract:  Where is the Difference?".  In
Jeffrey Berryman, ed., Remedies:  Issues and Perspectives. 
Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1991, 395.  Chitty on
Contracts, vol. 1, 26th
ed.  By A. G. Guest.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1989.  Fifoot,
C. H. S. History and Sources of the Common Law:  Tort and
Contract.  London:  Stevens & Sons, 1949.  French,
Christine.  "The Contract/Tort Dilemma" (1983), 5 Otago L. Rev.
236.   Johnson,
Howard.  "Contract and Tort:  Orthodoxy Reasserted!" (1990), 9 Int'l
Banking L. 306.  Lewison, Kim.  The
Interpretation of Contracts.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1989.  McLachlin,
Beverley M., and Wilfred J. Wallace.  The Canadian Law of
Architecture and Engineering.  Toronto:  Butterworths, 1987.  McLauchlan,
D. W.  "Assessment of Damages for Misrepresentations Inducing
Contracts" (1987), 6 Otago L. Rev. 370.                       Glenn A. Urquhart, Arthur M. Grant and Gordon D.
Phillips, for British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority.                     Donald J. Sorochan, Q.C., Meredith A. Quartermain
and Mari A. Worfolk, for BG Checo International Ltd.  //La Forest and McLachlin JJ.//                         Hydro argues first that it
carried out the clearing required by clause 6.01.03 of the contract, and
second, that in any event it was up to Checo to satisfy itself that the site
was adequately cleared before tendering.  In other words, if there was
ambiguity as to what was meant by "cleared" Checo had assumed the
risk of clearing which might not meet its expectations.                     The trial judge found Hydro
liable for the tort of deceit.  The Court of Appeal found that the evidence
fell short of supporting that finding, there being no evidence of intention to
deceive.  That conclusion cannot seriously be contested and Checo's
cross-appeal on the issue of fraudulent misrepresentation must accordingly be
dismissed. The only issues therefore are whether claims lie in contract and
tort and if so, what is the measure of damages.  The Claim in Contract                     The parties chose to set out
their respective rights and obligations in the contract they signed.  They
chose to incorporate the tender documents into the contract. Thus all rights
and obligations flowing from the tender documents onward are set by the
parties' own agreement.                     It follows that a court, in
assessing the rights and obligations of the parties, must commence with the
contract.  It must look to what the parties themselves had to say about those
rights and obligations.                      It is a cardinal rule of the
construction of contracts that the various parts of the contract are to be
interpreted in the context of the intentions of the parties as evident from the
contract as a whole:  K. Lewison, The Interpretation of Contracts
(1989), at p. 124; Chitty on Contracts (26th ed. 1989), vol. 1, at p.
520.  Where there are apparent inconsistencies between different terms of a
contract, the court should attempt to find an interpretation which can
reasonably give meaning to each of the terms in question.  Only if an interpretation
giving reasonable consistency to the terms in question cannot be found will the
court rule one clause or the other ineffective: Chitty on Contracts, supra,
at p. 526; Lewison, supra, at p. 206; Git v. Forbes (1921), 62
S.C.R. 1, per Duff J. (as he then was), dissenting, at p. 10, rev'd
[1922] 1 A.C. 256; Hassard v. Peace River Co-operative Seed Growers
Association Ltd., [1954] 2 D.L.R. 50 (S.C.C.), at p. 54.  In this process,
the terms will, if reasonably possible, be reconciled by construing one term as
a qualification of the other term: Forbes v. Git, [1922] 1 A.C. 256; Cotter
v. General Petroleums Ltd., [1951] S.C.R. 154.   A frequent result of this
kind of analysis will be that general terms of a contract will be seen to be
qualified by specific terms -- or, to put it another way, where there is
apparent conflict between a general term and a specific term, the terms may be
reconciled by taking the parties to have intended the scope of the general term
to not extend to the subject-matter of the specific term.                     Approaching the matter in this
way, the provisions referred to above are capable of reconciliation.  The
parties agreed that Hydro should bear the responsibility of clearing the
right-of-way.  The only exception was as to the removal of trees and debris in
certain valley and gully crossings.  The general obligation of Checo for
misunderstandings and errors in the tender documents and for satisfying itself
as to the site, the work and all contingencies must not have been intended to
negate the specific obligation for clearing which the contract placed squarely
on the shoulders of Hydro. The failure to discharge that responsibility was not
a "misunderstanding" or "error" in the tender documents
within clause 2.03.  Nor was it relevant to the tenderer's inspection of the
site or responsibility for risks and contingencies that might affect the bid
within clause 4.04.  Given the specific nature of Hydro's obligation to clear
the right-of-way, the site inspection and contingencies referred to can reasonably
be read as relating to matters other than clearing, which was a clearly
assigned obligation and thus not a contingency. The same applies to the
provision for preparation of the site (clause 7.01.02).  In this way, the
clause placing on Hydro the obligation to clear the right-of-way can be
reconciled with the clauses placing on Checo the consequences of errors and
misunderstandings in the tender documents and the obligation to satisfy itself
as to the site, the work and contingencies.                     We thus conclude that the
contract required Hydro to clear the right-of-way as specified in clause
6.01.03 of the contract and that duty was not negated by the more general
clauses relating to errors and misunderstandings in tendering, site conditions
and contingencies.  This was the view of the trial judge and the majority in
the Court of Appeal. The trial judge, based on the evidence he heard, went on
to define what "clearing" meant in the contract; it meant that
"the right-of-way would be free of logs and debris."  The majority of
the Court of Appeal accepted this conclusion.  So must we.  Since it is not
seriously contended that Hydro cleared the right-of-way to this standard,
Hydro's breach of contract is established.                     The plaintiff suing for breach
of contract is to be put in the position it would have been in had the contract
been performed as agreed.  The measure of damages is what is required to put
Checo in the position it would have been in had the contract been performed as
agreed.  If the contract had been performed as agreed, Hydro would have removed
the logs and debris from the right-of-way.  Checo would not have been required
to do the additional work that was necessitated by reason of the work site
being improperly cleared.  It might also have avoided certain overhead.   The
contract stipulated 15 percent for overhead and profit on extra work.  Checo
may be entitled to a portion of this sum for overhead.  It would not be
entitled to profit on the cost of clearing the right-of-way, since that would
put Checo in a better position than it would have been had Hydro performed its
contract; Checo never bargained for profit on this work, which was totally
outside the parties' expectations.  As will be explained in greater detail
later in these reasons, we share Iacobucci J.'s view that if damages are to be
assessed for breach of contract regarding the improper clearing of the work
site, the case should be returned to trial for that to be done.  The Claim in Tort  The Theory of Concurrency                     The first question is whether
the contract precludes Checo from suing in tort.                     Iacobucci J. concludes that a
contract between the parties may preclude the possibility of suing in tort for
a given wrong where there is an express term in the contract dealing with the
matter.  We would phrase the applicable principle somewhat more narrowly.  As
we see it, the right to sue in tort is not taken away by the contract in such a
case, although the contract, by limiting the scope of the tort duty or waiving
the right to sue in tort, may limit or negate tort liability.                     In our view, the general rule
emerging from this Court's decision in Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 147, is that where a given wrong prima facie supports an
action in contract and in tort, the party may sue in either or both, except
where the contract indicates that the parties intended to limit or negative the
right to sue in tort.  This limitation on the general rule of concurrency
arises because it is always open to parties to limit or waive the duties which
the common law would impose on them for negligence.  This principle is of great
importance in preserving a sphere of individual liberty and commercial
flexibility.  Thus if a person wishes to engage in a dangerous sport, the
person may stipulate in advance that he or she waives any right of action
against the person who operates the sport facility: Dyck v. Manitoba
Snowmobile Association Inc., [1985] 1 S.C.R. 589.  Similarly, if two
business firms agree that a particular risk should lie on a party who would not
ordinarily bear that risk at common law, they may do so.  So a plaintiff may
sue either in contract or in tort, subject to any limit the parties themselves
have placed on that right by their contract. The mere fact that the parties
have dealt with a matter expressly in their contract does not mean that they
intended to exclude the right to sue in tort.  It all depends on how
they have dealt with it.                     Viewed thus, the only limit on
the right to choose one's action is the principle of primacy of private
ordering -- the right of individuals to arrange their affairs and assume risks
in a different way than would be done by the law of tort.  It is only to the
extent that this private ordering contradicts the tort duty that the tort duty
is diminished.  The rule is not that one cannot sue concurrently in contract
and tort where the contract limits or contradicts the tort duty.  It is rather
that the tort duty, a general duty imputed by the law in all the relevant
circumstances, must yield to the parties' superior right to arrange their
rights and duties in a different way.  In so far as the tort duty is not
contradicted by the contract, it remains intact and may be sued upon. For
example, where the contractual limitation on the tort duty is partial, a tort
action founded on the modified duty might lie. The tort duty as modified by the
contractual agreement between the parties might be raised in a case where the
limitation period for an action for breach of contract has expired but the
limitation period for a tort action has not.  If one says categorically, as we
understand Iacobucci J. to say, that where the contract deals with a matter
expressly, the right to sue in tort vanishes altogether, then the latter two possibilities
vanish.                     This is illustrated by
consideration of the three situations that may arise when contract and tort are
applied to the same wrong. The first class of case arises where the contract
stipulates a more stringent obligation than the general law of tort would
impose.  In that case, the parties are hardly likely to sue in tort, since they
could not recover in tort for the higher contractual duty.  The vast majority
of commercial transactions fall into this class.  The right to sue in tort is not
extinguished, however, and may remain important, as where suit in contract is
barred by expiry of a limitation period.                     The second class of case
arises where the contract stipulates a lower duty than that which would be
presumed by the law of tort in similar circumstances.  This occurs when the
parties by their contract indicate their intention that the usual liability
imposed by the law of tort is not to bind them.  The most common means by which
such an intention is indicated is the inclusion of a clause of exemption or
exclusion of liability in the contract. Generally, the duty imposed by the law
of tort can be nullified only by clear terms.  We do not rule out, however, the
possibility that cases may arise in which merely inconsistent contract terms could
negative or limit a duty in tort, an issue that may be left to a case in which
it arises.  The issue raises difficult policy considerations, viz. an
assessment of the circumstances in which contracting parties should be
permitted to agree to contractual duties that would subtract from their general
obligations under the law of tort.  These important questions are best left to
a case in which the proper factual foundation is available, so as to provide an
appropriate context for the decision.  In the second class of case, as in the
first, there is usually little point in suing in tort since the duty in tort
and consequently any tort liability is limited by the specific limitation to
which the parties have agreed.  An exception might arise where the contract
does not entirely negate tort liability (e.g., the exemption clause applies
only above a certain amount) and the plaintiff wishes to sue in tort to avail
itself of a more generous limitation period or some other procedural advantage
offered by tort.                     The third class of case arises
where the duty in contract and the common law duty in tort are co-extensive. 
In this class of case, like the others, the plaintiff may seek to sue
concurrently or alternatively in tort to secure some advantage peculiar to the
law of tort, such as a more generous limitation period.  The contract may
expressly provide for a duty that is the same as that imposed by the common
law.  Or the contractual duty may be implied.  The common calling cases, which
have long permitted concurrent actions in contract and tort, generally fall
into this class.  There is a contract.  But the obligation under that contract
is typically defined by implied terms, i.e., by the courts. Thus there is no
issue of private ordering as opposed to publicly imposed liability.  Whether
the action is styled in contract or tort, its source is an objective
expectation, defined by the courts, of the appropriate obligation and the
correlative right.                     The case at bar, as we see it,
falls into this third category of case.  The contract, read as we have
proposed, did not negate Hydro's common law duty not to negligently
misrepresent that it would have the right-of-way cleared by others.  Had Checo
known the truth, it would have bid for a higher amount.  That duty is not
excluded by the contract, which confirmed Hydro's obligation to clear the
right-of-way.  Accordingly, Checo may sue in tort.                     We conclude that actions in
contract and tort may be concurrently pursued unless the parties by a valid
contractual provision indicate that they intended otherwise.  This excludes, of
course, cases where the contractual limitation is invalid, as by fraud, mistake
or unconscionability.  Similarly, a contractual limitation may not apply where
the tort is independent of the contract in the sense of falling outside the
scope of the contract, as the example given in Elder, Dempster & Co. v.
Paterson, Zochonis & Co., [1924] A.C. 522 (H.L.), of the captain of a
vessel falling asleep and starting a fire in relation to a claim for cargo damage.  The Express-Implied Distinction                     Our colleague asserts that
where the parties deal with a matter expressly in their contract, all right to
sue in tort is lost.  We have suggested, with great respect, that this
proposition is unnecessarily draconian.  The converse of this proposition is that
implied terms of contracts do not oust tort liability.                     Although Iacobucci J. states
at p. 000 of his reasons that he is leaving open the question of 
"[w]hether or not an implied term of a contract can define a duty of care
in such a way that a plaintiff is confined to a remedy in contract", the
distinction between implied and express terms figures in his discussion of the
effect of contract terms on tort liability.  For example, at p. 000 of his
reasons, our colleague states:  The compromise
position adopted by Le Dain J. was that any duty arising in tort will be
concurrent with duties arising under the contract, unless the duty which the
plaintiff seeks to rely on in tort is also a duty defined by an express term of
the contract.  [The emphasis is Iacobucci J.'s.]  It would seem to follow from this statement that
concurrent duties in contract and tort would lie where the contract duty is
defined by an implied term of the contract, but not where the term is
express.  In these circumstances, it is not amiss to consider the utility of
the distinction between express and implied terms of the contract as a basis
for determining when a contract term may affect tort liability.                     In our view, using the
express-implied distinction as a basis for determining whether there is a right
to sue in tort poses a number of problems.  The law has always treated express
and implied contract terms as being equivalent in effect.  Breach of an implied
term is just as serious as breach of an express term.  Moreover, it is difficult
to distinguish between them in some cases.  Implied terms may arise from
custom, for example, or from the conduct of the parties.  In some cases words
and conduct intermingle.  Why should parties who were so certain in their
obligations that they did not take the trouble to spell them out find
themselves able to sue in tort, while parties who put the same matters in
writing cannot?                     Nor is it evident to us that
if parties to a contract choose to include an express term in the contract
dealing with a particular duty relevant to the contract, they intended to oust
the availability of tort remedies in respect of that duty.  In such cases, the
intention may more likely be:  (a)  To
make it clear that the parties understand particular contractual duties to exist
as between them, rather than having the more uncertain situation of not knowing
whether a court will imply a particular duty under the contract; and/or  (b)  To
prevent litigation (for breach of contract) in the event of disputes arising --
the more certain the parties' respective rights and obligations (as is usually
the case when those rights and obligations are set out in express contractual
terms), the more likely it will be that disputes between the parties can be
settled.                     While the tort duty may be
limited by the contractual terms so as to be no broader than the contract duty,
there is no reason to suppose that merely by stipulating a duty in the
contract, the parties intended to negate all possibility of suing in tort.                     Indeed, a little further on in
his reasons, our colleague appears to concede that the ouster of recourse to
tort law must depend on more than the fact the contract has expressly dealt
with the matter.  He indicates at p. 000 of his reasons that whether the
parties will be held to have intended to oust tort remedies in favour of
contract remedies will depend on the context, including:  (a)  whether
the contract is commercial or non-commercial;  (b)  whether
the parties were of equal bargaining power;  (c)  whether
the court is of the view that to find such an intention will lead to an unjust
result in the court action.                     Thus the question of whether a
concurrent action in tort lies would depend not only on whether the contract
expressly deals with the matter, but also on the elastic distinctions between
commercial and non-commercial contracts, the court's perception of relative
bargaining power, and finally, whether the court sees the result as just or
unjust.  We do not agree that parties contracting in a commercial context
should be presumed to be more desirous of ousting the availability of tort
remedies than parties contracting in a non-commercial context.  If there are
particular commercial relationships in which the parties wish remedies for
disputes between them to be in contract only, then they may be expected to
indicate this intention by including an express clause in the contract waiving
the right to sue in tort.  As for equality of bargaining power and the court's
view of whether the result would be just or unjust, we fear they would
introduce too great a measure of uncertainty.  Parties should be able to
predict in advance whether their remedies are confined to contract or whether
they can sue concurrently in tort and contract.  Finally, it seems to us that
Iacobucci J.'s test for determining when concurrent liability is precluded will
be difficult to apply in situations where the express contractual term does not
exactly overlap a tort duty.  In the present case, the contractual term was
identical to the negligent misrepresentation, but that is not often to be
expected.  The Authorities                     The authorities, as we read
them, do not support the conclusion that the express mention of a matter in the
contract, and only its express mention in the contract, ousts any possibility
of suing in tort.  The opposing schools of thought on the concurrent liability
issue have not been divided along such lines.  Instead, the issue has been
whether there should be concurrent liability where any term of a contract, either
express or implied, deals with the same duty imposed by tort law.  For
example, in Lister v. Romford Ice and Cold Storage Co., [1957] A.C. 555
(H.L.), Viscount Simonds noted (at p. 573):  It is trite law
that a single act of negligence may give rise to a claim either in tort or for
breach of a term express or implied in a contract.  [Emphasis added.]                     Similarly, in Canadian
Indemnity Co. v. Andrews & George Co., [1953] 1 S.C.R. 19, Rand J.
stated (at p. 26):  Where a
contract expressly or by implication of fact provides for a performance
with care, as in the case of carriers, the general duty is clearly not
displaced and the person injured or damaged in property may sue either in
contract or tort.  [Emphasis added.]                     On the other side of the
concurrent liability debate, Wilson J.A. (as she then was), arguing in favour
of liability lying in contract only, stated at p. 408 in her dissenting opinion
in the Ontario Court of Appeal decision of Dominion Chain Co. v. Eastern
Construction Co. (1976), 68 D.L.R. (3d) 385, aff'd sub nom. Giffels
Associates Ltd. v. Eastern Construction Co., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 1346:                     The
borderline of contract and tort in my opinion exists where a contract either
expressly or impliedly imposes on A a duty of care vis-à-vis B, the other
party to the contract, to do the things undertaken by the contract without
negligence and there is also coincidental with, but independent of, the
contract a duty of care upon A in tort.... [W]here the person to whom the duty
is owed, the scope of the duty and the standard of care have all been expressly
or impliedly agreed upon by the parties, it appears to me somewhat
artificial to rely upon Lord Atkin's "neighbour" test to determine
whether or not the duty is owed to the particular plaintiff and as to the
requisite standard of care the defendant must attain.  [Emphasis added.]                     It is perhaps a source of some
confusion that in the course of his judgment in Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse,
supra, Le Dain J. stated (at p. 205):  Where the common
law duty of care is co-extensive with that which arises as an implied term of
the contract it obviously does not depend on the terms of the contract, and
there is nothing flowing from contractual intention which should preclude
reliance on a concurrent or alternative liability in tort.                     In our view, this passage
should not be read as predicating the availability of concurrent liability in
contract and tort on whether the contractual term is express or implied.  Le
Dain J. is simply stating that tort liability lies where the contractual term
is implied.  He does not go on to state that tort liability is always excluded
by an express contractual term.  This happens only when the express contractual
term negates the tort duty.  Thus in his summary of the applicable rules, Le
Dain J. refers to exclusion clauses -- express contract terms that negate
general liability -- as the kind of contract clause that may oust tort
liability.                     Our colleague relies on a
second passage from Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse, supra, at p.
205, for the proposition that an express contractual term always ousts tort
liability:                     What
is undertaken by the contract will indicate the nature of the relationship that
gives rise to the common law duty of care, but the nature and scope of the duty
of care that is asserted as the foundation of the tortious liability must not
depend on specific obligations or duties created by the express terms of the
contract.  It is in that sense that the common law duty of care must be
independent of the contract.  . . .  A claim cannot be said to be in
tort if it depends for the nature and scope of the asserted duty of care on the
manner in which an obligation or duty has been expressly and specifically
defined by a contract.  Again, with respect, our understanding of the
passage is different.  In our view, Le Dain J.'s use of the words 
"created" and "depends" indicates the meaning of this
passage is simply that for concurrent tort liability to be available there must
be a duty of care in tort that would exist even in the absence of the specific
contractual term which created the corresponding contractual obligation.                     This interpretation of Rafuse
accords with the view taken in other cases that concurrent liability in tort
and contract is available where the contractual obligation in question arises
from an express term of the contract.  For example, in Batty v. Metropolitan
Property Realisations Ltd., [1978] Q.B. 554, the English Court of Appeal
ruled that the plaintiffs were entitled to judgment against the defendant
developers in either contract or tort where a house leased to the plaintiffs on
a 999-year lease was gradually becoming uninhabitable due to instability of the
land on which the house was built.  The contractual obligation owed to the
plaintiffs by the developers arose from an express warranty in the contract
between the plaintiffs and the developers that the house had been built
"in an efficient and workmanlike manner and of proper materials and so as
to be fit for habitation . . ." (p. 563).  This contractual
obligation in effect corresponded with a tort duty "to examine with
reasonable care the land, which in this case would include adjoining land, in
order to see whether the site was one on which a house fit for habitation could
safely be built" (p. 567).                     Nor do we see the reference by
Le Dain J. in Rafuse to Jarvis v. Moy, Davies, Smith, Vandervell
& Co., [1936] 1 K.B. 399 (C.A.), and other related English case law
differentiating tort and contract, as supportive of a distinction between express
and implied contractual terms.  The issue in those cases was one of classifying
the causes of action as either tort or contract for procedural
purposes under the successive County Courts Acts.  Indeed, they may be seen as
resting on the assumption that, apart from statutory prescription, concurrent
actions may lie.  Summary                     We conclude that neither
principle, the authorities nor the needs of contracting parties support the
conclusion that dealing with a matter by an express contract term will, in
itself, categorically exclude the right to sue in tort.  The parties may by their
contract limit the duty one owes to the other or waive the right to sue in
tort.  But subject to this, the right to sue concurrently in tort and contract
remains.                     In the case at bar, the
contract did not limit the duty of care owed by Hydro to Checo.  Nor did Checo
waive its common law right to bring such tort actions as might be open to it. 
It follows that Checo was entitled to claim against Hydro in tort.  Damages in Tort and Contract in this Case                     The measure of damages in
contract and for the tort of negligent misrepresentation are:  Contract:  the plaintiff is to be put in the position it
would have been in had the contract been performed as agreed.  Tort:  the plaintiff is to be put in the position it
would have been in had the misrepresentation not been made.                     At trial the plaintiff relied
primarily on fraudulent misrepresentation, with its claim in contract being in
the alternative to the claim in tort.  The apparent reason for this approach
was that the plaintiff had calculated its damages in tort as exceeding the
damages in contract.  In situations of concurrent liability in tort and
contract, however, it would seem anomalous to award a different level of
damages for what is essentially the same wrong on the sole basis of the form of
action chosen, though, of course, particular circumstances or policy may
dictate such a course.                     The trial judge found for the
plaintiff in fraudulent misrepresentation, and seems at some points in his
judgment to have accepted the argument of the plaintiff that but for the
misrepresentation the plaintiff would not have entered into the contract with
Hydro.  Accordingly, Checo's damages were calculated on the basis of what Checo
lost overall on the contract.  The trial judge also awarded the plaintiff a 15
percent markup for overhead and profit.  With respect, while including an
amount for overhead is appropriate where the damages are assessed as equalling
the costs to the plaintiff of entering a contract it would not otherwise have
entered, including as well something for profit is not appropriate.  The trial
judge's purported justification for this part of the damage award is not
convincing.  To fit this part of the award within a tort analysis, one would
have to assume that but for the misrepresentation the plaintiff would have
increased its bid by exactly the amount of the loss, plus overhead and profit
(and would have been awarded the contract).  This assumption contradicts the
apparent assumption by the trial judge at other points of his judgment that
Checo would not have entered the contract had it known the true state of
affairs.                      The majority in the Court of
Appeal not only substituted a finding of negligent misrepresentation for a
finding of fraudulent misrepresentation, but also made an express finding
regarding what the plaintiff would have done had the misrepresentation not been
made; contrary to the trial judge's apparent assumption, the plaintiff would
have entered the contract but at a higher price.  As Hinkson J.A., put it,
writing for the majority:  The effect of
[the] negligent misrepresentation was to induce the plaintiff to enter into a
contract at a price less than it would have had it known the true facts.                     ((1990), 44 B.C.L.R. (2d) 145,
at p. 158.)  Hinkson J.A. went on to find that the increase in
Checo's bid had it known the true facts would have equalled the cost of the
extra work made necessary by the improperly cleared work site, plus a 15
percent margin for overhead and profit.                      In the situation of
concurrency, the main reason to expect a difference between tort and contract
damages is the exclusion of the bargain elements in standard tort
compensation.  In the terminology of L. L. Fuller and W. R. Purdue,
as set out in their article, "The Reliance Interest in Contract
Damages" (1936-37), 46 Yale L.J. 52 and 373, contract is normally
concerned with "expectation" damages while tort is concerned with
"reliance" damages.  The denial of "expectation" or
"loss of bargain" damages in a misrepresentation case like the
present will occur when it is concluded, for example, that but for the
misrepresentation, no contract would have been entered at all; this was the
situation that the Court found in Rainbow Industrial Caterers Ltd. v.
Canadian National Railway Co., [1991] 3 S.C.R. 3.  The Rainbow
assessment of damages can obviously lead to a different quantum of damages
because this method frees the parties from the burden or benefit of the rest of
their bargain.  The assessment of damages in a Rainbow situation could
be lower or higher than the contract damages depending on whether the contract
was a good or bad bargain; see D. W. McLauchlan, "Assessment of
Damages for Misrepresentations Inducing Contracts" (1987), 6 Otago L.
Rev. 370, at pp. 375-78.  We note that a tendency towards similar damages
in tort and contract can be identified even in Rainbow situations; see
J. Blom, "Remedies in Tort and Contract:  Where is the Difference?"
in J. Berryman, ed., Remedies: Issues and Perspectives (1991), 395, at
pp. 401-2.                     This is not a case like Rainbow. 
Here the evidence at trial concerning Checo's desire to break into the B.C.
market already provides solid support for the conclusion reached by the Court
of Appeal.  On the basis of that evidence, and in light of the absence in the
trial judge's reasons of a clear conclusion as to what Checo would have done
had the misrepresentation not been made, the Court of Appeal was in our view
justified in making its own finding that Checo would have entered the contract
in any event, albeit at a higher bid.  This conclusion having been reached, one
would expect that the quantum of damages in tort and contract would be similar
because the elements of the bargain unrelated to the misrepresentation are
reintroduced.  This means not giving the plaintiff compensation for any losses
not related to the misrepresentation, but resulting from such factors as the
plaintiff's own poor performance, or market or other forces that are a normal
part of business transactions.                     In tort, Checo is entitled to
be compensated for all reasonably foreseeable loss caused by the tort.  The
Court of Appeal was of the view that Checo, had it known the true facts (i.e.,
had the tort not been committed) would have increased its bid by an amount
equal to the cost of the extra work made necessary by the improperly cleared
work site plus profit and overhead.  Such loss was not too remote, being
reasonably foreseeable.  But to compensate only for the direct costs of
clearing is to suggest that the only tort was the failure to clear.  The real
fault is that Hydro misrepresented the situation and Checo may have
relied on that representation in performing its other obligations under the
contract.  For example, having to devote its resources to that extra work might
have prevented Checo from meeting its original schedule, thereby resulting in
Checo incurring acceleration costs in order to meet the contract completion
date.  Such costs would also arguably be reasonably foreseeable.  In our view,
the matter should be referred back to the trial division for determination of
whether any such indirect losses were the foreseeable results of the
misrepresentation.                     There remains the issue of
assessment of damages for breach of contract.  As implied above, it appears
that the majority of the Court of Appeal intended to remit all breach of
contract claims to trial, including the breach of contract claim related to the
obligation of Hydro to have the work site cleared by others.  We agree that
this is the most appropriate disposition with respect to the breach of contract
claims.  On the claim for breach of contract Checo is to be put in the position
it would be in had the work site been cleared properly, and is therefore to be
reimbursed for all expenses incurred as a result of the breach of contract,
whether expected or not, except, of course, to the extent that those expenses
may have been so unexpected that they are too remote to be compensable for
breach of contract.  We note that in this respect the test for remoteness in
contract may be of no practical difference from the test of reasonable
foreseeability applicable in tort:  see Asamera Oil Corp. v. Sea Oil &
General Corp., [1979] 1 S.C.R. 633, at p. 673, and B.D.C. Ltd. v.
Hofstrand Farms Ltd., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 228, at pp. 243-44.  Viewed thus, the
damages in contract would include not only the costs flowing directly from the
improperly cleared work site, but also consequent indirect costs such as
acceleration costs due to delays in construction.  Conclusion                     We would dismiss the appeal,
allow the cross-appeal in part and refer the question of damages in tort and
contract to the trial division to be reassessed in accordance with the
principles set forth in these reasons.                     The reasons of Sopinka and
Iacobucci JJ. were delivered by   I.  Facts                     The appellant and respondent
on the cross-appeal, B.C. Hydro and Power Authority, is a British Columbia
Crown corporation.  The respondent and appellant on the cross-appeal, BG Checo
International Ltd., is a large corporation in the business of constructing
electrical transmission lines and distribution systems.  I will refer to the
parties as "Hydro" and "Checo", respectively.                     In November of 1982, Hydro
called for tenders to erect transmission towers and to string transmission
lines.  In December 1982, prior to submitting its tender for the contract,
Checo's representative inspected the area by helicopter.  He noted that the
right-of-way had been partially cleared, and also noted evidence of ongoing
clearing activity.  The representative assumed that the right-of-way would be
further cleared prior to the commencement of Checo's work.  On January 2, 1983,
Checo submitted its tender, and on February 15, 1983, Hydro accepted Checo's
tender and the parties entered into a written contract.  Checo contracted to
construct 130 towers and install insulators, hardware and conductors over 42
kilometres of right-of-way near Sechelt, British Columbia.                     In fact, no further clearing
of the right-of-way ever took place.  The "dirty" condition of the
right-of-way caused Checo a number of difficulties in completing its work. 
Checo sued Hydro seeking damages for negligent misrepresentation, or, in the
alternative, for breach of contract.                     The evidence at trial
indicated that Hydro had contracted the clearing out to another company, and
that, to Hydro's knowledge, the work was not done adequately.  There was no
direct discussion between the representatives of Checo and Hydro concerning
this issue.  There was evidence led at trial that the contract between the
parties did not specify clearing standards with the same degree of detail as
was present in similar contracts entered into by Hydro.                     During the trial, Hydro
tendered documents in evidence which Checo had unsuccessfully attempted to
discover.  These documents indicated that Hydro was aware of the problem with
the clearing and of the impact that these problems would have on the successful
tenderer.  As a result, Checo amended its statement of claim to include a claim
in fraud.                     The trial judge found that
Hydro had acted fraudulently in its dealings with Checo and awarded Checo
$2,591,580.56, being "the total loss suffered by [Checo] as a result of
being fraudulently induced to enter into this contract".  Hydro appealed
to the Court of Appeal for British Columbia, which rejected the finding of
fraud, but found that there had been a negligent misrepresentation which
induced Checo to enter into the contract.  The Court of Appeal awarded the sum
of $1,087,729.81, for the misrepresentation, and referred the question of
breach of contract and damages flowing therefrom to the British Columbia
Supreme Court.  Checo's cross-appeal for punitive damages and for a higher
scale of costs was dismissed: (1990), 44 B.C.L.R. (2d) 145, 4 C.C.L.T. (2d)
161, 41 C.L.R. 1, [1990] 3 W.W.R. 690.                     It will be helpful to set out
the relevant provisions of the contract.  The terms of the contract, No.
HA-8071, are identical to the tender documents.  The critical clauses are 2.03,
4.04 and 6.01.03.  I have highlighted that portion of clause 6.01.03 which
Checo alleges founds the misrepresentation by Hydro.  2.03TENDERER'S
RESPONSIBILITY  It shall be the
Tenderer's responsibility to inform himself of all aspects of the Work and no
claim will be considered at any time for reimbursement for any expenses
incurred as a result of any misunderstanding in regard to the conditions of the
Work.  Should any details necessary for a clear and comprehensive understanding
be omitted or any error appear in the Tender Documents or should the Tenderer
note facts or conditions which in any way conflict with the letter or spirit of
the Tender Documents, it shall be the responsibility of the Tenderer to obtain
clarifications before submitting his Tender.  [There follows some technical
details.]  Neither B.C.
Hydro nor the Engineer shall be responsible for any instructions or information
given to any Tenderer other than by the Purchasing Agent, in accordance with
this Clause.  4.04INSPECTION
OF SITE AND SUFFICIENCY OF TENDER  The Contractor
shall inspect and examine the Site and its surroundings and shall satisfy
himself before submitting his Tender as to the nature of the ground and
sub-soil, the form and nature of the Site, the quantities and nature of work
and materials necessary for completion of the Work, the means of access to the
Site, the accommodation and facilities he may require, and in general shall
himself obtain all necessary information as to risks, contingencies, and other
circumstances which may influence or affect his Tender.  Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the Contractor shall satisfy himself of any
special risks, contingencies, regulations, safety requirements, and other
circumstances which may be encountered.  The Contractor
shall be deemed to have satisfied himself before tendering as to the
correctness and sufficiency of his Tender for the Work and of the prices stated
in the Schedule of Prices which prices shall (except insofar as it is otherwise
provided in the Contract) cover all his obligations under the Contract and all
matters and things necessary for the proper execution of the Work.  6.01.03WORK
DONE BY OTHERS  Clearing of
the right-of-way and foundation installation has been carried out by others and
will not form part of this Contract.  Standing trees and
brush have not been removed from the right-of-way in certain valley and gully
crossings.  The Contractor shall be responsible for such further site
preparation as required by Section 7.01. [Emphasis added.]  7.01.02PREPARATION
OF THE SITE                     The
Contractor shall carry out any preparation of the Site, including removal of
logs, stumps and boulders,  as is necessary to perform his operations.                     The
Contractor shall ensure that the transmission line is protected from possible
slides, washouts or other hazards resulting from his road construction,
grading, benching, and other site preparation work and operations.  Surface
drainage shall be directed away from any structure foundations and guy anchors.                     Any
condition resulting from the Contractor's work and which, in the opinion of the
Engineer constitutes a hazard to the transmission line shall be corrected to
the satisfaction of the Engineer.  II.  Judgments in the Courts Below  A.Supreme
Court of British Columbia (Vancouver Reg. No. C864116, June 10, 1988)                     The trial began in November of
1987 and ended in April of 1988, taking 28 days in total.  Cohen J. delivered
his reasons on June 10, 1988.  Checo's original claim was for breach of
contract or, in the alternative, negligent misrepresentation.  In the middle of
the trial, Checo amended its statement of claim to advance a claim of
fraudulent misrepresentation.                     The trial judge found that
Hydro knew and failed to disclose to Checo the problems with the clearing
contractors, that the right-of-way was improperly cleared, and that
merchantable logs, which Hydro intended to salvage, remained on the
right-of-way.  The trial judge also found that Hydro knew that the effect of the
inadequate clearing would be to increase the costs of construction.  He then
turned to a consideration of the issue of fraud.  Citing the principles set out
in K.R.M. Construction Ltd. v. British Columbia Railway Co. (1981), 18
C.L.R. 159 (B.C.S.C.), at p. 169; (1982), 18 C.L.R. 159 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 277,
Cohen J. was satisfied that Hydro was guilty of fraudulent misrepresentation.                     It was significant to him
that, in another contract for similar installations, Hydro included, in a
paragraph "virtually identical" to s. 6.01.03, the words "logs
and old logging slash will be on the right-of-way in some areas".  Cohen
J. concluded (at pp. 61-62):  . . .
the decision to remove any reference in clause 6.01.03 of [Checo's] contract to
logs remaining on the right-of-way was deliberate.  Foxall [an employee of
Hydro] insisted that it was not necessary to include any words of warning in
[Checo's] contract because the existence of logs on the right-of-way would be
obvious to a tenderer viewing the right-of-way.  However, when I consider that
words warning of logs remaining on the right-of-way were excluded when
[Hydro's] clearing standards allowed for logs to be left on the right-of-way, a
fact not disclosed in the tender documents, [Hydro] knew merchantable logs were
left on the right-of-way, knew of problems with clearing contractors not
clearing to specifications, and knew of the delays and extra costs experienced
by [another contractor] due to logs on the right-of-way obstructing
construction activities, the deliberate omission of these words in the tender
documents amounted, in my opinion, to a form of tender by ambush.                     The trial judge held that
Hydro had a duty to be accurate in the information that it gave in its tender,
and it was not open to it to say that Checo should not have assumed that the
right-of-way would be cleared further, or that Checo should have made
inquiries.  Here, the "ordinary meaning" of the words used in clause
6.01.03 supported Checo's conclusion that the clearing was not yet complete. 
This representation in clause 6.01.03 was a false one, and was a representation
that Checo relied upon.  Cohen J. found that Checo would not have contracted on
the basis that it did in the absence of the representation, and held Hydro
liable for the "actual damages directly flowing from [its] fraud" (p.
72).                     Cohen J. did not consider
Checo's claim in breach of contract.  He declined to make an award of punitive
damages.  B.  Court of Appeal of British Columbia
(1990), 44 B.C.L.R. (2d) 145                     Hydro appealed from the
judgment of Cohen J.  Checo cross-appealed seeking punitive damages and costs
to be taxed on a higher scale.                     The Court of Appeal considered
the issues of fraudulent misrepresentation, negligent misrepresentation and
breach of contract.  Writing for the majority, Hinkson J.A. (Lambert, Toy and
Cumming JJ.A. concurring) allowed Hydro's appeal on the issue of fraudulent
misrepresentation.  However, Hinkson J.A. found Hydro liable for negligent
misrepresentation (which had not been considered in the judgment at trial). 
Hinkson J.A. remitted Checo's action for breach of contract back to the British
Columbia Supreme Court.  Hinkson J.A. dismissed Checo's cross-appeal.  Southin
J.A., writing for herself, dissented in the result.  While she agreed with Hinkson
J.A. on the questions of fraudulent misrepresentation and breach of contract,
she would have held that Hydro was not liable for negligent misrepresentation.                     In the result, Hydro's appeal
was allowed in part, in that the Court of Appeal held unanimously that Hydro
was not liable for fraudulent misrepresentation.  However, the Court of Appeal
awarded damages against Hydro for negligent misrepresentation, but reduced the
trial judge's damage award to $1,087,729.81.  Checo's cross-appeal was
dismissed.                     (1)  Reasons of Hinkson
J.A.                     Hinkson J.A. considered that
the omission of the reference to logs and logging slash in clause 6.01.03 left
"the meaning of `clearing' unqualified" (p. 153).  The majority of
the Court held that the representation in clause 6.01.03 as to clearing
"meant that logs and slash would be cleared from the right-of-way"
(p. 155), and that the state of the right-of-way in November 1982 was not the
state that the right-of-way would be in at the commencement of the contract. 
The majority concluded that "on the date of the contract [Hydro], while
having represented that the right-of-way would have been cleared, knew that it
had not been done" (p. 156), and held that this was, therefore, a
misrepresentation.                     Hinkson J.A. then turned to a
consideration of the issue of negligent misrepresentation, which had not been
considered by the trial judge.  Hydro had a duty to advise Checo about the
amount of clearing which would in fact be carried out.  Hydro having failed to
discharge this duty, it made a negligent misrepresentation, the effect of which
"was to induce [Checo] to enter into a contract at a price less than it
would have had it known the true facts" (p. 158).  Hinkson J.A. held that
Checo had established a claim for negligent misrepresentation based on Donoghue
v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562 (H.L.), and Hedley Byrne & Co.  v.
Heller & Partners Ltd., [1964] A.C. 465 (H.L.).                     In considering whether there
was also liability for fraudulent misrepresentation, as the trial judge had
found, Hinkson J.A. traced the development of the law of the tort of deceit. 
He noted that although deceit, as it applies to corporations, is an evolving
tort, fundamentally, "the plaintiff must establish an intention to deceive
on the part of the defendant" (p. 161) and referred to the principles
enunciated in Rainbow Industrial Caterers Ltd. v. Canadian National Railway
Co. (1988), 30 B.C.L.R. (2d) 273 (C.A.).  On the facts of this case, the
majority concluded that the "evidence fell short of establishing the
necessary basis for a finding of fraud" because there was no evidence of a
dishonest intention (at pp. 161-62):                     In
the present case, a committee of 12 prepared the specifications.  The evidence
does not reveal that any members of the committee were dishonest in the
preparation of the specifications for this contract.  Rather, it is possible to
conclude that they mistakenly and negligently believed that the requirement
that a tenderer should take a view of the site would remedy any shortcomings in
the specifications included in the terms of the contract.  Hydro's appeal was accordingly allowed on the
issue of fraudulent misrepresentation.                     On the question of damages,
the majority held that Checo was not entitled to recover the entire loss it
suffered as a result of performing the contract.  The majority held that the
decision of the Court of Appeal, affirming the trial judgment in Rainbow
Industrial Caterers Ltd. v. Canadian National Railway Co. (1990), 43
B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, affirmed on appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada, [1991] 3
S.C.R. 3, could be distinguished from the case at bar, on the grounds that in
the present case it was clear that Checo "would have entered into a
contract if it had known the true state of affairs but would have adjusted the
price of doing the work to reflect that state of affairs" (pp. 163-64). 
The majority held that on the basis of the statement of claim and the evidence,
the extra work attributable to an improperly cleared work-site cost Checo $945,852,01. 
The majority allowed an additional 15 percent for overhead and profit, making a
total damage award of $1,087,729.81.                     Hinkson J.A. ordered a new
trial on the breach of contract issue (at p. 164):  . . .
I would remit the action to the Supreme Court for determination as to whether
or not a breach of contract occurred and, in the event that the defendant is
found to have been in breach of contract, what damages flowed from such
breach.  As the parties led evidence at trial in respect of this issue and with
respect to the claim of the plaintiff for damages asserted to flow from breach
of contract, the trial judge will be in a position on the basis of the record
at trial to determine the issue of breach of contract and to assess damages if
he finds a breach of contract occurred.  The question of whether further
evidence should be permitted on this issue should be determined by the trial
judge.                     Checo's cross-appeal was
dismissed, punitive damages being inappropriate in view of the conclusion of
the majority that the trial judge's finding of fraud was in error.                     (2)  Dissenting Reasons of
Southin J.A.                     Southin J.A. was in agreement
with the majority on the issue of fraud, and the disposition of the
cross-appeal, but would not have awarded damages for negligent
misrepresentation.                     With respect to the issue of
fraudulent misstatement, Southin J.A. noted that, in her view, "[b]ecause
a conscious intention to deceive, i.e., mens rea, is a necessary ingredient of
the tort of deceit, it follows that a corporation cannot be liable for this
tort except upon the principle respondeat superior" (p. 183).  In this
context, Southin J.A. looked to evidence of the intent of Mr. Foxall, who was
the Hydro employee in charge of the project.  For there to have been a fraudulent
misrepresentation, Foxall would have to be shown to have consciously intended
to deceive Checo.  Southin J.A. held that the trial judge had not asked himself
the right questions and that there was no finding of the required fraudulent
intent, and that therefore the claim in fraud could not stand.                     Southin J.A. then considered
the issue of negligent misstatement.  After reviewing the case law, she
concluded on the facts of this case that clause 6.01.03 did "not impart
the information that between the date of the tender call and the date of commencement
of work [Hydro would] clear the right of way to a standard thought suitable
either by [Checo] or by a reasonable man" (pp. 200-1).  Further, clauses
2.03 and 4.04 were evidence of Hydro's intention not to assume any duty to
Checo (at p. 201):  "In my opinion, by cls. 2.03 and 4.04, [Hydro] was
declaring that it was not assuming any duty of care to [Checo]."  Southin
J.A. stated she was reinforced in her conclusion by the decision of the Alberta
Court of Appeal in Catre Industries Ltd. v. Alberta (1989), 99 A.R. 321
(C.A.), leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada refused on March 8,
1990, [1990] 1 S.C.R. vi.                     She did not agree with the
majority that the measure of damages in this type of case is different
depending on whether liability is founded in contract or in tort.                     As the trial judge had made no
findings as to breach of contract, Southin J.A. agreed with Hinkson J.A. that
there should be a new trial on the claim for breach of contract.  III.  Issues                     I would characterize the
issues raised by Hydro's appeal as follows:  (1)  Can a
pre-contractual representation which becomes a contractual term found liability
in negligent misrepresentation?  (2)  If the
answer to the first question is in the affirmative, did the terms of the
contract nonetheless operate to exclude Hydro's potential liability for any
misrepresentations?  (3)  If the
terms of the contract did not exclude Hydro's potential liability for any
misrepresentations, is Hydro liable for negligent misrepresentation?  (4)  Was there
a breach of contract?                     I would characterize the
issues raised by Checo's cross-appeal as follows:  (1)  Should
Hydro be liable for fraudulent misrepresentation?  (2)  Did the
Court of Appeal correctly assess Checo's damages for negligent
misrepresentation?  IV.  Analysis                     In the interests of simplicity
and brevity, I will deal with the issues raised by the appeal and cross-appeal
somewhat out of order.  Because the issue of fraudulent misrepresentation can
and should be resolved quickly, I will deal with it first.  Then I will
examine, following Central Trust v. Rafuse, supra, the scope of
the right of a party to a contract to sue the other party in tort (the
tort-contract concurrency problem).  It will also be necessary for me to review
the law of negligent misrepresentation (which was not at issue in Central
Trust v. Rafuse), in order to determine the applicability of the principles
in Central Trust v. Rafuse to pre-contractual representations.                     Because of my conclusions on
these issues, it will not be necessary for me to decide whether there was a
negligent misrepresentation, or whether the Court of Appeal's assessment of
Checo's damages for negligent misrepresentation was correct.  It will, however,
be necessary for me to consider the issue of breach of contract.  A.  Fraudulent Misrepresentation                     The trial judge found Hydro
liable in deceit.  The Court of Appeal allowed Hydro's appeal on this issue. 
In argument before us, Checo submitted that the trial judge's ruling on the
question of deceit should be upheld.  At the hearing of the appeal, we
indicated that we did not find it necessary to hear Hydro's response on the
issue of deceit.                     In my view, there was
insufficient evidence to support a finding of deceit (i.e. of fraudulent
intention, as discussed further in these reasons) against Hydro, and the Court
of Appeal correctly intervened to reverse the trial judge on this point.  As
Hinkson J.A. noted (at pp. 161-62):  [A] committee
of 12 prepared the specifications.  The evidence does not reveal that any members
of the committee were dishonest in the preparation of the specifications for
this contract.  Rather, it is possible to conclude that they mistakenly and
negligently believed that the requirement that a tenderer should take a view of
the site would remedy any shortcomings in the specifications included in the
terms of the contract.  Consequently, Checo's cross-appeal on this point
should be dismissed.  B.  Concurrent Liability in Tort and Contract                     (1)  Introduction                     It was Hydro's submission on
this appeal that it ought to be liable, if at all, in contract and not in
tort.  For the reasons which I will set out, I agree that in the circumstances
of the case, while Hydro may be liable in contract for the representations
which Checo complains of, Hydro cannot be liable in tort.  Given the importance
of the general issue of tort-contract concurrency, I propose to explore it in
some detail.                     As a general rule, the
existence of a contract between two parties does not preclude the existence of a
common law duty of care.  Subject to the substantive and procedural differences
that exist between an action in contract and an action in tort,  both the duty
of care and the liability may be concurrent in contract and tort.  In such
circumstances, it is for the plaintiff to select the cause of action most
advantageous to him or her.  That was the position adopted by Le Dain J. in Central
Trust v. Rafuse, supra.  At pages 204-5, Le Dain J. said the
following:                     The
common law duty of care that is created by a relationship of sufficient
proximity, in accordance with the general principle affirmed by Lord
Wilberforce in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, is not confined to
relationships that arise apart from contract.  Although the relationships in Donoghue
v. Stevenson, Hedley Byrne and Anns were all of a
non-contractual nature and there was necessarily reference in the judgments to
a duty of care that exists apart from or independently of contract, I find
nothing in the statements of general principle in those cases to suggest that
the principle was intended to be confined to relationships that arise apart
from contract.  . . .  [T]he question is whether there is a relationship of
sufficient proximity, not how it arose.  The principle of tortious liability is
for reasons of public policy a general one.                     Le Dain J.'s conclusion that a
plaintiff is generally entitled to choose, as between contract and tort, the
cause of action most favourable to him or her was supported by a long line of
Canadian and English authority, some of which I will consider below.  Central
Trust v. Rafuse, supra, has since met with wide acceptance, and has
been applied by a number of provincial Courts of Appeal.  See University of
Regina v. Pettick (1991), 90 Sask. R. 241 (C.A.); Fletcher v. Manitoba
Public Insurance Co. (1989), 68 O.R. (2d) 193 (C.A.); Pittman v.
Manufacturers Life Insurance Co. (1990), 76 D.L.R. (4th) 320 (Nfld. C.A.); Clark
v. Naqvi (1989), 99 N.B.R. (2d) 271 (C.A.), and Catre Industries Ltd. v.
Alberta, supra.                     In Central Trust v. Rafuse,
supra, Le Dain J. recognized two situations in which, notwithstanding
what would otherwise be a breach of the duty of care in tort, a plaintiff's
ability to sue in tort will be limited by the terms of the contract.  In one
situation it is the liability in tort which is avoided or modified; in
the other it is the duty in tort which is affected.                     Le Dain J. recognized that
liability in tort can be limited or excluded by the terms of a contract.  A
plaintiff will not be permitted to plead in tort in order to circumvent a
contractual clause which excludes or limits the defendant's liability (at p.
206):                     A
concurrent or alternative liability in tort will not be admitted if its effect
would be to permit the plaintiff to circumvent or escape a contractual
exclusion or limitation of liability for the act or omission that would
constitute the tort.  In this case, Hydro argues that the terms of the
contract operated to exclude its liability for the conduct of which Checo
complains.  If Hydro were correct, then Checo would no more be able to recover
in tort than in contract.  As I will discuss below, I am of the opinion that
the contract does not exclude Hydro's liability.                     As mentioned, Le Dain J. also
recognized that the defendant's duty in tort could be affected by the terms of
the contract.  If the duty of care alleged in tort is also defined by a
specific term of the contract, then the plaintiff will be entitled only to
those remedies which may be available pursuant to the contract.  The
contractual relationship can bring the parties into sufficient proximity to
give rise to a duty of care.  However, no duty of care in tort can be
concurrent with a duty of care created by an express term of the contract.  In
the words of Le Dain J. (at p. 205):                     What
is undertaken by the contract will indicate the nature of the relationship that
gives rise to the common law duty of care, but the nature and scope of the duty
of care that is asserted as the foundation of the tortious liability must not depend
on specific obligations or duties created by the express terms of the
contract.  It is in that sense that the common law duty of care must be
independent of the contract.  . . .  A claim cannot be said to be in tort if it
depends for the nature and scope of the asserted duty of care on the manner in
which an obligation or duty has been expressly and specifically defined by a
contract.                     On the facts of Central
Trust v. Rafuse, supra, Le Dain J. concluded that the defendant
solicitors had concurrent duties of care in contract and in tort.  The contract
between the parties was a general retainer.  Le Dain J. held that it was an
implied term of the contract between solicitor and client that the solicitor
perform his or her professional duties with "reasonable care, skill and
knowledge" (p. 208).  The duty of care imposed on a solicitor at common
law was the same as, and concurrent with, that imposed as an implied term of
the contract (at p. 210):                     While
the solicitor's duty of care has generally been stated . . . as
arising as an implied term of the contract or retainer, the same duty arises as
a matter of common law from the relationship of proximity created by the
retainer.  In the absence of special terms in the contract determining the
nature and scope of the duty of care in a particular case, the duties of care
in contract and tort are the same.                     Given the nature of a
solicitor's duties in contract and in tort, and given the particular contractual
relationship between the parties, Le Dain J. concluded that the duty of care of
the solicitors ran concurrently in tort and contract.  Moreover, there was no
clause in the contract excluding or limiting the solicitors' liability which
could affect the solicitors' liability in tort.                     In Central Trust v. Rafuse,
supra, it was not necessary for Le Dain J. to test the boundaries
of the situations he described in which a plaintiff's right to recover in tort
would be limited.  As I mentioned, the contract before him had no clauses
excluding or limiting the liability of the solicitors.  Moreover, the contract
contained no express terms creating specific obligations or duties which might
have excluded the solicitors' duty of care in tort.                     The facts of this case require
me to do what it was not necessary for Le Dain J. to do in Central Trust v.
Rafuse, supra: I must interpret and apply the principles to a
contractual relationship in which there are exclusion or limitation of
liability clauses which may exclude or limit liability in tort, as well as in
contract, and in which there are clauses which may operate to exclude some
parts of the duty of care in tort entirely.  To interpret and apply the
principles in Central Trust v. Rafuse in the circumstances of this case,
it will be necessary for me to review the authorities governing concurrency of
obligations in tort and contract.  It will also be necessary for me to review
the law governing clauses which exclude or limit liability.                     (2)  Concurrency of Tort
and Contract                     The recent history of
concurrency in tort and contract can be characterized as the development of a
single regime of concurrency from two sets of rules governing concurrency in
distinct circumstances.  Until Esso Petroleum Co. v. Mardon, [1976] 2 All
E.R. 5 (C.A.), there was one set of rules governing obligations in tort and
contract for the so-called "status relationships" and another set of
rules governing obligations in tort and contract for all other relationships. 
Since Esso Petroleum, supra, these two sets of rules have been
assimilated into a single regime governing obligations in tort and contract for
all relationships.  The principles set out by Le Dain J. in Central Trust v.
Rafuse, supra, are representative of that single regime.  To understand
better the principles articulated by Le Dain J. in Central Trust v. Rafuse,
it will be helpful to review the process of development which preceded and
informed the judgment of Le Dain J.                     (a)  The Two Strands of
Concurrent Liability in Tort and Contract                     The modern conception of a
distinct tort of negligence is relatively recent.  It has been argued that the
genesis of negligence is to be found in the long series of "running
down" cases in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, as ever increasing
numbers of horses, carts and ships meant increasing numbers of accidents.  See
J. H. Baker, An Introduction to English Legal History (1979), at
pp. 342-45.  But it was not until the famous case of Donoghue v. Stevenson,
supra, that a general tort of negligence was finally recognized.                     Negligence was not, however,
unknown to the law before Donoghue v. Stevenson, or even before such
running down cases as Leame v. Bray (1803), 3 East 593 (K.B.), 102 E.R.
724.  Beginning in a much earlier time, negligence was actionable if the
defendant's status imposed upon him or her a duty to take care in the exercise
of his or her profession.  Persons with such status included bailees and those
who practised a "common calling", including those of innkeeper and
common carrier.  The liability of such persons arose independently of
contract.  To quote Baker, supra, at pp. 277-78:  Many callings
were, in any case, controlled by the common law or custom independently of
contract; an innkeeper, for instance, was liable under the `custom of the
realm' for his failure to look after a guest's goods or for refusing to
accommodate a traveller.  . . .  [S]imilar duties could be imposed on
professional men.  . . .  Another kind of status was that of bailee or
custodian of property; it was held in 1487 that a shepherd having the custody
of sheep was liable in assumpsit for failing to look after them, so that
they were killed.                     That a defendant who owed a
duty to take care because of his or her status was liable in negligence even if
there also existed a contract between the parties is confirmed by the judgment
of Dallas C.J. in Bretherton v. Wood (1821), 3 Brod. & B. 54 (Ex.
Ch.), 129 E.R. 1203, at p. 1206 E.R.:                     This
action is on the case [i.e. in negligence] against a common carrier, upon whom
a duty is imposed by the custom of the realm, or in other words, by the common
law, to carry and convey their goods or passengers safely and securely, so
that, by their negligence or default, no injury or damage happen.  A breach of
this duty is a breach of the law, and for this breach an action lies, founded
on the common law, which action wants not the aid of a contract to support it.                                                                      ...                     Nor
is it material, whether redress might or might not have been had in an action
of assumpsit [i.e. in contract]; that must depend on circumstances of which
this Court has no knowledge; but, whether an action of assumpsit might or might
not have been maintained, still this action on the case may be maintained. 
The action of assumpsit, as applied to cases of this kind, is of modern use. 
The action on the case is as early as the existence of the custom or common law
as to common carriers.  [Emphasis added.]                     There has been some debate as
to the extent of these status relationships.  See Central Trust v. Rafuse,
supra, at pp. 176-78; C. French, "The Contract/Tort Dilemma"
(1983), 5 Otago L. Rev. 236, at pp. 273-78; and C. H. S.
Fifoot, History and Sources of the Common Law:  Tort and Contract
(1949), at pp. 157-59.  On what French calls the "traditional view",
status relationships included carriers, innkeepers, surgeons, apothecaries,
attorneys, veterinary surgeons, smiths, and barbers, together with the
relationships of bailor/bailee and master/servant (at pp. 274-78).  Whatever
the proper scope of the status relationships might have been, it is clear that
they attracted concurrent liability in contract and in tort.  As Tindal C.J.
expressed it in Boorman v. Brown (1842), 3 Q.B. 511 (Ex. Ch.), 114 E.R.
603, at pp. 608-9 E.R., aff'd sub nom. Brown v. Boorman (1844),
11 Cl. & Fin. 1 (H.L.), 8 E.R. 1003:                     That
there is a large class of cases in which the foundation of the action springs
out of privity of contract between the parties, but in which, nevertheless, the
remedy for the breach, or non-performance, is indifferently either assumpsit or
case upon tort, is not disputed.  Such are actions against attorneys, surgeons,
and other professional men, for want of competent skill or proper care in the
service they undertake to render:  actions against common carriers, against
ship owners on bills of lading, against bailees of different descriptions:  and
numerous other instances occur in which the action is brought in tort or
contract at the election of the plaintiff.                                                                      ...                     The
principle in all these cases would seem to be that the contract creates a duty,
and the neglect to perform that duty, or the nonfeasance, is a ground of action
upon a tort.                     As the judgment of Tindal C.J.
in Boorman, supra, indicates, the range of status relationships
was seen in the nineteenth century as extensive (the profession at issue in Boorman
was that of commodities broker).  In fact, in the judgment of the House of
Lords upholding the judgment of Tindal C.J., concurrency of tort and contract
is stated as a general principle, without reference to status relationships at
all (at pp. 1018-19 E.R., per Lord Campbell):  . . .
wherever there is a contract, and something to be done in the course of the
employment which is the subject of that contract, if there is a breach of a
duty in the course of that employment, the plaintiff may either recover in tort
or in contract.                     However, in the twentieth
century, there was a noticeable trend towards limiting the range of the status
relationships.  In Jarvis v. Moy, Davies, Smith, Vandervell & Co.,
[1936] 1 K.B. 399 (C.A.), Slesser L.J. found that a broker did not exercise a
"common calling" (at pp. 406-7):                     In
reference to the suggestion that a broker might be regarded as exercising a
common calling in the same way as, for example, a carrier, in respect of whom
it has been held that his duties to the public are imported so that a breach of
these is necessarily a tort, I desire to add that no authority was cited to
establish that a stockbroker is in such a position.  . . .  In my
opinion a stockbroker does not exercise a "public calling" in the
sense in which that term is used as applied to carriers and certain other
occupations.  In this case a personal relationship existed between the parties,
and in my view the breach complained of was a breach of contract.  In Groom v. Crocker, [1939] 1 K.B. 194,
the Court of Appeal held that the profession of solicitor was not among the
status relationships, as those of doctor, architect and stockbroker also were
not (at p. 222 per Scott L.J.):  A solicitor, as
a professional man, is employed by a client just as much as a doctor, an
architect, or a stockbroker, and the mutual rights and duties of the two are
regulated entirely by the contract of employment.  . . .  The retainer when
given puts into operation the normal terms of the contractual relationship,
including in particular the duty of the solicitor to protect the client's
interest and carry out his instructions in the matters in which the retainer
relates, by all proper means.  . . .  But in all these aspects the tie between
the two is contractual.  There is to-day no common-law duty similar to that
which survives in the case of a bailee or carrier, and no action lies in tort
for the breach of the above duties.  . . .  The judgment of Diplock L.J. in Bagot v.
Stevens Scanlan & Co., [1966] 1 Q.B. 197, was to a similar effect. 
Diplock L.J. held that the relationship of architect and client was not a
"status relationship" (at p. 206):  . . .
I can see nothing in the relationship of architect and client which can be said
to give rise to the kind of status obligation which arises from the origins of
the common law in the case of master and servant, common carrier, innkeeper,
bailor and bailee.                     For those who were not
in one of the status relationships, on the other hand, a different regime
governed the tort liabilities of parties to a contract.  For all those who were
not in status relationships, an action in negligence lay only if the duty
relied upon in negligence was "independent" of the duty imposed by
contract.  Before the causes of action were abolished by the Judicature Act,
the principle was stated to be that if no cause of action remained if the
allegation of a contract were struck out, then the action was founded on
contract alone: Williamson v. Allison (1802), 2 East. 446 (K.B.), 102
E.R. 439.  In Legge v. Tucker (1856), H. & N. 500 (Ex.), 156 E.R.
1298, all the judges were unanimously of the opinion that an action in tort
would lie only if there was a duty existing apart from the contract.  In the
words of Pollock C.B. (at p. 1299 E.R.):  "Where the foundation of the
action is a contract, in whatever way the declaration is framed, it is an
action of assumpsit; but where there is a duty ultra the contract, the
plaintiff may declare in case."  In the words of Watson B. (at p. 1299
E.R.): "[T]he true question is, whether, if [the allegation of a contract]
were struck out, any ground of action would remain.  . . .  There is no duty
independently of the contract, and therefore it is an action of
assumpsit."  The judgment of Smith L.J. in Turner v. Stallibrass,
[1898] 1 Q.B. 56 (C.A.), is to the same effect (at p. 58):  The rule of law
on the subject, as I understand it, is that, if in order to make out a cause of
action it is not necessary for the plaintiff to rely on a contract, the action
is one founded on tort; but, on the other hand, if, in order successfully to
maintain his action, it is necessary for him to rely upon and prove a contract,
the action is one founded upon contract.  See also Edwards v. Mallan, [1908] 1 K.B.
1002 (C.A.), per Vaughan Williams L.J.                     The "independent
tort" requirement was applied and refined in more modern cases.  In Elder,
Dempster & Co. v. Paterson, Zochonis & Co., [1924] A.C. 522 (H.L.),
Viscount Finlay stated, at p. 548, that for an action in tort to lie in a
contractual setting, there must be "an independent tort unconnected with
the performance of the contract".  In this Court, Pigeon J. said in J.
Nunes Diamonds Ltd. v. Dominion Electric Protection Co., [1972] S.C.R. 769,
at pp. 777-78, relying on Elder, Dempster & Co., supra, that
no action for negligent misrepresentation would lie in "any case where the
relationship between the parties is governed by a contract, unless the
negligence relied on can properly be considered as `an independent tort'
unconnected with the performance of that contract. . .".  In Dominion
Chain Co. v. Eastern Construction Co. (1976), 68 D.L.R. (3d) 385 (Ont.
C.A.), Wilson J.A. (as she then was), dissenting in part, held that no action
in tort would lie where the acts complained of by the plaintiff were in
relation to the "very matters covered by the contract" (at p. 408):  . . .
where the person to whom the duty is owed, the scope of the duty and the
standard of care have all been expressly or impliedly agreed upon by the
parties, it appears to me somewhat artificial to rely upon Lord Atkin's
"neighbour" test [as set out in Donoghue v. Stevenson, supra]
to determine whether or not the duty is owed to the particular plaintiff and as
to the requisite standard of care the defendant must attain.  In other words,
it would appear that if the acts or omissions complained of by the plaintiff
are in relation to the very matters covered by the contract, the essence of the
plaintiff's action is breach of the contractual duty of care rather than breach
of the general duty of care owed to one's "neighbour" in tort.                     (b)  The Emergence of a
Single Theory of Concurrent Liability                     Since Esso Petroleum, supra,
the law in England and in Canada has ceased to apply a rule of concurrency for
status relationships different from that in other relationships, although in Esso
Petroleum it was not clear that this was the case.  In finding that an
architect was concurrently liable in contract and in tort, Lord Denning M.R.
relied on the decision of Tindal C.J. in Boorman v. Brown, supra,
a case based on status.  However, any ambiguity was resolved by the judgment of
Megaw L.J. in Batty v. Metropolitan Property Realisations Ltd., [1978]
Q.B. 554 (C.A.).  Megaw L.J. held that the rule in Esso Petroleum was
not limited to "common callings", but was a rule of general
application (at p. 566):                     The
distinction to which I have referred which Mr. Brown seeks to make is this:  that
the right of a plaintiff who sues in contract, where the facts giving rise to
the breach of contract would also constitute a breach of common law duty apart
from contract, to have the judgment entered on both heads is limited to cases
where the common law duty is owed by one who conducts a common calling and thus
is under a special type of legal liability, and to cases where the duty is owed
by a professional man in respect of his professional skill.  Mr. Brown contends
that, though there is no affirmative authority for limiting the right in that
way, it ought to be treated as being so limited because there is no case in the
English books, going back over many years, which shows that the right has been
allowed, or possibly even claimed, in cases other than the special types of
case to which he referred, and in particular the professional skill types of
case.  In Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd. v. Mardon [1976] Q.B. 801 the right
was held to arise in a case where the breach of duty was a breach of an expert
in siting filling stations involving his professional skill.  I see no reason,
in logic or on practical grounds, for putting any such limitation on the scope
of the right.  It would, I think, be an undesirable development in the law if
such an artificial distinction, for which no sound reason can be put forward,
were to be held to exist.                     More generally, in Anns v.
London Borough of Merton, [1977] 2 All E.R. 492 (H.L.), Lord Wilberforce
acknowledged that the duty of care in tort is now a general one, arising as a
result of proximity, and not of the particular class of relationship between
the parties (at p. 498):                     Through
the trilogy of cases in this House, Donoghue v Stevenson, Hedley Byrne &
Co Ltd v Heller & Partners Ltd and Home Office v Dorset Yacht Co Ltd,
the position has now been reached that in order to establish that a duty of
care arises in a particular situation, it is not necessary to bring the facts
of that situation within those of previous situations in which a duty of care
has been held to exist.  Rather the question has to be approached in two
stages.  First one has to ask whether, as between the alleged wrongdoer and the
person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient relationship of proximity
or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable contemplation of the former,
carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage to the latter, in which
case a prima facie duty of care arises.  Secondly, if the first question is
answered affirmatively, it is necessary to consider whether there are any considerations
which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of the duty or the
class of person to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach of it may
give rise. . . .                     This trend towards a single
theory of concurrent liability in tort and contract was recognized in Canada by
La Forest J.A. (as he then was) in New Brunswick Telephone Co. v. John
Maryon International Ltd. (1982), 43 N.B.R. (2d) 469 (C.A.).  After an
extensive review of the case law, La Forest J.A. concluded that an architect
was concurrently liable in contract and in tort.  La Forest J.A. based his
conclusion on the concept of a general tort of negligence (at p. 520): 
"[W]hile I could dispose of this case by simply adding the profession of
structural engineer to the list of common callings and skilled professions, I
prefer to base my judgment on the generalized tort of negligence".                     In Central Trust v. Rafuse,
supra, Le Dain J. also rejected any distinction between status
relationships and other relationships in determining whether parties to a
contract can also recover in tort.  Instead, Le Dain J. found that a single
rule applied to all relationships (at p. 205): "[T]he question is whether
there is a relationship of sufficient proximity, not how it arose."  The
rule of concurrency which Le Dain J. adopted was a compromise between two
strands of authority.                     In one strand of authority,
that governing the status relationships, any duty arising in tort had always
been concurrent with duties arising under the contract:  Brown v. Boorman,
supra.  In the other strand of authority, the duty in tort was only
concurrent with the duty in contract if the negligence complained of was
unconnected with the performance of the contract:  J. Nunes Diamonds, supra. 
The compromise position adopted by Le Dain J. was that any duty arising in tort
will be concurrent with duties arising under the contract, unless the duty
which the plaintiff seeks to rely on in tort is also a duty defined by an
express term of the contract.  If the duty is defined by an express term of
the contract, the plaintiff will be confined to whatever remedies are available
in the law of contract (at p. 205):  . . .
the nature and scope of the duty of care that is asserted as the foundation of
the tortious liability must not depend on specific obligations or duties
created by express terms of the contract.  . . .  Where the common
law duty of care is co-extensive with that which arises as an implied term of
the contract it obviously does not depend on the terms of the contract. 
. . .  The same is also true ofreliance on a common law duty of care
that falls short of a specific obligation or duty imposed by the express terms
of a contract.                     In my opinion, the compromise
struck by Le Dain J. is an appropriate one.  If the parties to a contract
choose to define a specific duty as an express term of the contract, then the
consequences of a breach of that duty ought to be determined by the law of
contract, not by tort law.  Whether or not an implied term of a contract can
define a duty of care in such a way that a plaintiff is confined to a remedy in
contract is not at issue in this case.  I leave that determination to another
day.  While the rule articulated by Le Dain J. is a rule of law which does
not depend on the presumed or actual intention of the parties, the intention
which can be inferred from the fact that the parties have made the duty an
express term of the contract provides policy support for the rule.  If a duty
is an express term of the contract, it can be inferred that the parties wish
the law of the contract to govern with respect to that duty.  This is of
particular significance given that the result of a breach of a contractual duty
may be different from that of a breach of a duty in tort.  As Wilson J.A. noted
in Dominion Chain Co., supra, a plaintiff's substantive rights
may be different in contract and in tort (at p. 409):  His cause of
action may arise later in tort resulting in a later expiry of the limitation
period.  His damage may be greater in quantum and different in kind if he sues
in tort.  On the other hand his action in contract may survive him or be the
subject of a set-off or counterclaim, neither of which would be so if his
action were framed in tort.  The fact that damages may be assessed differently
in contract from in tort was recently affirmed by this Court in Rainbow
Industrial Caterers Ltd. v. Canadian National Railway Co., [1991] 3 S.C.R.
3.                     A further policy rationale for
the rule advanced by Le Dain J. is that contracts have become, particularly in
commercial contexts, increasingly complex.  Commercial contracts allocate risks
and fix the mutual duties and obligations of the parties.  Where there is an
express term creating a contractual duty, it is appropriate that the parties be
held to the bargain which they have made.  Tort duties are of "uncertain
definition and scope": H. Johnson, "Contract and Tort: Orthodoxy
Reasserted!" (1990), 9 Int'l Banking L. 306.  Commercial parties
ought to be able to fix their respective rights and obligations in a particular
transaction with certainty.  Contractual certainty is a sine qua non
without which reliance and the execution of obligations are seriously
impaired.  Moreover, without certainty, the transaction costs associated with a
given commercial arrangement would most likely increase, perhaps drastically. 
In V.K. Mason Construction Ltd. v. Bank of Nova Scotia, [1985] 1 S.C.R.
271, Wilson J. alluded to these considerations stating, at p. 282, that
"much of the value of commercial contracts lies in their ability to
produce certainty.  Parties are enabled to regulate their relationship by means
of words rather than by means of their understanding of what each other's
actions are intended to imply."                     However, I do not believe that
the rule advanced by Le Dain J. that forecloses a claim in tort is absolute in
all circumstances.  In this respect, I would favour a contextual approach which
takes into account the context in which the contract is made, and the position
of the parties with respect to one another, in assessing whether a claim in
tort is foreclosed by the terms of a contract.  The policy reasons in favour of
the rule advanced by Le Dain J. are strongest where the contractual context is
commercial and the parties are of equal bargaining power.  There was no
question of unconscionability or inequality of bargaining power in Central
Trust v. Rafuse, supra, as there is no such question in this case. 
If such issues, or others analogous to them, were to arise, however, a court
should be wary not to exclude too rapidly a duty of care in tort on the basis
of an express term of the contract, especially if the end result for the
plaintiff would be a wrong without a remedy.                     (3)  Contractual Terms
Excluding or Limiting Liability or Duty                     As noted above, contractual
exclusion or limitation clauses can operate either to exclude or limit
liability, or to limit the duty owed by one party to the other.  In neither
case will the plaintiff be permitted to use an action in tort to circumvent the
limitation of liability or of duty in the contract.  Terms going to duty are of
particular importance where one party is alleging negligent misrepresentation,
as Checo is in this case.                     It is well-settled that a
clause limiting liability in contract can, in appropriate circumstances, also
have the effect of limiting liability in tort: see, for example, ITO--International
Terminal Operators Ltd. v. Miida Electronics Inc., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 752, and
London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd., [1992] 3
S.C.R. 299.  In the words of Scrutton L.J. in Hall v. Brooklands Auto Racing
Club, [1933] 1 K.B. 205 (C.A.), at p. 213:  . . .
where the defendant has protection under a contract, it is not permissible to
disregard the contract and allege a wider liability in tort: Elder, Dempster
& Co. v. Paterson, Zochonis & Co., per Lord Cave, Lord
Finlay and Lord Sumner.                     The rule that liability in
tort cannot be used to circumvent a contractual limitation of liability is
supported by recent Canadian authority, including Central Trust v. Rafuse,
supra, itself.  In New Brunswick Telephone Co. v. John Maryon
International Ltd., supra, La Forest J.A. stated that (at p. 506):  . . .
the law of negligence will not be used to give a remedy to a person for a
breach of contract for which he is absolved under the contract.  . . .  Parties
are free to contract out of liabilities, tortious or otherwise, and the courts
should not interfere with their agreements.  The point was reiterated by Le Dain J. in Central
Trust v. Rafuse (at p. 206):                     A
concurrent or alternative liability in tort will not be admitted if its effect
would be to permit the plaintiff to circumvent or escape a contractual
exclusion or limitation of liability for the act or omission that would
constitute the tort.  See, on this question, London Drugs Ltd., supra,
where I deduce from this principle one of many reasons for permitting
employees, in certain circumstances, to obtain directly the benefit of their
employer's contractual limitation of liability clause so as to limit their
liability for the breach of a common law duty of care.  See also Peters v.
Parkway Mercury Sales Ltd. (1975), 10 N.B.R. (2d) 703 (C.A.).                     Contractual terms may also
operate to limit the duty (as distinct from the liability ensuing from a breach
of duty), tortious or otherwise, owed by one party to the other.  To quote
B. M. McLachlin and W. J. Wallace, The Canadian Law of
Architecture and Engineering (1987), at p. 134:  . . .
it may now be said that courts have come to accept the concurrency of
obligations imposed by tort law and obligations imposed by contract.  However,
this is subject to an important limitation.  Where the parties have defined
their duties by contract, the court will not impose contrary obligations on
them.  A contract defining the parties' rights and responsibilities will be a
factor limiting the scope of the duty in tort.                     Clauses limiting the duty owed
by one party to the other are often important in cases where negligent
misrepresentation is alleged.  Such disclaimers or "non-reliance
clauses", as they are sometimes described, may be contractual or
extra-contractual.  It should not be forgotten that in the leading case, Hedley
Byrne, supra, the defendant bank was found not liable because the
representation had been accompanied by the following disclaimer: "Confidential.  For your private use and
without responsibility on the part of this bank or its officials."  There
was no contract between the parties.  Lord Morris found that the effect of the
disclaimer was to negate any duty of care which would otherwise have been owed
by the defendant (at p. 504):  . . .
in my judgment, the bank in the present case, by the words which they employed,
effectively disclaimed any assumption of a duty of care.  They stated that they
only responded to the inquiry on the basis that their reply was without
responsibility.  If the inquirers chose to receive and act upon the reply they
cannot disregard the definite terms upon which it was given.                     Disclaimers or
"non-reliance clauses" may also be contractual.  In Carman
Construction Ltd. v. Canadian Pacific Railway Co., [1982] 1 S.C.R. 958, the
defendant successfully raised a contractual disclaimer clause as a defence to
an action for negligent misrepresentation.  The relevant clause of the contract
was in the following terms (at p. 961):  3.1.It is
hereby declared and agreed by the Contractor that this Agreement has been
entered into by him on his own knowledge respecting the nature and conformation
of the ground upon which the work is to be done, the location, character,
quality and quantities of the material to be removed, the character of the
equipment and facilities needed, the general and local conditions and all other
matters which can in any way affect the work under this Agreement, and the
Contractor does not rely upon any information given or statement made to him in
relation to the work by the Company.  [Emphasis added.]  Martland J. was careful to characterize the
clause as a "non-reliance provision" negating the existence of a duty
of care, as distinct from a clause limiting liability for the breach of a duty
(at p. 973):  . . .
I do not regard s. 3.1 as being a clause exempting from liability.  It is what
the Court of Appeal described as a non-reliance provision, the effect of which
was to prevent liability arising on the part of C.P.R. in respect of statements
made or information given by its employees.                     To summarize, if the liability
of a party to a contract is limited or excluded by a term of the contract, or
if a contractual term limits or negates the duty owed by one party to the other
(whether in contract or in tort), the other party to the contract may not use
an action in tort to impose a wider liability on the first party than would be
available under the contract.  C.  Negligent Misrepresentation                     Checo alleges that Hydro
negligently misrepresented the state of the right-of-way.  The majority of the
British Columbia Court of Appeal agreed.  In Queen v. Cognos Inc.,
[1993] 1 S.C.R. 000, a case involving issues somewhat similar to those in the
present appeal, I reviewed many aspects of the tort of negligent
misrepresentation including the required elements for such an action.  The
specific question I should like to address in this case is: if the parties are
in a contractual relationship, under what circumstances will it be open to one
of the parties to allege that the other was guilty of negligent
misrepresentation?  In other words, when will the existence of a contract preclude
a tort action for negligent misrepresentation?                     The action for negligent
misrepresentation was first recognized by the decision of the House of Lords in
Hedley Byrne, supra.  The ingredients of a negligent
misrepresentation set out in that case remain good law today.  To quote from
the speech of Lord Morris (at pp. 502-3):                     My
Lords, I consider that it follows and that it should now be regarded as settled
that if someone possessed of a special skill undertakes, quite irrespective of
contract, to apply that skill for the assistance of another person who relies
upon such skill, a duty of care will arise.  The fact that the service is to be
given by means of or by the instrumentality of words can make no difference. 
Furthermore, if in a sphere in which a person is so placed that others could
reasonably rely upon his judgment or his skill or upon his ability to make
careful inquiry, a person takes it upon himself to give information or advice
to, or allows his information or advice to be passed on to, another person who,
as he knows or should know, will place reliance upon it, then a duty of care
will arise.                     The rule in Hedley Byrne,
supra, has been adopted in numerous Canadian cases, some of which will
be discussed below.  Although Hedley Byrne was considered revolutionary
when it was decided, the case was in fact the culmination of a series of
majority and dissenting judgments extending back into the last century.  Like Donoghue
v. Stevenson, supra, Hedley Byrne needs to be understood in
its context.  An understanding of this context is particularly important to
assessing the role of negligent misrepresentation where the parties are in a
contractual relationship.                     Before Hedley Byrne, supra,
it was settled law that a misrepresentation could give rise to damages only if
it was fraudulent, or if the representation was a collateral warranty to a
contract.  An "innocent" misrepresentation (which included what would
now, since Hedley Byrne, be characterized as a negligent
misrepresentation) was not actionable in itself, but only if it formed part of
a valid contract.                     The leading case in fraudulent
misrepresentation was Derry v. Peek (1889), 14 App. Cas. 337 (H.L.).  In
Derry v. Peek, the Court of Appeal held that a negligent
misrepresentation -- one made without due care as to its truth or falsehood --
gave rise to an action in damages for deceit for anyone to whom the statement
was directed and who relied on the statement to his or her detriment.  The
House of Lords rejected the suggestion that a false statement made negligently
was actionable.  In the words of Lord Herschell, "making a false statement
through want of care falls far short of, and is a very different thing from,
fraud, and the same may be said of a false representation honestly believed
though on insufficient grounds" (p. 375).  The House held that for an
action in deceit or fraud to lie, the person making the statement must either
know the statement to be false, or be reckless as to its truth or falsehood. 
This principle was reaffirmed by the House in Nocton v. Lord Ashburton,
[1914] A.C. 932, where Viscount Haldane L.C. said this (at pp. 953-54):
"It must now be taken to be settled that nothing short of proof of a
fraudulent intention in the strict sense will suffice for an action of
deceit."                     Although actions on warranties
were originally actions in tort, actions for breach of warranty had become, by
the nineteenth century, actions in contract.  See Baker, supra, at pp.
293-95.  The leading case of Heilbut, Symons & Co. v. Buckleton,
[1913] A.C. 30 (H.L.), settled the rule that for a representation to be
actionable as a warranty, it must have been made with promissory intent.                     The appellants in Heilbut,
Symons were rubber merchants, who were promoting shares in what they
represented was a rubber company.  The respondent bought a large number of
shares.  The company turned out to be other than as it had been described, and
the respondent brought an action in fraud and for breach of warranty.  At
trial, the jury found that the company had not been correctly represented by
the appellants, but that the misrepresentation was not fraudulent.  The jury
did, however, find that the appellants had warranted that the company was a
rubber company.  The House of Lords allowed the appeal.  In his speech, Lord
Moulton held that no liability can flow from a representation which is not
fraudulent, unless it is made with promissory intent (at p. 51):                     It
is, my Lords, of the greatest importance, in my opinion, that this House should
maintain in its full integrity the principle that a person is not liable in
damages for an innocent misrepresentation, no matter in what way or under what
form the attack is made.  In the present case the statement was made in answer
to an inquiry for information.  There is nothing which can by any possibility
be taken as evidence of an intention on the part of either or both of the
parties that there should be a contractual liability in respect of the accuracy
of the statement.  It is a representation as to a specific thing and nothing
more.                     Between Derry v. Peek
and Heilbut, Symons, supra, it was settled that a negligent
misrepresentation which was not made with promissory intent was not actionable,
as it fell between deceit and warranty.  To succeed, a plaintiff was required
to prove fraud or a collateral warranty.  As Lord Denning M.R. observed in Esso
Petroleum, supra, at p. 13:                     Ever
since Heilbut Symons & Co v Buckleton we have had to contend with
the law as laid down by the House of Lords that an innocent misrepresentation
gives no right to damages.  In order to escape from that rule, the pleader used
to allege -- I often did it myself -- that the misrepresentation was fraudulent,
or alternatively a collateral warranty.                      It was against this backdrop
that the House of Lords decided Hedley Byrne, supra.  Through
their bank, the appellants had obtained the opinion of the respondent merchant
bankers as to the creditworthiness of E. Ltd.  There was no contract
between the appellants and the respondent.  E. Ltd. subsequently went bankrupt,
and it was found at trial that the respondent had been negligent in giving the
opinion.  Their Lordships, expressly distinguishing Derry v. Peek, supra,
and implicitly distinguishing Heilbut, Symons, supra, held that a
negligent misrepresentation may, even if not made with promissory intent, give
rise to liability for damages.  Lord Reid described those relationships in
which a duty to take care in the making of representations will arise as
follows (at p. 486):  . . .
all those relationships where it is plain that the party seeking information or
advice was trusting the other to exercise such a degree of care as the
circumstances required, where it was reasonable for him to do that, and where
the other gave the information or advice when he knew or ought to have known
that the inquirer was relying on him.  I say "ought to have known"
because in questions of negligence we now apply the objective standard of what
the reasonable man would have done.                     In reaching this result, their
Lordships relied on an alternate line of authority reaching back through the
dissenting judgment of Denning L.J. in Candler v. Crane Christmas & Co.,
[1951] 1 All E.R. 426 (C.A.), and the decisions of the House of Lords in Donoghue
v. Stevenson, supra, and Nocton v. Lord Ashburton, supra,
to the nineteenth century decisions of Cann v. Willson (1888), 39 Ch. D.
39; Heaven v. Pender (1883), 11 Q.B.D. 503 (C.A.); and George v.
Skivington (1869), L.R. 5 Ex. 1.                     With the exception of Nocton
v. Lord Ashburton, supra, the cases relied upon by their Lordships
were all cases in which the relationship between the plaintiff and the
defendant was not contractual, but the court (or the dissenting judge)
nonetheless held that the defendant owed a duty of care to the plaintiff.  That
is, in each case, no contractual remedy was available to the plaintiff, but the
action was allowed in tort.  Nocton v. Lord Ashburton is the exception: 
in that case there was a contract between the plaintiff and the defendant (who
was his solicitor).  However, Nocton v. Lord Ashburton is readily
distinguishable.  In that case, an action for breach of contract was barred by
the Statute of Limitation.  Moreover, the plaintiff succeeded not in
tort but for breach of fiduciary duty.                     It was not clear from Hedley
Byrne, supra, that an action for negligent misrepresentation would
lie where the parties subsequently entered into a contract.  In Hedley Byrne
and in the cases upon which it relied (with the exception of Nocton v. Lord
Ashburton, supra) there was no contract between the parties.  A
dictum of Lord Reid in Hedley Byrne hinted that if the parties were in a
contractual relationship, the proper remedy was an action for breach of
warranty (at p. 483): "Where there is a contract there is no difficulty as
regards the contracting parties: the question is whether there is a
warranty."  The cases decided immediately after Hedley Byrne held
that an action for negligent misrepresentation was barred if the parties were
in a contractual relationship:  Bagot v. Stevens Scanlan & Co., supra,
and Clark v. Kirby-Smith, [1964] 2 All E.R. 835 (Ch. D.).  See also
D. W. McLauchlan, "Pre-Contract Negligent Misrepresentation"
(1977), 4 Otago L. Rev. 23.                     However, it was settled by Esso
Petroleum, supra, that the existence of a contract is not a bar to a
remedy for negligent misrepresentation.  In the words of Shaw L.J. (at p. 26):                     It
is difficult to see why, in principle, a right to claim damages for negligent
misrepresentation which has arisen in favour of a party to a negotiation should
not survive the event of the making of a contract as the outcome of that
negotiation.  It may, of course, be that the contract ultimately made either
expressly or by implication shows that, once it has been entered into, the
rights and liabilities of the parties are to be those and only those which have
their origin in the contract itself.  For a list of Canadian cases applying Esso
Petroleum, see Kingu v. Walmar Ventures Ltd. (1986), 38 C.C.L.T. 51
(B.C.C.A.), at p. 59.                     The principle that an action
for negligent misrepresentation will survive the making of a contract between
the parties was affirmed in this Court in Carman Construction, supra. 
Martland J., writing for the Court, held that the respondent was not liable on
the basis of negligent misrepresentation because the contract that was made
between the parties contained a "non-reliance provision" or
disclaimer which had the effect that the respondent did not assume any duty of
care.  It is clear from Martland J.'s reasons that the fact that the alleged
negligent misrepresentation had induced the contract would not have been a
reason for disallowing the claim in negligence.  The same proposition can be
deduced from the recent decision of this Court in Rainbow Industrial
Caterers Ltd., supra.  Although the narrow issue was the appropriate
measure of damages where a plaintiff is induced to enter into a contract with
the defendant by the defendant's negligent misrepresentation, both Sopinka J.
(for the majority) and McLachlin J. (dissenting), agreed that damages for
negligent misrepresentation could be awarded where the misrepresentation
induces a contract.                     It is clear that the fact that
the parties are in a contractual relationship is not in itself a bar to an
action in tort for negligent misrepresentation.  As in other areas of
negligence, the plaintiff may have the option of concurrent actions in tort and
contract.  However, concurrency must be viewed in light of the principles
articulated above.  Where a duty arising in tort is co-extensive with a duty
created by an express term of the contract, the plaintiff will be limited to
whatever remedies are available under the contract.  Moreover, if the liability
or duty of the defendant is excluded or limited by the terms of the contract,
the plaintiff may not allege a wider liability in tort in order to circumvent
the terms of the contract.  D.  Application of the Law to the Facts of
this Case                     Checo alleges that Hydro
negligently misrepresented the state of the right-of-way, and that Checo
suffered damages as a result of this misrepresentation.  In the alternative,
Checo has alleged that Hydro was in breach of its contractual duties.                     (1)  The Claim for
Negligent Misrepresentation                     I will assess Checo's claim in
tort for negligent misrepresentation first.  Because Checo and Hydro are in a
contractual relationship, Checo's claim in tort immediately raises two issues. 
First, is there a specific contractual duty created by an express term of the
contract which is co-extensive with the common law duty of care which Checo
alleges Hydro has breached?  If there is such a contractual duty, then Checo is
precluded from bringing an action in tort against Hydro for breach of the
common law duty of care.  In such a case, Checo would be confined to whatever
remedies are available under the law of contract.  Second, if the answer to the
first question is negative, is Hydro's liability or duty in tort limited or
excluded by the terms of the contract?                     (a)  Is there a Contractual
Duty Excluding a Common Law Duty of Care?                     The question whether there is
a contractual duty defined by an express term of the contract which would operate
to exclude the common law duty of care upon which Checo relies in its action
for negligent misrepresentation is shortly answered: there is such a duty. 
Checo bases its claim for negligent misrepresentation on the alleged
representation made in clause 6.01.03 of the tender documents.  Clause 6.01.03
of the tender documents was incorporated verbatim as an express term (also
numbered 6.01.03) of the contract between Hydro and Checo after Hydro accepted
Checo's tender.  On Checo's interpretation of clause 6.01.03 of the tender
documents, it is a representation as to the state of the right-of-way.  If
clause 6.01.03 of the tender documents is such a representation (and I am of
the opinion that it is, as I will discuss below), then clause 6.01.03 of the contract
is an express warranty as to the state of the right-of-way.  Whatever duty is
imposed in tort on Hydro by the clause in the tender documents is co-extensive
with the duty imposed in contract by the express clause in the contract.  In
consequence, subject to any overriding considerations arising from the context
in which the transaction occurred, Checo is limited to whatever remedies may be
available to it in contract for Hydro's breach of clause 6.01.03 of the
contract.  Checo cannot rely on a breach by  Hydro of any duty created by
clause 6.01.03 of the tender documents to found an action in tort.                     As I indicated, context is
important in assessing whether a claim in tort is foreclosed by the terms of
the contract.  This transaction occurred in a commercial context.  The parties
are both large corporations, and there is no allegation or indication of any
inequality of bargaining power or unconscionability.  I would also note that
the contract which was concluded by the parties was included as part of the
tender documents.  That is, Checo knew when it was preparing its bid that if
its bid were accepted, the representation as to the condition of the
right-of-way would be a term of the contract.  Checo knew, or ought to have
known, that disputes as to the condition of the right-of-way would potentially
be governed by the contract.  Knowing this, Checo decided to make a bid, hoping
that its bid would be accepted.  I would conclude that an assessment of the
context strengthens my initial conclusion that Checo should be limited to any
remedies which might be available to it under the contract.                     (b)  Is Hydro's Liability
or Duty Limited or Excluded?                     In light of my answer to the
first question, it is unnecessary for the purposes of this appeal to consider
whether Hydro's liability or duty in tort is limited or excluded by a term of
the contract.  Simply put, Checo's claim in tort is barred by the contract. 
However, I shall proceed at this stage to consider the effect of clauses 2.03
and 4.04 of the tender documents, which were incorporated into the contract, on
Checo's rights under the contract.                     In argument before this Court,
Hydro submitted that clauses 2.03 and 4.04 operated to exempt Hydro from
contractual liability for its representations.  The representation relied upon
by Checo is contained in clause 6.01.03, which is in the following language:  6.01.03WORK
DONE BY OTHERS  Clearing of the
right-of-way and foundation installation has been carried out by others and
will not form part of this Contract.                     The two clauses which Hydro
argues exclude its liability are as follows:  2.03TENDERER'S
RESPONSIBILITY  It shall be the
Tenderer's responsibility to inform himself of all aspects of the Work and no
claim will be considered at any time for reimbursement for any expenses
incurred as a result of any misunderstanding in regard to the conditions of the
Work.  Should any details necessary for a clear and comprehensive understanding
be omitted or any error appear in the Tender Documents or should the Tenderer note
facts or conditions which in any way conflict with the letter or spirit of the
Tender Documents, it shall be the responsibility of the Tenderer to obtain
clarifications before submitting his Tender.  . . .  Neither B.C.
Hydro nor the Engineer shall be responsible for any instructions or information
given to any Tenderer other than by the Purchasing Agent, in accordance with
this Clause.  4.04INSPECTION
OF SITE AND SUFFICIENCY OF TENDER  The Contractor
shall inspect and examine the Site and its surroundings and shall satisfy
himself before submitting his Tender as to the nature of the ground and
sub-soil, the form and nature of the Site, the quantities and nature of work
and materials necessary for completion of the Work, the means of access to the
Site, the accommodation and facilities he may require, and in general shall
himself obtain all necessary information as to risks, contingencies, and other
circumstances which may influence or affect his Tender.  Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the Contractor shall satisfy himself of any
special risks, contingencies, regulations, safety requirements, and other
circumstances which may be encountered.  The Contractor
shall be deemed to have satisfied himself before tendering as to the
correctness and sufficiency of his Tender for the Work and of the prices stated
in the Schedule of Prices which prices shall (except insofar as it is otherwise
provided in the Contract) cover all his obligations under the Contract and all
matters and things necessary for the proper execution of the Work.                      Kosty
acknowledged that tenderers rely on information contained in the tender
documents and the defendant intended that the plaintiff would prepare its bid
based on the representations contained in the tender documents.  Clause 6.01.03
does not define the word "clearing" and the tender documents do not
contain the defendant's clearing standards or clearing contracts.  In my
opinion, based on what they observed and their past experience, the natural and
ordinary meaning to be given to the word "clearing" in clause 6.01.03
was the one understood by Lemieux and Campeau, that the right-of-way would be
free of logs and debris.  I accept the evidence of Lemieux and Campeau, who I
found to be honest and forthright, that they formed an honest belief in
December 1982, after reading the tender documents and viewing the right-of-way,
that clearing was not yet complete.  The trial judge also found as a fact that the
right-of-way was incompletely and improperly cleared as of the date of the
contract.  In my opinion, clauses 4.04 and 2.03 do not limit or exclude Hydro's
liability flowing from clause 6.01.03 of the contract and of the tender
documents.  Clause 6.01.03 is a specific provision which is not displaced by
clauses 4.04 and 2.03.                     Clauses 2.03 and 4.04 do not
operate to limit Hydro's liability in contract for the representation relied
on.  Clause 4.04 required Checo to inspect the contract "Site", and
specified that the contract price would cover all Checo's obligations under the
contract.  "Site" is defined by clause 4.01 of the contract as
"the land upon which the Work is to be done [by the Contractor
-- Checo] and any area or areas adjacent thereto used in connection with
the Work and, unless the context otherwise requires, shall include all
materials, supplies, tools, equipment and structures thereon" (emphasis
added).  The representation relied on by Checo, however, is that clearing of
the right-of-way "has been carried out by others and will not form
part of this Contract" (emphasis added).  The ordinary meaning of the
emphasized words suggests that the "Site" referred to in clause 4.04
of the contract does not encompass the right-of-way, which is the subject
matter of the representation at issue.  Thus, clause 4.04 is not relevant to
Checo's action in tort or to its action for breach of contract.                     The key phrase in clause 2.03
is, "should the Tenderer note facts or conditions which in any way
conflict with the letter or spirit of the Tender Documents, it shall be the
responsibility of the Tenderer to obtain clarifications before submitting his
Tender."  The representation made in clause 6.01.03 was that the
right-of-way would be cleared as of the date of the contract.  Accordingly,
although Checo did note the "dirty" condition of the right-of-way at
the time it was carrying out the inspection mandated by clause 2.03, the
condition of the "Site" was not in conflict with the representation
that the right-of-way would be cleared as of the date of the contract, and
Checo's obligation under clause 2.03 to obtain clarification from Hydro on this
point was not triggered.  Moreover, the well-known principles governing the
interpretation of contractual exclusion and limitation of liability clauses
suggest that neither clause 2.03 nor clause 4.04 is sufficiently clear to limit
or exclude Hydro's liability in contract for the representation relied on.                     I would accordingly conclude
that there is no clause in the contract or in the tender documents which serves
either to limit or exclude Hydro's liability for the representation contained
in clause 6.01.03.                     (2)  The Claim for Breach
of Contract                     I have found that it was an
express term of the contract that the right-of-way would be cleared.  As found
by the trial judge, the right-of-way was not cleared.  Therefore, Hydro
breached the contract.  I have also found that there is no exclusion or
limitation clause that would affect Hydro's liability in contract.  Given that
he found Hydro liable for fraudulent misrepresentation, the trial judge did not
consider the question of damages for breach of contract.  I would return the
matter to trial on the question of damages for the breach of contract.                     At the original trial, Checo
also claimed damages for breach of contract for items which would appear to be
unconnected with the failure to clear the right-of-way.  As the trial judge did
not consider the issue of breach of contract, there are no findings of fact
with respect to these items.  Accordingly, if Checo establishes at the new
trial that Hydro breached its contract in any other respect, unconnected with
the failure to clear the right-of-way, and that Checo suffered damages
therefrom, Checo is entitled to recover damages for these items in accordance
with the applicable law of damages.  V.  Disposition                     I would accordingly allow
Hydro's appeal in part and dismiss Checo's cross-appeal.  I would order a new
trial on the issue of breach of contract.  I have found that Hydro breached the
contract in that the right-of-way was not properly cleared.  Damages for this
breach should be assessed at the new trial.  In addition, Checo is entitled to
recover for any breaches of the contract unconnected with the condition of the
right-of-way which it may establish at the new trial.                     Under the circumstances, each
party should bear its own costs, here and in the courts below.                     Appeal dismissed and
cross-appeal allowed in part, Sopinka and Iacobucci JJ. dissenting in
part.                     Solicitors for British
Columbia Hydro and Power Authority:  Singleton, Urquhart, MacDonald,
Vancouver.                     Solicitors for BG Checo
International Ltd.:  Swinton & Company, Vancouver.     
*      Stevenson J. took no part in the judgment.  