Young v. Young, [1993] 4 S.C.R.
3  Irene Helen Young                                                                             Appellant  v.  James Kam Chen Young                                                                   Respondent  and  W. Glen How                Respondent  and  Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of
Canada                            Respondent  and  The Attorney General of Canada, the Attorney General for Ontario, the Attorney General of Quebec, the Attorney General of Manitoba, the Attorney General of British
Columbia, the Law Society of British Columbia
and  Indexed as:  Young v.
Young  File No.:  22227.  1993:  January 25, 26;
1993:  October 21.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
british columbia                       Family law --
Property and financial awards -- Lump sum payment -- Family debts -- Principles
governing reallocation of property.                       Torts --
Maintenance -- Religious society carrying cost of action -- Common religious
action -- Whether or not tort of maintenance.                     Appellant's and
respondent's separation was marked by a protracted series of court battles. 
Appellant was awarded custody of the couple's three daughters and respondent
was granted access subject to court imposed restrictions arising from
appellant's objection to his religious activity with the children.  Respondent
was ordered not to discuss the Jehovah's Witness religion with the children,
take them to any religious services, canvassing or meetings, or expose them to
religious discussions with third parties without appellant's prior consent. 
Organized religion was not important to appellant although she wanted the
children to be raised within the United Church.                     The two older
daughters liked their father but came to dislike his religious instruction to
the extent that it was damaging his relationship with them and was contributing
to the stress the children were experiencing in adjusting to their parents'
separation.                        Held (L'Heureux-Dubé J. dissenting in the
result):  The appeal should be allowed in part.                     The issues should
be decided as follows:                     1.  The test
regarding access is the best interests of the child (L'Heureux-Dubé J., La
Forest and Gonthier JJ., and Iacobucci and Cory JJ.).  McLachlin J. suggests
that in cases such as this harm is usually an important element in determining
the best interests of the child.  Sopinka J. would recognize a threshold
element of harm.                     2. 
Sections 16(8)  and 17(5)  of the Divorce Act  do not violate
ss. 2 (a), (b), (d) or 15(1)  of the Charter . 
L'Heureux-Dubé J. (and La Forest and Gonthier JJ.) found the Charter  to
be inapplicable.  McLachlin J. found the impugned legislation did not violate
the  Charter .  Cory and Iacobucci JJ. agreed that there was no Charter 
violation.  Sopinka J. found that the Charter  applied and could only be
overridden in limited circumstances.                     3.  The
restrictions on access should be removed (L'Heureux-Dubé J. and La Forest and
Gonthier JJ. dissenting).                     4.  The judgment
dealing with property and financial matters and the award of costs should be
varied (L'Heureux-Dubé J. dissenting).                                                  _____________________  Best Interest of the Child, Charter
Considerations and Access                       Decisions are made
according to the best interests of the child without the benefit of a
presumption in favour of either parent.  The Act envisages contact between the
child and each of his or her parents as a worthy goal which should be in the
best interests of the child.  Maximum contact, however, is not an unbridled
objective and must be curtailed wherever the welfare of the child requires it.                      As the ultimate
goal of access is the continuation of a relationship which is of significance
and support to the child, access must be crafted to preserve and promote that
which is healthy and helpful in that relationship so that it may survive to
achieve its purpose.  Sources of ongoing conflict which threaten to damage or
prevent the continuation of a meaningful relationship should be removed or
mitigated.  Notwithstanding a general concern about the vulnerability of access
rights to the caprices of a vengeful custodial parent, courts should not be too
quick to presume that the access concerns of the custodial parent are unrelated
to the best interests of the child.  Courts should also not be blind to issues,
such as financial support, which form part of the broader context in which
these rights are exercised.  The access parent has no obligation to exercise
those rights and cannot be forced to comply with such an order even if that
contact has been determined to be in the child's best interest.                       The most common
presumption now governing the best interests test is the primary caregiver
presumption.  It explicitly restores the values of commitment and demonstrated
ability to nurture the child and recognizes the obligations and supports the
authority of the parent engaged in day to day tasks of childrearing.                     The order of the
trial judge is not subject to the Charter .  Even if it were, the best
interests test is nevertheless value neutral and does not, on its face, violate
any Charter  right.  Its objective, the protection of a vulnerable
segment of society, is completely consonant with the Charter 's values. 
Broad judicial discretion is crucial to the proper implementation of the
legislative objective of securing the best interests of the child.  Such
discretion in a legislative provision does not of itself give rise to an
inference of Charter  infringement.  It cannot be considered in the absence
of an examination of the legislative objectives and must be rationally tied to
those objectives.                     The standard for
finding a legislative provision unconstitutional because of vagueness is high. 
The provisions need only permit the framing of an intelligible legal debate
with respect to the objectives contained in the legislation.  The best
interests test is not so uncertain as to be incapable of guiding a
consideration of the factors relevant to custody and access determinations. 
The fact that it must be applied to the facts of each case does not militate in
favour of its unconstitutionality.                     The vagueness of a
legislative provision cannot be examined in the abstract but must be considered
within the context of the particular legislative objectives in question,
bearing in mind that some objectives will require a panoply of judicial
remedies for their meaningful fulfilment.  Among the factors with which courts
should be concerned when the vagueness of a law is at issue are:  (a) the
need for flexibility and the interpretive role of the courts, (b) the
impossibility of achieving absolute certainty, a standard of intelligibility
being more appropriate and (c) the possibility that many varying judicial
interpretations of a given disposition may exist and perhaps coexist.                      Expert evidence
should not be routinely required to establish the best interests of the child. 
Expert testimony, while helpful in some circumstances, is often inconclusive
and contradictory because such assessments are both speculative and may be
affected by the professional values and biases of the assessors themselves. 
Experts are not always better placed than parents to assess the needs of the
child.  The person involved in day to day care may observe changes in the child
that could go unnoticed by anyone else and normally has the best vantage point
from which to assess the interests of the child.  The custodial parent,
therefore, will often provide the most reliable and complete source of
information to the judge on the needs and interests of that child.  The
importance of the evidence of children in custody and access disputes, too, must
be emphasized.                       Decisions regarding
custody and access must not be based on the parents' faith.  The religion of
the parties, however, may be relevant as one of the circumstances to be
assessed in the determination of the best interests of the child.  Where there
is conflict over religion, the court is not engaged in adjudicating a "war
of religion" and the religious beliefs of the parties themselves are not
on trial.  Rather, it is the manner in which such beliefs are practised
together with the impact and effect they have on the child which must be
considered.  In all cases where the effects of religious practices are at
issue, the best interests of the child must prevail.                     Ordinarily, the
exposure of a child to different religions or beliefs may be of value to the
child.  Where religion becomes a source of conflict between the parents or is
the very cause of the marriage breakdown, it is generally not in the best
interests of the child and may in some circumstances be very detrimental for
the child to be drawn into the controversy over religious matters.  Where there
is conflict over religion, courts must secure the longstanding authority of the
custodial parent to make decisions over religious activities.  This ensures
that stress occasioned by such issues does not become a continuing and
ultimately destructive feature in the life of the child after divorce.                     Freedom of religion
is not an absolute value.  Here, powerful competing interests must also be
recognized, not the least of which, in addition to the best interests of the
children, are the freedoms of expression and religion of the children
themselves.                     Respondent's
religious beliefs and practices and his general rights of access were not
threatened.  The restrictions were aimed at reducing the area of conflict which
had arisen on account of the respondent's behaviour with his children during
access and the effects of that behaviour on their best interests.  Much of the
stress the children were experiencing was related to their resistance to becoming
involved in their father's religious practices.  The restrictions were to
further the best interests of these children by removing the source of
conflict, particularly as the ultimate purpose of the restrictions was to
preserve the relationship between the respondent and his children.  Evidence
supported the conclusion that the respondent would not respect the wishes of
the children without an order to do so.                        The matters of the
children's attending religious services with the respondent and accompanying
him on his proselytizing activities were resolved by the respondent's
undertaking to respect his children's wishes in this regard.  The order
forbidding the respondent from discussing his religion was not supported by a
proper application of the best interests of the child test.  Indeed,
curtailment of explanatory or discursive conversations between a parent and his
or her child should only be rarely ordered.                      The legislative
provision for the "best interests of the child" does not limit and
therefore does not violate the Charter  right to religious and expressive
freedom.  Religious expression not in the best interests of the child is not
protected by the Charter  because the guarantee of freedom of religion is
not absolute and does not extend to religious activity which harms or
interferes with the parallel rights of other people.  Conduct not in the best
interests of the child, even absent the risk of harm, amounts to an
"injury" or intrusion on the rights of others and is clearly not
protected by this Charter  guarantee.  "Injure" in this context
is a broad concept.  To deprive a child of what a court has found to be in his
or her best interests is to "injure", in the sense of not doing what
is best for the child.  A child's vulnerability heightens the need for
protection and any error should be made in favour of the child's best interests
and not in favour of the exercise of the alleged parental right.  An additional
factor which may come into play in the case of older children is the
"parallel right" of others to hold and manifest beliefs and opinions of
their own.                     The ambit of
freedom of expression is broader than that of freedom of conscience and
religion because even harmful expression may be protected.  Some forms of
harmful expression, however, are not constitutionally protected:  violence or
threats of violence or a direct attack on the physical integrity and liberty of
another.  Criminal conduct is an indication, although not a conclusive one,
that expressive conduct is constitutionally unprotected.                       The teaching of
religious beliefs and practices to one's children, while it has an expressive
aspect, is predominantly religious.  In seeking to reconcile the rights of
freedom of religion and freedom of expression in this context, it is the
religious aspect which must dominate.  Reading the two guarantees together, the
limits of the guarantee of freedom of expression should govern in the context
of religious instruction of children.                     The custodial
parent does not have the "right" to determine limits on access.  The
only question to be considered, where limitation of access is in issue, is what
is in the best interests of the child.  The custodial parent's obligation to
make certain basic decisions as to how the child is educated (which may extend
to religious matters) does not automatically mean that religious contacts with
the access parent of a different faith are to be excluded.  The failure of the
child to consent to instruction on the part of the access parent does not
necessarily preclude such instruction's being in the child's best interests.                      The order
restricting respondent's access was unnecessary given his undertaking and the
order enjoining him from preventing blood transfusions was unnecessary from a
practical point of view.  Parents should not make disparaging comments about
the other parent's religion, but the matter might best be left to the parents'
good sense.                     Per Sopinka J.:  While the
"best interests of the child" test is the  ultimate determination in
deciding issues of custody and access, it must be reconciled with the Charter . 
General language in a statute which, in its breadth, potentially confers the
power to override Charter  values must be interpreted to respect those
values.  Here, the best interests test must be interpreted to allow the Charter 
right to freedom of religious expression to be overridden only if its exercise
would occasion consequences that involve more than inconvenience, upset or
disruption to the child and incidentally to the custodial parent.                        Risk of substantial
harm must be shown if religious expression is to be restricted in applying the
best interests of the child test.  The statutory test in s. 16(10)  of the Divorce
Act  does not constitute a limitation on freedom of religious expression. 
This freedom does not extend to protect conduct which is harmful to others. 
However, the concept of harm should not be expanded to reach the conclusion
that anything which is not in the best interests of the children is injurious
within the meaning of s. 2 (b) and thus not protected by the Charter .  Financial
Considerations and Costs                     Per McLachlin J.:  A judge, to fix
lump sum maintenance, must fix it in a sum certain with reference to the
principles applicable to such an award.  The goal of conveying the entire
interest in the matrimonial home to the wife did not support an award of lump
sum maintenance; more was required.  There was ample basis here for an order
under s. 51 of the Family Relations Act awarding appellant a
greater portion of the family assets because respondent, for a considerable
time, paid little or nothing for the support of the family.  The debts incurred
during this period can serve as a consideration supporting reduction of
respondent's interest in the family property.  The equity in the home was not
substantial and respondent was permitted to retain other assets.                     The trial judge, in
effecting a de facto reapportionment of the interest in the family
assets to do justice, as was permitted on the facts and the law, did not
expressly allude to the factors for reallocation.  This omission should not
result in a new trial being ordered because of the length and cost of the
current litigation.  The result achieved by the trial judge should be endorsed
because the evidence was capable of supporting an order for reallocation of the
parties' interest in the family assets to the extent required to give the
appellant the entire interest in the matrimonial home.                     The money owed by
the family's jewelry corporation was not, in law, a debt for which respondent
was personally liable.  Only the corporation was liable.  The debt appellant
incurred to support herself and the children before she applied for maintenance
is similarly unenforceable against respondent as a debt, although it could be
taken into consideration in an order for reduction of his interest in the
family assets.                      No order for costs
should have been made against respondent's barrister.  Costs are awarded as compensation
for the successful party, not to punish a lawyer.  Any member of the legal
profession might be subject to a compensatory order for costs if it is shown
that repetitive and irrelevant material, and excessive motions and
applications, characterized the proceedings in which he or she was involved,
and that the lawyer acted in bad faith in encouraging this abuse and delay. 
The courts have jurisdiction to make such an award, often under statute and as
part of their inherent jurisdiction to control abuse of process and contempt of
court.  The proceedings here, despite their length and acrimonious progress,
did not fall within these characterizations.  Courts, moreover, must be
extremely cautious in awarding costs personally against a lawyer, given the
duties upon a lawyer to guard confidentiality of instructions and to bring
forward with courage even unpopular causes.  A lawyer should not be placed in a
situation where his or her fear of an adverse order of costs may conflict with
these fundamental duties of his or her profession.                      Per La Forest and Gonthier JJ.:  The
reasons of McLachlin J. were agreed with on the property and monetary
issues and on the principles governing costs.                     Per Iacobucci and Cory JJ.:  The
reasons of McLachlin J. were agreed with on the property, monetary and
costs issues.                     Per L'Heureux-Dubé J. (dissenting):  The
reasons of the trial judge on the issues of maintenance, division of property
and costs were agreed with.  Cases Cited    By McLachlin J.   By Sopinka J.                     Referred to:  Slaight Communications Inc. v.
Davidson, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1038; R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd., [1985] 1
S.C.R. 295.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited  AAct to Amend the Law relating to the custody of
Infants,  S. Prov.
Can. 1855, c. 126, s. 1.  Act to amend the Law
relating to the Custody of Infants (Talfourd's Act) (U.K.),          2 & 3 Vict.,
c. 54.  Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 1 , 2 (a), (b),
(d), 7 , 15(1) , 24 , 26 , 32 .  Civil
Code of Lower Canada,
art. 30.  Civil
Code of Quebec,
arts. 543, 569, 570, 647.  Convention
on the Rights of the Child, Can. T.S. 1992 No. 3, Art. 3(1).  Divorce
Act, R.S.C., 1985,
c. 3 (2nd Supp .), ss. 15(2) , 16(1) , (2) , (4) , (5) , (6) , (8) , (9) ,
(10) , 17(5) .  Family
Relations Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 121, ss. 51, 52.  Guardianship
of Infants Act, 1886
(U.K.), 49 & 50 Vict., c. 27.  Guardianship
of Infants Act, 1925
(U.K.), 15 & 16 Geo. 5, c. 45.  Guardianship
of Minors Act, 1971
(U.K.), 1971, c. 3, s. 1.  Lov
8 April nr 7 om barn og foreldre, s. 34 (Law about Children and Parents, of April 7, 1981,
no. 7, s. 34).  Supreme
Court of Judicature Act, 1873 (U.K.), 36 & 37 Vict., c. 66, s. 25(10).     Authors Cited   Abella,
Rosalie Silberman.  "Family Law in Ontario:  Changing Assumptions"
(1981), 13 Ottawa L. Rev. 1.  Bala, Nicholas. 
"Assessing the Assessor:  Legal Issues" (1990), 6 C.F.L.Q.
179.  Benians,
Robin.  "Preserving Parental Contact: a Factor in Promoting Healthy Growth
and Development in Children".  In Jo Tunnard, ed., Fostering Parental
Contact:  Arguments in Favour of Preserving Contact Between Children in Care
and Their Families.  London:  Family Rights Group, 1982.  Boyd,
Susan B. "Child Custody Law and the Invisibility of Women's Work"
(1989), 96 Queen's Q. 831.  Boyd, Susan
B.  "Potentialities and Perils of the Primary Caregiver Presumption"
(1991), 7 C.F.L.Q. 1.  Boyd, Susan
B.  "Women, Men and Relationships with Children:  Is Equality
Possible?".  In Karen Busby, Lisa Fainstein and
Holly Penner, eds., Equality Issues in Family Law:  Considerations for
Test Case Litigation.  Winnipeg:  Legal Research Institute of the
University of Manitoba, 1990.  Burrett,
Jill F.  Child Access and Modern Family Law.  Melbourne:  Law Book Co.,
1988.  Canada. 
Department of Justice.  Custody and Access: Public Discussion Paper. Ottawa: 
The Dept., 1993.  Canada. 
Department of Justice.  Evaluation of the Divorce Act, 1985 -- Phase I:
Collection of Baseline Data.  Ottawa: The Dept., 1987.  Canada. 
Department of Justice.  Evaluation of the Divorce Act -- Phase II: 
Monitoring and Evaluation.  Ottawa:  The Dept., 1990.  Canada. 
Law Reform Commission.  Report.  Family Law.  Ottawa: The Commission,
1976.  Canada. 
Law Reform Commission.  The Custody, Care and Upbringing of Children of
Divorcing Spouses.  By Richard Gosse.  Ottawa: The Commission, 1973.  Caplan, Paula
J., and Jeffery Wilson. "Assessing the Child Custody Assessors"
(1990), 27 R.F.L. (3d) 121.  Chambers, David
L.  "Rethinking the Substantive Rules for Custody Disputes in
Divorce" (1984), 83 Mich. L. Rev. 477.  Deech, Ruth. 
"The Unmarried Father and Human Rights" (1992), 4 J. Child L.
3.  Delorey, Anne
Marie.  "Joint Legal Custody:  A Reversion to Patriarchal Power"
(1989), 3 C.J.W.L. 33.  Dickens,
Bernard M.  "The Modern Function and Limits of Parental Rights"
(1981), 97 L.Q. Rev. 462.  Drakich, Janice. 
"In Search of the Better Parent:  The Social Construction of Ideologies of
Fatherhood" (1989), 3 C.J.W.L. 69.  Drakich, Janice. 
"In Whose Best Interests?  The Politics of Joint Custody".  In
Bonnie Fox, ed., Family Bonds and Gender Divisions:  Readings in the
Sociology of the Family.  Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press, 1988.  Ehrcke, Ann. 
"Limiting Judicial Discretion in Custody Proceedings on Divorce"
(1987), 6 Can. J. Fam. L. 211.  Ellison,
Edythe S.  "Issues Concerning Parental Harmony and Children's Psychosocial
Adjustment" (1983), 53 Amer. J. Orthopsychiat. 73.  Elster,
Jon.  "Solomonic Judgments:  Against the Best Interest of the Child"
(1987), 54 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1.  Emery, Robert
E.  "Interparental Conflict and the Children of Discord and Divorce"
(1982), 92 Psych. Bull. 310.  Fineman, Martha
Albertson.  "Dominant Discourse, Professional Language and Legal Change in
Child Custody Decisionmaking" (1988), 101 Harv. L. Rev. 727.  Fineman, Martha
Albertson.  The Illusion of Equality: The Rhetoric and Reality of Divorce
Reform.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1991.    Furstenberg, Frank
F., Jr., and Andrew J. Cherlin.  Divided Families:  What Happens to
Children When Parents Part.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press,
1991.  Gélinas, Louis,
et Bartha Maria Knoppers.  "Le rôle des experts en droit
québécois en matière de garde, d'accès et de protection" (1993), 53 R.
du B. 3.  Goldstein,
Joseph, Anna Freud and Albert J. Solnit.  Beyond the Best Interests of the
Child.  New York:  The Free Press, 1979.   Grassby, Miriam. 
"Women in Their Forties:  The Extent of Their Rights to Alimentary
Support" (1991), 30 R.F.L. (3d) 369.  Hetherington,
E. Mavis, Martha Cox and Roger Cox.  "Effects of Divorce on Parents and
Children".  In Michael E. Lamb, ed., Nontraditional Families: 
Parenting and Child Development.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Lawrence Erlbaum &
Associates, 1982.  Holmes, Sheila
M.  "Imposed Joint Legal Custody:  Children's Interests or Parental
Rights?" (1987), 45 U.T. Fac. L. Rev. 300.  Johnston, Janet
R., Marsha Kline and Jeanne M. Tschann, "Ongoing Postdivorce
Conflict:  Effects on Children of Joint Custody and Frequent Access"
(1989), 59 Amer. J. Orthopsychiat. 576.  LaFave, LeAnn
Larson.  "Origins and Evolution of the `Best Interests of the Child'
Standard" (1989), 34 S.D.L. Rev. 459.   Maidment,
Susan.  Child Custody and Divorce.  London:  Croom Helm, 1984.  Mnookin, Robert
H.  "Child-Custody Adjudication:  Judicial Functions in the Face of
Indeterminacy" (1975), 39 Law & Contemp. Probs. 226.   Payne,
Julien D.  Payne on Divorce, 2nd ed. Toronto:  Butterworths, 1988.   Perry, Debra. 
Access to Children Following Parental Relationship Breakdown in Alberta. 
Calgary:  Canadian Research Institute for Law and the Family, 1992.    Rutter,
Michael.  Maternal Deprivation Reassessed.  Harmondsworth, England: 
Penguin Books, 1981.  Rutter, Michael. 
"Protective Factors in Children's Responses to Stress and
Disadvantage".  In Martha Whalen Kent and Jon E. Rolf, eds., Primary
Prevention of Psychopathology:  Social Competence  in Children, vol. III. 
Hanover, N.H.: University Press of New England, 1979.  Ryan, Judith
P.  "Joint Custody in Canada:  Time for a Second Look" (1986),
49 R.F.L. (2d) 119.  Schneider, Carl
E.  "Religion and Child Custody" (1992), 25 U. Mich. J.L. Ref.
879.  Smart, Carol,
and Selma Sevenhuijsen.  Child Custody and the Politics of Gender. 
London:  Routledge, 1989.  Smith,
Lucy, and Peter Lødrup.  "The Child in the Divorce Situation --
Factors Determining the Custody Question and the Use of Experts in Custody
Cases in Norway".  In Ian F. G. Baxter and Mary A. Eberts, eds., The
Child and the Courts.  Toronto: Carswell, 1978.  Syrtash, John
Tibor.  Religion and Culture in Canadian Family Law.  Toronto: 
Butterworths, 1992.  Toope, Stephen
J.  "Riding the Fences:  Courts, Charter Rights and Family Law"
(1991), 9 Can. J. Fam. L. 55.  Wallerstein, Judith
S., and Sandra Blakeslee.  Second Chances:  Men, Women and Children a Decade
After Divorce.  New York:  Ticknor & Fields, 1989.  Wallerstein, Judith
S., and Joan Berlin Kelly.  Surviving the Breakup:  How Children and Parents
Cope with Divorce.  New York: Basic Books, 1980.  Weisman, Norris. 
"On Access After Parental Separation" (1992), 36 R.F.L. (3d) 35.  Weiss, Martin,
and Robert Abramoff.  "The Enforceability of Religious Upbringing
Agreements" (1991), 25 J. Mar. L. Rev. 655.  Weitzman, Lenore
J.  The Divorce Revolution.  New York:  The Free Press, 1985.  Zarowny, Steven
M.  "The Religious Upbringing of Children After Divorce" (1980), 56 Notre
Dame Law. 160.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (1990), 50 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, 75
D.L.R. (4th) 46, allowing an appeal in part from a judgment of
Proudfoot J. (1989), 24 R.F.L. (3d) 193.  Appeal allowed in part,
L'Heureux-Dubé J. dissenting in the result.  Sections 16(8)  and 17(5)  of
the Divorce Act  did not violate ss. 2 (a), (b), (d)
or 15(1)  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .                     Lorne N.
MacLean and Fred C.
Lowther, for the appellant.                      Gordon Turriff, for the respondent W. Glen How.                     John M. Burns and Linda How, for the
respondent Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Canada.                     Brian Evernden, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Canada.                     Michel Y.
Hélie, for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario.                     Monique Rousseau and Isabelle Harnois, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.                     Shawn Greenberg, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Manitoba.                     Written submission
only for the intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia.                      The reasons of La
Forest and Gonthier JJ. were delivered by                     La
Forest J. -- I have had
the advantage of reading the reasons of my colleagues.  I am in agreement with
the reasons of Justice L'Heureux-Dubé that the issue of access should be
determined on the basis of what is in the best interest of the child.  I also
agree with her on the constitutional issue.                     On the property and
monetary issues, I am in agreement with the reasons of Justice McLachlin.  I
also agree with her on the principles that should govern costs and accordingly
with the order of the Court of Appeal respecting the costs at trial.  However,
since the appellant was largely successful in the final result, I would allow
her costs on this appeal and the Court of Appeal.                     Accordingly, I
would allow the appeal and restore the order of the trial judge on all matters
except the monetary issues, which I would dispose of in the manner proposed by
McLachlin J.  I would award the appellant her costs at trial as set forth by
the Court of Appeal, as well as costs on a party and party basis in this Court
and in the Court of Appeal.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                       On the related
issues of maintenance, division of property and costs, I agree with the trial
judge for the reasons that she expressed at length, given her privileged
vantage point and her findings of fact.  Accordingly, I will deal only with the
main issue:  access.  Facts and Judgments                     Since the facts
leading to the dispute between the parties have been set out by my colleague, I
will only point out those most relevant to my subsequent discussion.                     The parties, who
had two children when they first separated in February, 1987, resumed
cohabitation and finally separated in August, 1987, shortly after the birth of
their third child.  It appears from the evidence that the breakdown of their
marriage was due, to a great extent, to religious differences between the
parties.  The respondent became involved, unbeknownst to the appellant, in the
Jehovah's Witnesses faith some two years before the separation.  The children
had been baptized in the United Church, and the appellant, an Anglican,
apparently did not favour any involvement for herself or the children in her
husband's new faith.  At the time, the older children were six and eight years
of age.                      In the interim
order of August 16, 1988, Scarth L.J.S.C. dismissed the respondent's motion for
a declaration and order pursuant to s. 24  of the Charter .  He granted
custody to the appellant, awarded her $3,500 a month in spousal and child
support and specified the following restrictions on the respondent's access:  a)the
Respondent will not take the said children of the marriage to the Respondent's
church without the Petitioner's consent and if the Petitioner withholds
consent, the Respondent may make application to this court;  b) the
Respondent will not suggest that the three children of the marriage will have
to separate from the Petitioner if she does not convert to the Jehovah's
Witnesses [sic] faith, or that the Petitioner will be punished by God
for failing to adhere to that faith;  c) the
Respondent will not deprecate the Petitioner's religion in the presence of the
three infant children of the marriage;  d) the
Respondent is enjoined from preventing the said infants from having blood
transfusions in the event blood transfusions are required and the Petitioner
shall be solely responsible for all health care decisions and choices relative
to the said infant children of the marriage.  The respondent appealed the order and
instituted a number of further applications in which he sought to vary the
interim custody order and the terms and conditions imposed on access.  He also
applied to set the dates and times of access and sought overnight access.  The
appeal of the interim order was dismissed by the B.C. Court of Appeal on
September 23, 1988 and the applications for interim and permanent custody of
the children and variation of the restrictions were rejected by Scarth
L.J.S.C.   on October 7, 1988.  The respondent then appealed the order of
October 7, 1988 and sought a declaration that both the order and s. 16(1) ,
(2) , (6)  and (8)  of the Act  violated his Charter  rights.  This appeal
was dismissed on November 15, 1988.  Prior to trial, the respondent also
unsuccessfully contested the amount of support to be paid and applied to list
the matrimonial home for sale and have the arrears of support accumulated to
that date cancelled.                     At trial (1989), 24
R.F.L. (3d) 193, on the issue of custody and access, Proudfoot J. (now J.A.)
found that the respondent's attempts to argue loss of freedom of religion were
but a guise under which he was attempting to gain control of the children's
religious upbringing.  She held that the respondent would not be denied custody
or access because of his religious beliefs and that his freedom of religion had
not been infringed.  Rather, custody and access would be decided only according
to the best interests of the children.  She found that the appellant did not
oppose access by the respondent, and that the difficulty was created solely by
their religious differences.  Distinguishing the decision of the Divisional
Court of the Supreme Court of Ontario in Hockey v. Hockey (1989), 21
R.F.L. (3d) 105, and relying on Anson v. Anson (1987), 10 B.C.L.R. (2d)
357 (Co. Ct.), and Andrews v. Andrews, B.C.S.C., June 9, 1983,
unreported, Proudfoot J. found that both the right and the responsibility to
determine a child's education, health care and religion rest with the custodial
parent.  Citing the decision of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in Brown v.
Brown (1983), 39 R.F.L. (2d) 396, she found that the Charter  has not
affected the general principle enunciated in DeLaurier v. Jackson,
[1934] S.C.R. 149, that the father's rights in respect of the religious
upbringing of his child must yield to the welfare of the child.                     Proudfoot J. noted
that the original custody order had been made with the respondent's consent and
that all the experts agreed that custody should remain with the appellant.  The
children had indicated in letters written to the judge that they wished to
remain with their mother.  The evidence was clear that they were opposed to any
involvement in the respondent's religious activities and that there had been
total disregard for their wishes.  The reports of both court experts indicated
that the two older children's relationship with their father was deteriorating,
that they were under increasing pressure regarding family issues and needed to
settle the conflict so they could proceed with their lives.  Proudfoot J. found
that there was no doubt on the evidence that the religious conflict was causing
a problem for the children and that it should be resolved.  She granted the
appellant custody and guardianship of the children with sole responsibility for
their religious upbringing, health care and education and granted the
respondent access subject to the following conditions:  a) that
the Respondent shall not discuss the Jehovah's Witness religion with the
children and shall not take any of the children to any religious services,
canvassing or meetings, without the written consent of the Petitioner and shall
not expose the children to religious discussions with a third party or parties
without the written consent of the Petitioner;  b) that
the Respondent is enjoined from preventing any of the three infant children of
the marriage from having blood transfusions in the event blood transfusions are
required;  c)and
that the Respondent shall not make any adverse remarks with respect to the
religious beliefs of the Petitioner....  She further declared that neither the
custody order nor the access restrictions infringed the respondent's freedom of
religion under the Charter  and made other incidental findings as to
support, the division of matrimonial property and costs, with which I agree as
already indicated.                     On appeal (1990),
50 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, the respondent abandoned his custody claim but sought an
order for joint guardianship of the children, unrestricted access and a
declaration that the restrictions on access violated his and the children's Charter 
rights.  Upon reviewing the rights of custodial parents and the historical
development of access, Wood J.A. for the majority (Cummings J.A. concurring on
this issue) noted that the concept of access did not receive statutory
recognition until the Act .  Wood J.A. found that the terms of s. 16  of the
Act , when taken as a whole, indicate an intention by Parliament to foster
substantial changes in the law of custody and access and to facilitate a
meaningful and continuing relationship with the children of the marriage and
the access parent.  In his opinion, the word "contact" within s.
16(10)  should be given a broad meaning, and a proper construction of the Act 
requires the distribution of "rights" between the custodial and the
access parent.  He found that an order for custody under s. 16(1)  of the
Act  necessarily gives the custodial parent the power to determine the religious
upbringing of the child, but does not give that parent the right to prevent the
other from sharing his or her views with the child, whether that takes the form
of discussions, observances or other related activities.  The right of the
access parent to share those beliefs is subject only to two limitations:  (a)
the unwillingness of the child to participate and (b) the power of the court to
restrict the access if exposure to the beliefs or practices is, or is likely to
be, harmful to the well-being of the child.  Such harm must be
"real psychological or physical harm", established on a civil
standard of proof and must be distinguished from the general emotional distress
which every child experiences upon divorce.                      Applying these
principles to the facts of the case, Wood J.A. concluded at p. 109 that:  No
such harm was diagnosed or anticipated by either of the expert witnesses which
the learned trial judge found to be credible.  Nor did the evidence establish
that the conflict in the religious beliefs of the parents was causing, or
likely to cause, such harm.   Nonetheless, Wood J.A. held that the
respondent was bound to respect the girls' wishes not to accompany him to his
place of worship or on his proselytization efforts.  Finding no reason to
disbelieve the respondent's willingness to do so, Wood J.A. held that there was
no basis for the imposition of any restrictions on his rights of access.  In
the result, he struck out the restrictions on access, found the declaration
that the appellant have sole responsibility for the religious upbringing,
health care and education of the children unnecessary and struck out the order
that neither party make adverse remarks with reference to the religious beliefs
of the other.   Relevant Statutory
Provisions                     In the present
case, the Court is concerned with the statutory criteria which guide courts in
matters of custody and access.  A proper starting point, then, is to spell out
those provisions of the Divorce Act , which are relevant to a discussion
of custody and access:                     16. (1)  A court of
competent jurisdiction may, on application by either or both spouses or by any
other person, make an order respecting the custody of or the access to, or the
custody of and access to, any or all children of the marriage.                                                                     .
. .                     (4)  The
court may make an order under this section granting custody of, or access to,
any or all children of the marriage to any one or more persons.                     (5)  Unless
the court orders otherwise, a spouse who is granted access to a child of the
marriage has the right to make inquiries, and to be given information, as to
the health, education and welfare of the child.                     (6)  The
court may make an order under this section for a definite or indefinite period
or until the happening of a specified event and may impose such other terms,
conditions or restrictions in connection therewith as it thinks fit and just.                                                                     .
. .                     (8)  In
making an order under this section, the court shall take into consideration
only the best interests of the child of the marriage as determined by reference
to the condition, means, needs and other circumstances of the child.                     (9)  In
making an order under this section, the court shall not take into consideration
the past conduct of any person unless the conduct is relevant to the ability of
that person to act as a parent of a child.                     (10)  In
making an order under this section, the court shall give effect to the
principle that a child of the marriage should have as much contact with each
spouse as is consistent with the best interests of the child and, for
that purpose, shall take into consideration the willingness of the person for
whom custody is sought to facilitate such contact.                      17.  . . .                     (5)  Before
the court makes a variation order in respect of a custody order, the court
shall satisfy itself that there has been a change in the condition, means,
needs or other circumstances of the child of the marriage occurring since the
making of the custody order or the last variation order made in respect of that
order, as the case may be, and, in making the variation order, the court shall
take into consideration only the best interests of the child as determined by
reference to that change.  [Emphasis added.]  Custody                     Leaving aside for
the moment the constitutional questions stated by Lamer C.J., I wish to focus
on the matter of custody and access.  While the issue of custody is no longer
in dispute, the parties having agreed that the appellant should retain custody
of their three children, it is still necessary, to set the stage fully, to
examine the rationale underlying the granting of custody.                      Since the 19th
century, along with a gradual move toward equality of the sexes in custody presumptions,
the focus has shifted from the rights of the parents to those of the child. 
The first statutory inroads were made in England with the passage of Talfourd's
Act  in 1839 (An Act to amend the Law relating to the Custody of Infants
(U.K.) , 2 & 3 Vict., c. 54) which allowed courts to make an order of
access to the mother, and even to award her the custody of children of
"tender years", those under the age of seven.  However, fathers still
retained the presumptive right to custody, a right which would only be
disturbed where there was serious reason to believe that his behaviour would be
detrimental to the child.  In contrast, mothers who engaged in adulterous
behaviour were deemed to have threatened the family structure and were presumed
unfit to protect the interests of the child and routinely denied custody.                       The best
interests of the child gained ascendancy as the proper focus of custody
decisions at the same time as courts moved toward the equality of women in
custody decisions.  The power of courts to rule in the best interests of the
child was originally found in the equitable parens patriae jurisdiction
of the Courts of Chancery.  Although this power was at first only exercised in
respect of the property rights of the child, the concept of the best interests
of the child was gradually expanded to include the emotional, physical and
spiritual welfare of the child.  Changes in the social landscape affecting both
the nature of work and the family and growing recognition of the needs of
children began to inform custody decisions.  With the merger of the courts of
equity and common law in the Supreme Court of Judicature Act, 1873
(U.K.), 36 & 37 Vict., c. 66, the ability of courts to overrule any
common law parental right where found to be in the best interests of the child
was confirmed, as s. 25(10)  of the Act  specifically provided that "In
questions relating to the custody and education of infants the rules of equity
shall prevail".  In England, Parliament specifically recognized as
important a consideration of the welfare of the child in the Guardianship of
Infants Act, 1886 (U.K.), 49 & 50 Vict., c. 27.  Upon the passage
of the Guardianship of Infants Act, 1925 (U.K.), 15 & 16 Geo. 5,
c. 45, the welfare of the child became the "the first and paramount
consideration".  The welfare, or what is now called the best interests, of
the child thus prevailed over any potential rights that parents previously held
at common law.                     A number of rules
were developed by courts, presumably predicated on the best interests test,
which made the outcome of custody matters dependent upon assumptions as to
parents' suitability.  The most important of these rules was the tender years
doctrine, which was described by an Ontario court in 1933 as the common sense
proposition that, in general, children under the age of seven needed the care
of their mothers (Re Orr, [1933] O.R. 212 (C.A.)).  A related
presumption favoured the placement of older children with the parent of the
same sex.  The Guardianship of Infants Act, 1925, granted women equal
rights to custody over their children in England.  In Canada, statutes
providing for equality in entitlement to custody were passed in some provinces
as early as 1923, although the process of legislative entrenchment was not
completed until 1977 (see R. S. Abella, "Family Law in Ontario:  Changing
Assumptions" (1981), 13 Ottawa L. Rev. 1, at p. 13).  The net
effect of both legislative enactments and judicially developed presumptions was
that women were granted custody of children in the majority of cases.                     Although the
welfare principle long predates the 1970s, it was at that time that the
emerging focus on the rights of children began to supplant the tender years
doctrine, as courts adopted the principle expressed by de Grandpré J. in Talsky
v. Talsky, [1976] 2 S.C.R 292, at p. 293, that "the paramount
consideration in custody matters is the welfare of the infants". 
Concurrent with this shift was the dissociation of notions of matrimonial fault
from assumptions about parenting ability.  Following the Law Reform Commission
of Canada's report on Family Law in 1976, the best interests test was
entrenched as the sole criterion for the determination of custody and access in
the Divorce Act .  Since then, not only has the best interests of the
child become the paramount consideration, legislation has dictated that it be
the sole consideration.                     Despite these
changes over time with respect to who is regarded as the appropriate custodial
parent, the nature and scope of custody itself have remained relatively
constant.  The chief feature of such orders was, and still is, the implied, if
not explicit, conferral of parental authority on the person granted custody. 
The long-standing rule at common law is that an order of custody entails the
right to exercise full parental authority.  In the case of a sole custody
order, that authority is vested in one parent to the exclusion of the other.                     The power of the
custodial parent is not a "right" with independent value which is
granted by courts for the benefit of the parent, but is designed to enable that
parent to discharge his or her responsibilities and obligations to the child. 
It is, in fact, the child's right to a parent who will look after his or her
best interests.  Indeed, courts have recognized that there is no magic to the
parental tie and will, when the best interests of the child warrant, grant
custody to a third party.  As Dubin J.A. (now C.J.O.) held in Re Moores and
Feldstein, [1973] 3 O.R. 921, at p. 928:  . .
. it is the duty of the Court to view all the circumstances relevant to what is
in the interest of the child, including a consideration as to whether the
evidence disclosed that the child would benefit from the tie of a child to its
mother.                      In
my view, to award one parent the exclusive custody of a child is to clothe that
parent, for whatever period he or she is awarded the custody, with full
parental control over, and ultimate parental responsibility for, the care,
upbringing and education of the child, generally to the exclusion of the right
of the other parent to interfere in the decisions that are made in exercising
that control or in carrying out that responsibility.  See also Baker v. Baker (1979),
8 R.F.L. (2d) 236 (Ont. C.A.).                      The rationale for
granting this authority to the custodial parent is described by Gendreau J.A.
in Dussault v. Ladouceur (1987), 14 R.F.L. (3d) 185 (Que. C.A.), at
p. 191, as follows:                     [translation] It goes without saying
that as a general rule, when custody of a child is granted to one parent, he or
she then exercises all the attributes of parental authority and the other
parent does not normally interfere in the custodial parent's way of doing
things, except in the exercise of his or her supervising role.  The child's
unity of development is preserved in this manner and any scatterings or
dislocations that might be harmful to him or her are avoided.  See also Gunn v. Gunn (1975),
24 R.F.L. 182 (P.E.I.S.C.); Benoit v. Benoit (1972), 6 R.F.L. 180 (Ont.
Prov. Ct.), reversed on other grounds (1972), 10 R.F.L. 282 (Ont. C.A.). 
Similarly, under the B.C. Family Relations Act, the custodial parent has
the full bundle of rights over the child (Charlton v. Charlton (1980),
15 R.F.L. (2d) 220 (B.C.S.C.); Anson v. Anson, supra).                     As Professor Julien
Payne has observed in Payne on Divorce (2nd ed. 1988), at p. 144,
it has, at times, been thought, both in Canada and elsewhere, that custody and
guardianship of a child were different in scope.  While the case law is not
consistent on this point, the term "custody" has been used in two
senses.  When used in its wider sense, custody is akin to the concept of
guardianship and encompasses the full bundle of parental rights.  In its
narrower sense, the term refers only to the right to physical custody or day to
day care and control of the child (see Hewer v. Bryant, [1970] 1 Q.B.
357; Anson v. Anson, supra, at p. 363).  However, as Payne notes at
pp. 144-45, at this point in time, the wider concept of custody is well
entrenched in Canadian law:   This view is reflected in the decision
of Huddart Co. Ct. J. in Anson v. Anson, supra, at p. 366:                     There
seems to be no limit other than that of the imagination of the bar and bench to
the variety of orders that can be devised to ensure the best interests of a
child are served by the distribution of custodial rights and duties between the
interested adults.  The law reports resound with examples.  Key, however, is
where the residual authority lies.  It seems too late to suggest that the term
custody be confined to physical care and control with guardianship of the
person being the residual concept, including general supervision of the
upbringing of the child.  The wide meaning is entrenched in federal legislation
and in the case law here and elsewhere.  [Emphasis added.]  See also Clarke v. Clarke
(1987), 7 R.F.L. (3d) 176 (B.C.S.C.).                     Southin J.A., the
dissenting judge on this issue in the Court of Appeal, dealt at p. 31 with
the question of custody under the B.C. provincial legislation in the following
terms:                     I
can find nothing in the 1978 Act  which warrants an inference that the
Legislature intended by it to cut down the powers of guardians as those powers
have long been understood.  It follows that, if the order giving custody to
Mrs. Young is sustained, she has under the Family Relations Act the full right
to lay down the law concerning all matters relating to the children even during
the time they are with their father for the purpose of his exercise of access.     A
child must know where its home is and to whom it must look for guidance and
admonition and the person
having custody and having that responsibility must have the opportunity to
exercise it without any feeling by the infant that it can look elsewhere.  It
may be an unfortunate thing for the spouse who does not have custody that he or
she does lose a great deal of the authority and indeed to some extent the love
and affection of the child that might otherwise be gained, but this is one of
the things which is inherent in separation and divorce.  The parents cannot
have it both ways.  As I say, in my view, it is vitally necessary that the
child know where its home is, to whom it is responsible and that there be no
doubt in the mind of the child as to that.  Within those limits, the parent
who does not have custody should, of course, have access to the child under
terms which are as reasonably generous as possible, but without interfering
with that basic responsibility on the parent having custody.  [Emphasis added.]  Once a court has determined who is the
appropriate custodial parent, it must, indeed it can do no more than, presume
that that parent will act in the best interests of the child.  As the New
Brunswick Court of Appeal stated in Fougere v. Fougere (1987), 77 N.B.R.
(2d) 381, at p. 384:                     Once
courts award custody they must, in our view, support the custodial parent in
that parent's reasonable efforts to bring up the children, including the right
of the custodial parent to decide questions relating to the religious
upbringing of the children.                     As has been widely
observed by those studying the nature and sources of changes in family
institutions, popular notions of parenthood and parenting roles have undergone
a profound evolution both in Canada and elsewhere in the world in recent years
(see generally M. A. Fineman, The Illusion of Equality: The Rhetoric and
Reality of Divorce Reform (1991); L. J. Weitzman, The Divorce Revolution
(1985); J. Drakich, "In Whose Best Interests? The Politics of Joint
Custody", in B. Fox, ed., Family Bonds and Gender Divisions: Readings
in the Sociology of the Family (1988); C. Smart and S. Sevenhuijsen, Child
Custody and the Politics of Gender (1989), and S. B. Boyd, "Women, Men
and Relationships with Children:  Is Equality Possible?", in K. Busby, L.
Fainstein and H. Penner, eds., Equality Issues in Family Law:  Considerations
for Test Case Litigation (1990)).  One of the central tenets of this new
vision is that child care both is no longer and should no longer be exclusively
or primarily the preserve of women.  Society has largely moved away from the
assumptions embodied in the tender years doctrine that women are inherently
imbued with characteristics which render them better custodial parents (for a
discussion, see D. L. Chambers, "Rethinking the Substantive Rules for
Custody Disputes in Divorce" (1984), 83 Mich. L. Rev. 477). 
Moreover, both economic necessity and the movement toward social and economic
equality for women have resulted in an increase in the number of women in the
paid workforce.  Many people have tended to assume that a natural result of
this change would be the concurrent sharing of household and childcare
responsibilities with spouses, companions and, of course, fathers.  In
addition, the increased emphasis on the participation of fathers in the raising
of children and financial support after divorce gave rise to claims by fathers
and fathers' rights groups for legislative changes that would entitle them to
the benefit of neutral presumptions in custody decisions.                         To that end, Wood
J.A. relies on the views expressed about the nature of custody in the English
decision of Dipper v. Dipper, [1980] 2 All E.R. 722, as approximating
the philosophy found in the Act .  In that case, the English Court of Appeal
held at p. 733:  . .
. it [is] a fallacy which continues to raise its ugly head that, on making a
custody order, the custodial parent has a right to take all the decisions about
the education of the children in spite of the disagreements of the other
parent.  That is quite wrong.  The parent is always entitled, whatever his
custodial status, to know and be consulted about the future education of the
children and any other major matters.  If he disagrees with the course proposed
by the custodial parent he has the right to come to the court in order that the
difference may be determined by the court.                      Furthermore, in my
view, there is nothing in the Act  which mandates such a reversal in the
philosophy of custody as held up to now.  The Law Reform Commission of Canada,
report on Family Law, supra, on which the Act  is based, defines
custody at p. 46 in the following manner:                       This description of
custody mirrors the traditional elements of parental authority and in no way
suggests a blending of the rights of the access parent with those of the
custodial parent.  While the Act  specifies that access is a value to be
preserved, the objective in s. 16(10)  that a child have "as much
contact with each spouse" is immediately qualified by the proviso  "as
is consistent with the best interests of the child" (emphasis added). 
Thus, it is clear that maximum contact is not an unbridled objective, and that
it must be curtailed wherever the welfare of the child requires it.  The best
interests of the child remain the prism through which all other considerations
are refracted.    I could not agree more, given the
wording of the Act  itself and the generally accepted view of custody both
before and since its enactment.  The Act neither suggests nor requires the
division of parental responsibilities between the custodial and access parent. 
If Parliament had intended such a result, it would have used much clearer and
less ambiguous language.                        Above
all, [joint custody] requires a willingness by both parents to work together to
ensure the success of the arrangement.  Such a willingness must be sincere and
genuine; by its very nature it is not something that can be imposed by a
Court on two persons, one or both of whom may be unwilling or reluctant to
accept it in all its implications.  Like marriage itself if it is to succeed,
it is an arrangement that has to be worked out by two persons who are
determined, or their own will and in good faith, to make it work.  [Emphasis in
original.]                       Since in the
present case, the respondent requested joint custody at trial but abandoned
this claim on appeal and since his claim for joint guardianship also failed, it
is not necessary to labour the point.  One can only note that the trial judge
made a finding of fact that the respondent desired custody simply in order to
control the religious upbringing of the children.      Access                     As indicated
previously, the Act  specifies the powers of courts in matters of access.  Under
s. 16(6), the trial judge possesses broad discretion to "impose such
other terms, conditions or restrictions in connection therewith" as he or
she thinks "fit and just".  However, that discretion is to be
exercised strictly from the perspective of the interests of the child, as
s. 16(8)  requires courts to "take into consideration only the best
interests of the child of the marriage as determined by reference to the
condition, means, needs and other circumstances of the child".  Section
16(5)  confers on a parent granted access, again subject to the discretion of
the judge, the right to be informed about the child.  Finally, s. 16(10)
directs courts to give effect to the principle that "a child of the
marriage should have as much contact with each spouse as is consistent with the
best interests of the child".                     I am in agreement
with my colleague that s. 16(10) indicates that Parliament has expressed
its opinion that contact with each parent is valuable.  On the other hand, it
must also be recognized that the goal of maximum contact is not absolute and
that access may be restricted where there is evidence that such contact would
otherwise conflict with the best interests of the child.  This limitation on
maximum contact is both abundantly clear on a straightforward reading of the
section and consistent with the spirit of the Act  and its focus on the best
interests of the child.  In my view, the analysis may and should stop at this
point.  However, the Court of Appeal adopts quite a different test, that of
"real psychological or physical harm" as the proper criterion which
should govern access.  Given McLachlin J.'s assertion, at p. 127, that:                     The
majority of the Court of Appeal, by contrast, saw the matter less in terms of
the custodial parent's "right" to decide all religious matters
affecting the children, and more in terms of the best interests of the
children.  Unfettered by notions of the custodial parent's rights, the majority
of the Court of Appeal asked simply what was in the best interests of the
child.                                                                     .
. .                     Thus,
for the majority in the Court of Appeal, the prime concern was the best
interests of the child.  I find it useful to contrast such analysis
with what, in fact Wood J.A., for the majority of the Court of Appeal, said in
the following extract:  at p. 98:                     The
right of the access parent to share his or her religious beliefs with the child
flows from the provisions of s. 16(10)  of the Divorce Act  of 1985. In my view
it is subject to only two limitations:                     (a)  the
unwillingness of the child to participate in such sharing, and                     (b)  the
powers of the court to restrict that right on the grounds that exposure to the
religious beliefs or practices of the access parents is, or is likely to be, harmful
to the well being of the child.                                                                     .
. .                     The
second [limitation] also seems straightforward, but it contains a complexity
that requires discussion. Obviously if it can be established, on a civil
standard of proof, that exposure to conflicting religious doctrines is causing
the child psychological harm, or that by engaging in the observance of,
or activities associated with, the religious beliefs of the access parent, the
child is suffering real psychological or physical harm, the well being
of that child would clearly require the court to intervene by way of an order
which would eliminate the potential for such harm to continue. In those
cases where such harm could be anticipated on a balance of
probabilities, there would be grounds for an order that would avoid the
problems before it begins.                     But,
in the exercise of the court's duty to protect the well being of the child,
care must be taken to ensure that real harm of the sort,
and arising in the manner, just described is distinguished from the general
emotional distress which every child experiences when confronted with both the
reality of divorce and the turmoil which characterizes the post-divorce
relationship of many ex-spouses. The former can properly be addressed by
judicial intervention. The latter is inevitable, and in most cases lies
beyond the influence of any order of the court.  at p. 103:  Obviously,
if the exercise by each [parent] of their individual freedom of religion,
caused or threatened the probability of real psychological or physical harm
to their children, state sanctioned intervention to preserve those
interests would be justified under s. 1  of the Charter , but such action would
only be justified to the extent that its purpose was accomplished in the manner*
least intrusive to the fundamental freedoms of each parent.                     While
I do not share the doubt which Southin J.A. has expressed concerning the
existence of the parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of this
province, I do agree that any interference with the exercise of parental
judgement, on what constitutes the best interests of their children, could only
be justified on the basis of evidence establishing the probability of real
harm, either physical or psychological. The jurisdiction to interfere, of
course, exists in connection with any matter which creates, or threatens such real
harm, and does not depend upon the harm originating in any
disagreement between the parents. Thus any such harm occasioned by a
religious doctrine or practice in which both parents joined would equally
justify state sanctioned interference with their freedom of religion.  at pp. 104-5:  Of
necessity, however, there are limitations to the exercise of that freedom. From
what has been said so far, the obvious limitations are:                     (a)
the consent of the child to participate in the process of teaching or
dissemination, and                     (b)
the power of the court to restrict the right of the access parent to teach and
disseminate his or her religious beliefs to the child on the grounds that
exposure to the religious beliefs or practices of the access parent is, or is
likely to be, harmful to the well being of the child.  at p. 105:  . .
. I do not believe that it can be invoked as a rule which would oblige the
court to shrink from its duty to determine whether or not the exposure to
conflicting religious beliefs, or the content of a religious doctrine, is
threatening real harm to the welfare of a child of the marriage.                     But
it will be a rare case where such an issue could legitimately arise. As has
been noted, it could arise in those few cases where it could credibly be
asserted that exposure either to conflicting religious doctrines, or to the
doctrines of the religious belief of one of the parents, is causing or is likely
to cause the child real harm of a physical or psychological nature.                     In
such cases the evidence which will establish such harm will not come
from a critical evaluation of the religious beliefs of either parent. That sort
of evidence takes its force exclusively from the personal value judgments of
either person whose evaluation is offered or the judge who hears it. Rather the
threshold evidence, which will justify the court embarking on an inquiry into real
physical or psychological harm caused by a religious doctrine, will be that
of an independent expert whose opinion is based upon generally accepted,
objective, scientific criteria for the diagnosis and evaluation of the harm
alleged.  at pp. 107-8:  It
reinforces my view that the following principles of law are applicable to the
issue of access restrictions which this case presents:                                                                     .
. .                     (g)  Mr.
Young's fundamental freedom of religion under s. 2 (a) of the Charter , to
teach and disseminate his religious beliefs to his children, is limited only
to the extent that the exercise of that freedom causes, or threatens the
probability of, real physical or psychological harm to the children.  at p. 108:  In
my view both [Huddart J. and Proudfoot J.] correctly perceived that no issue of
real harm, either physical or psychological, arose in this case. If any
such issue had presented itself, it would have been manifest from the evidence
of the expert witnesses who examined the children on a number of occasions, and
who undoubtedly would have identified the existence of, or the potential
for, real harm to the children arising from their father's religious beliefs,
if such existed. In the absence of any such evidence, there was no basis upon
which the court could legitimately entertain any inquiry into the substance of
his religious beliefs.                     At
no time did the learned trial judge refuse to admit any evidence relevant to
the issue of the children's best interests. Her decision not to admit
any evidence related to the tenets of the Jehovah's Witness faith was the
natural and irresistible result of the fact that the dispute between these two
parents had its genesis in the intolerance of each for the religious beliefs of
the other. Theirs was a dispute between beliefs, not a dispute over whether
real harm would befall their children as a result of the religious beliefs of
one or the other.  and, finally, at
p. 109:  I
have reviewed the evidence which was offered in support of those restrictions.
In my view it fell far short of establishing that any real harm would befall
the children from Mr. Young's exercise of his fundamental freedom to teach and
disseminate his religious beliefs to them. No such harm was diagnosed or
anticipated by either of the expert witnesses which the learned trial judge
found to be credible. Nor did the evidence establish that the conflict in the
religious beliefs of the parents was causing, or was likely to cause, such harm.                     The
evidence went no further than to establish that the children were under some
stress, the cause of which was "multi-factorial", but which obviously
included some component related to the religious dispute between the parents. 
[Emphasis (by underlining) added.]                     This, in my view,
leaves absolutely no doubt that the only basis for the Court of Appeal's
reversal of the orders of the trial judge, which the court could not have said
more clearly, was the absence of harm, which, in their view, was not
established in evidence.  We are far from the best interests of children test. 
Affirming the Court of Appeal's judgment on this point, my colleague, while
repeating profusely that the best interests of children is the sole test, is in
fact applying the harm test, which is the only basis on which the Court of
Appeal reversed the trial judge who, in their opinion, did not apply that test.                     Neither logic,
necessity nor the terms of the Act  mandate such an equation.  As I will discuss
later, the best interests of the child encompasses more than the absence of
harm and I cannot agree that this objective compels the conclusion that there
must be evidence of "real and significant harm to the child" before
contact with the access parent can be limited in any manner.    Thus, the role of the access parent is
"that of a very interested observer, giving love and support to [the
child] in the background" (Pierce v. Pierce, [1977] 5 W.W.R. 572
(B.C.S.C. in chambers), at p. 575.  See also Gubody v. Gubody, [1955]
O.W.N. 548 (H.C.), and Sudeyko v. Sudeyko (1974), 18 R.F.L. 273
(B.C.S.C.)).                      The Civil Code
of Quebec for its part recognizes no right of access but states simply:  570  Whether custody is
entrusted to one of the spouses or to a third person, the father and mother
retain the right of watching over the maintenance and education of the
children, and are obliged to contribute thereto in proportion to their means.   However, art. 30 of the Civil
Code of Lower Canada provides that "[i]n every decision concerning a
child, the child's interest and the respect of his rights must be the
determining factors".  Article 543 of the Civil Code of Quebec
obliges courts "to see to the interests of the child, at all stages of
divorce proceedings".  Article 569 directs courts to decide matters of
custody, maintenance and education of the children, in their interest and in
the respect of their rights.  Thus, in both civil and common law jurisdictions,
access exists only to the extent it is provided by statute and where it is in
the best interests of the child.                     One can find in
both case law and doctrine discussion and debate as to whether access is more
properly understood as a right of the parent or of the child.  (See Weitzman, supra,
at p. 230; R. Deech, "The Unmarried Father and Human Rights"
(1992), 4 J. Child L. 3; and Maidment, supra, at p. 40.  See
also Frame v. Smith, supra).  Some have regarded access as an
entitlement which belongs to the parent absent any compelling reason to disallow
it, such as the safety of the child (Tocco v. Tocco (1977), 4 R.F.L.
(2d) 174 (Ont. C.A.)).  However, as is consistent with the focus on the best
interests of the child in the Act , the more perceptive view at this time both
in the literature and case law is that access is more properly regarded as a
right of the child, not a right of the parent.  As Bernard Dickens has stated,
the modern function of parental rights is not to enforce powers of custody and
control parents enjoy over their children, but to permit parents to discharge
their duties to their children (supra, at p. 471).  This view
accords with the decision of this Court in Racine v. Woods, [1983] 2
S.C.R. 173, in which Wilson J. summarized the proper focus in the following
words, at p. 185:  ...
it is the parental tie as a meaningful and positive force in the life of the
child and not in the life of the parent that the court has to be concerned
about.  As has been emphasized many times in custody cases, a child is not a
chattel in which its parents have a proprietary interest; it is a human being
to whom they owe serious obligations.  Some years later, in Frame v.
Smith, supra, at p. 132, Wilson J., although dissenting on another
point, clearly said that:  The
access right has become the child's right, not the parent's right, and it would
be a regressive step to recognize today a cause of action in the parent based
on an outmoded concept of parental rights in children....                        As the ultimate
goal of access is the continuation of a relationship which is of significance
and support to the child, access must be crafted to preserve and promote that
which is healthy and helpful in that relationship so that it may survive to
achieve its purpose.  Accordingly, it is in the interests of the child, and
arguably also in the interests of the access parent, to remove or mitigate the
sources of ongoing conflict which threaten to damage or prevent the
continuation of a meaningful relationship.                     Wood J.A. expressed
the general concern that access rights remain vulnerable to the caprices of a
vengeful custodial parent.  In my view, courts should not be too quick to
presume that the access concerns of the custodial parent are unrelated to the
best interests of the child.  Although the myth is that the custodial parent
typically attempts to obstruct access of the other parent, studies in Canada,
England and the United States indicate that the problem tends to be quite the
reverse (see Richardson, supra;  Weitzman, supra, at p. 230;
and Maidment, supra, at p. 68).  At the outset, it must not be
forgotten that a parent who is granted access has no obligation to exercise
those rights, and neither the child nor the custodial parent can force an
access parent to comply with such an order, even though access might have been
determined to be in the best interests of the child.                        The difficulty, of
course, always lies in determining what does constitute the best interests of
the child, which brings us to the next issue.  Best Interests of the
Child                     The issue of the
best interests of the child raises considerations at a number of different
levels.  First, the content of the rule must be discussed.  Second, its
constitutionality must be determined.  Finally, the appropriate standard for
its application must be established.  All of these issues form the basis of the
respondent's arguments in support of the Court of Appeal's ruling as to access.  1.  Content
of the Rule                     As I discussed in
the context of custody, the statutory recognition of the best interests of the
child in the Act  marks the culmination of a long evolution of the focus in
custody and access decisions.  From the era in which the enforcement of
paternal rights was at the forefront of the courts' concern, through a time
where the merits of each parent's claims were weighed, we have now reached the
point where the sole question to be determined in custody and access
arrangements is the best interests of the child.  Indeed, the legislation makes
it quite explicit that only the best interests of the child as they are
comprehensively understood should be considered in such adjudications.  This
evolution was recognized by Wilson J. in Frame v. Smith, supra, at
p. 132:                     At
first the courts were much more comfortable assessing the competing claims of
parents than they were in trying to decide what was in the best interests of
children.  But over time the best interest of children increasingly became an
important concern of the court and today it is the paramount concern.  ...  In
light of these developments it can be said with some assurance that the concept
of "parental rights" has fallen into disfavour.  Parental
responsibilities yes, but rights no.                     The courts have
moved inevitably and steadfastly in this direction since the 19th century.  In In
re McGrath (Infants), [1893] 1 Ch. 143, at p. 148, the English Court
of Appeal determined that a court should have unfettered scope to consider the
best interests of the child, even where it interfered with the father's rights
with respect to religion, holding:                      This Court has
followed suit and unremittingly endorsed the position that in the face of any
threat to the welfare of the child, parental interests must give way.  As long
ago as DeLaurier v. Jackson, supra, at pp. 153-54, Crocket
J. held:  If
the general welfare of the child requires that the father's rights in respect
of the religious faith in which his offspring is to be reared, should be
suspended or superseded, the courts in the exercise of their equitable
jurisdiction have undoubted power to override them, as they have the power to
override all other parental rights, though in doing so they must act
cautiously. . . .   The Court reached the same conclusion
in King v. Low, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 87, finding that such a result was
consistent with both modern authority in other jurisdictions and previous
decisions of this Court in Racine v. Woods, supra, and Beson v.
Director of Child Welfare (Nfld.), [1982] 2 S.C.R. 716.  The nature of the
judicial determination of the best interests was described by McIntyre J. in King
v. Low at p. 101 as follows:  . .
. the dominant consideration to which all other considerations must remain
subordinate must be the welfare of the child.  This is not to say that the
question of custody will be determined by weighing the economic circumstances
of the contending parties.  The matter will not be determined solely on the
basis of the physical comfort and material advantages that may be available in
the home of one contender or the other.  The welfare of the child must be
decided on a consideration of these and all other relevant factors, including
the general psychological, spiritual and emotional welfare of the child.  It
must be the aim of the Court, when resolving disputes between rival claimants
for the custody of a child, to choose the course which will best provide for
the healthy growth, development and education of the child so that he will be
equipped to face the problems of life as a mature adult.  Parental claims
must not be lightly set aside, and they are entitled to serious consideration
in reaching any conclusion.  Where it is clear that the welfare of the child
requires it, however, they must be set aside.  [Emphasis added].  These words express the important
notion that courts must be directed to create or support the conditions which
are most conducive to the flourishing of the child.  They are, in my view, as
applicable in the context of access arrangements as they are in the
determination of custody.                      In making a
determination as to the best interests of the child, courts must attempt to
balance such considerations as the age, physical and emotional constitution and
psychology of both the child and his or her parents and the particular milieu
in which the child will live.  These considerations, which underlie the common
law, are clearly set out in art. 30 of the Civil Code of Lower Canada:  30  In every decision
concerning a child, the child's interest and the respect of his rights must be
the determining factors.                     Consideration
may be given in particular to the child's age, sex, religion, language,
character and family surroundings, and the other circumstances in which he
lives.  [Emphasis added.]  Probably one of the most significant
factors in many cases will be the relationship that the child entertains with
his or her parents.  This must necessarily encompass such considerations as the
strength of the emotional ties and the role of the person who has provided
primary care in the life of the child.                        In my view, without
minimizing these concerns and risks, it is crucial to distinguish between the
criticism of the best interests test and the best interests of the child as an
objective.  Despite concerns about the application of the test, no one has
questioned the best interests of the child as the proper focus of custody and
access determinations.  In the words of Maidment, supra, at p. 161:                      Furthermore, it is
significant that no other test has been broadly endorsed to replace it.  At the
end of the day, the test has been described as "the least detrimental
available alternative for safeguarding the child's growth and development"
and most of the suggested guidelines or presumptions are in fact designed to
give content to the test in furtherance of the welfare of the child. (See
Goldstein, Freud and Solnit, supra, at p. 53.  See also Mnookin, supra.)                     It is also
worthwhile to recall that the best interests test initially fulfilled its
purpose because the presumptions such as the tender years doctrine provided the
necessary content on which to base custody and access decisions (Fineman,
The Illusion of Equality: The Rhetoric and Reality of Divorce Reform, supra,
at p. 84).  Courts not only presumed that mothers were naturally better
custodial parents, but also relied on the parent who had since the beginning
provided primary care to the child to continue to act in its best interests. 
As this Court noted in Talsky v. Talsky, supra, at p. 293, the
tender years doctrine was not so much a rule of law as "purely . . . a
principle of common sense".    However, as she points out, one of the
principal rationales for endorsing this presumption is not to supplant the best
interests of the child as the ultimate objective but to ensure that those
interests are protected.  The presumption explicitly restores the values of
commitment and demonstrated ability to nurture as well as continued
psychological parenting to the child, factors which may be overshadowed by
other considerations in custody disputes.  The primary caregiver presumption
thus recognizes the obligations and supports the authority of the parent
engaged in day-to-day tasks of child rearing.                     In assessing all
the relevant considerations, courts must be careful that the ideals of parental
sharing and equality do not overcome the lived reality of custody and access
arrangements and that the child's needs and concerns are accommodated and not
obscured by abstract claims of parental rights.  This is not to say that the
parent's interests may not coincide with the child's interests or that a court
may never validly take a parent's interests into consideration.  However, to
further the best interests of the child, a recognition of the close
relationship between the needs of the child and the needs of the remaining
family unit of which he or she is a part is essential.  As Abella J.A. held in M.
(B.P.) v. M. (B.L.D.E.), (1992), 97 D.L.R. (4th) 437, for the majority, at
p. 459:                      Moreover, as
Weisman, supra, concludes at p. 36:  . .
. access issues often present the most intractable problems in all family law. 
On occasion, fairness and enforceability are impossible to achieve, and the
most for which one can hope is the least detrimental alternative for the child.                     In the final
analysis, when considering the best interests of the child, it may be a virtue
rather than a sin for the judge to be pragmatic and take into consideration
both the strengths and shortcomings of the parties and the limits of human
nature.  To do so is only to recognize that, in some circumstances, the perfect
may be the enemy of the good.  Courts must always be mindful that not only the
benefit but also the real cost and burden of all custody and access
arrangements ultimately falls on the children themselves.  2.  Constitutionality
of the Best Interests Test                      Nonetheless, in his
claim that the access order infringes his freedom of religion under the Charter ,
the respondent challenges the constitutionality of the best interests test on a
number of grounds.  First, he alleges that the discretion conferred on judges
under the best interests test violates the Charter .  Second, he claims
that the test is so vague that it cannot be said to be "prescribed by
law" and, accordingly, any violation of his freedom of religion, cannot be
justified by the test under s. 1  of the Charter .  Leaving aside for
the moment the alleged infringement of freedom of religion of the respondent
and his children under the Charter , in my opinion, both of these
contentions must fail.                     As I observed in R.
v. Swain, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 933, this Court has previously found that the
mere existence of broad judicial discretion in a legislative provision is not
in itself sufficient to attract the application of the Charter , nor can
the presence or scope of such discretion alone give rise to an inference that Charter 
rights are thereby infringed.  One such instance was the decision in R. v.
Beare, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 387, where the issue arose in the context of a
challenge to the wide discretion of the police to fingerprint suspects.  In
that case, La Forest J., writing for the Court, stated at p. 410:                     The
existence of the discretion conferred by the statutory provisions does not, in
my view, offend principles of fundamental justice.  Indeed, this Court recently held in Baron
v. Canada, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 416, that the presence of the residual
discretion of a judge may itself be a constitutional requirement in some
instances, in order that there be a means of balancing the competing rights and
interests of the individual and the state.                     In R. v. Morales,
[1992] 3 S.C.R. 711, Gonthier J., dissenting, observed at p. 754 that:  . .
. the identification of a measure of discretion conferred by means of a
legislative provision cannot alone provide the basis for a constitutional
evaluation of that provision.  Nor can the identification of possible
parameters of that discretion, for a discretion which is referred to as being
fettered can be one which is limited not only by appropriate constraints but
also by those which are inappropriate or unsuitable.  The more important
issue which remains, therefore, is what kind of discretion is conferred, and
the capacity of the words of the legislative provision to support the type of
reasoning which the matter under adjudication requires.  [Emphasis added.]  Thus, discretion cannot be considered
in the absence of an examination of the legislative objectives, and the
important question is whether the presence of such discretion can be rationally
tied to those objectives.  For the reasons which I shall delineate hereinafter
when considering the vagueness of the best interests test, it is clear that
broad judicial discretion is crucial to the proper implementation of the
legislative objective of securing the best interests of the child.                     This Court has had
occasion to consider the concept of vagueness of legislative provisions in the
context of the Charter  on a number of occasions in recent years (see  R.
v. Morgentaler, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30; Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Quebec (Attorney
General), [1989] 1 S.C.R. 927; Reference re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c)
of the Criminal Code (Man.), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1123; R. v. Keegstra,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 697; Canada (Human Rights Commission) v. Taylor, [1990]
3 S.C.R. 892;  Committee for the Commonwealth of Canada v. Canada,
[1991] 1 S.C.R. 139; Osborne v. Canada (Treasury Board), [1991] 2 S.C.R.
69; R. v. Butler, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 452; R. v. Nova Scotia
Pharmaceutical Society, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 606).  While these cases all dealt
with  vagueness in the criminal context, a number of principles may be derived
from this jurisprudence which are useful in the present context.  The
underlying concern is that a legislative provision be capable of providing a
framework or guide within which judicial decisions can be made.  The threshold
for constitutional violation due to vagueness in legislative provisions is
relatively high, and it is not necessary that such provisions carry a precise
technical meaning or provide certainty as to the result (R. v. Butler,
supra; Osborne v. Canada (Treasury Board), supra, and R. v. Nova Scotia
Pharmaceutical Society, supra).  Rather, the standard requires that the
provisions permit the framing of an intelligible legal debate with respect to
the objectives contained in the legislation.                     The doctrine of
vagueness was defined most recently by Gonthier J. for this Court in R. v.
Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, supra, at p. 643 as follows:  . .
. a law will be found unconstitutionally vague if it so lacks in precision as
not to give sufficient guidance for legal debate.                     The question which
arises, then, under the vagueness requirements of constitutional validity, is
whether the best interests test is so uncertain as to be incapable of guiding a
consideration of the factors relevant to custody and access determinations. In
my opinion, it is not.                     A similar question
arose concerning the concept of the "public interest" in the recent
decision of this Court in R. v. Morales, supra, where Gonthier J.,
while dissenting on this issue, set out a framework for considering the
constitutional validity of broad legislative concepts which are nonetheless
designed to encompass a specific set of concerns and interests.  He described
"public interest" in the following manner at p. 751:  . .
. a notion which has traditionally been recognized as affording a means of
referring to the special set of considerations which are relevant to those
legal determinations concerned with the relationship of the represented private
interest or interests and the broader interest of the public.                     The same type of
characterization is appropriate to the best interests test.  The "best
interests of the child" can be regarded as the term employed to refer to
the spectrum of considerations encompassed by the needs of the child, as distinct
from those of any other party, in the determination of custody and access
disputes.  The fact that it must be applied to the facts of each case does not
militate in favour of its unconstitutionality.  Rather, this feature is part
and parcel of what makes decisions in the best interests of the child possible
at all.                     As its widespread
adoption and application suggest, the best interests of the child standard
cannot be regarded as unconstitutionally vague.  On the contrary, the best
interests test is universally recognized as the foundation of modern family law
around the world and is legislatively entrenched in both common law and civil
jurisdictions in the United States, Australia and Europe.  Moreover, the need
to make the best interests of the child the primary consideration in all
actions concerning children, including legal proceedings, is specifically
recognized in international human rights documents such as the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child, Can. T.S. 1992 No. 3, Art. 3(1).  In my view,
this amply demonstrates both the enduring value of the best interests test as a
legal norm capable of meaningful application and the broad recognition of the
interests of children in the field of human rights.                     It is important to
recall that the vagueness of a legislative provision cannot be examined in the
abstract but must be considered within the context of the particular
legislative objectives in question, bearing in mind that some objectives will
require a panoply of judicial remedies for their meaningful fulfilment.  As
Beetz J. observed in R. v. Morgentaler, supra, at p. 107,
"[f]lexibility and vagueness are not synonymous".  Nor should the
vagueness of a provision be considered solely with reference to the words of
the statute.  The Ontario Court of Appeal held in R. v. LeBeau (1988),
41 C.C.C. (3d) 163, at p. 173:                     It
has been recognized that the void for vagueness doctrine is not to be applied
to the bare words of the statutory provision but, rather, to the provision as
interpreted and applied in judicial decisions.  See also Reference re ss. 193 
and 195.1(1) (c) of the Criminal Code  (Man.), supra, at p. 1157.                     This Court held
recently in R. v. Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, supra, at
p. 627 that, among the factors with which courts should be concerned when
the vagueness of a law is at issue are:  . .
. (a)  the need for flexibility and the interpretive role of the
courts, (b)  the impossibility of achieving absolute certainty, a
standard of intelligibility being more appropriate and (c)  the
possibility that many varying judicial interpretations of a given disposition
may exist and perhaps coexist. . . .                     Child custody and
access decisions engage all of these considerations, as the best interests of
the child remain, in the words of Abella J.A., "as fluid as each
child's circumstances" (M. (B.P.) v. M. (B.L.D.E.), supra,
at p. 459).  As I have discussed earlier in these reasons, when fashioning
custody and access orders, courts are concerned with the design of future
living arrangements which may be affected by a multitude of different factors. 
In establishing this modus vivendi, courts must consider not only the
circumstances which might ideally be in the best interests of the child, but
must also weigh the capacity of the parties to fulfil and endure the conditions
which are set for custody and access.  Thus, family law statutes, and child
custody provisions in particular, probably best exemplify the type of
legislation in which broad judicial discretion is necessary to fulfil the
legislative purpose effectively.                     Furthermore, the
best interests test has been judicially applied for decades, and the case law
provides a large body of jurisprudence to which courts may resort when
considering factors relevant to the best interests test.                     In my opinion, the
prophetic caution of Gonthier J. in R. v. Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical
Society, supra, at p. 642, is particularly apposite in the
circumstances of this case:                      It should not be
assumed that a grant of discretion is an invitation to exercise personal
prejudice, as it is well established in the jurisprudence that discretion in
every instance must be exercised judicially and in conformity with the
objectives and standards of the legislation.  The application of the best interests
test, if done in an individual case according to irrelevant or improper
criteria, remains subject to the normal process of review on appeal.                     Having analyzed the
content of the best interests of the child standard prescribed in the Act  in
matters of custody and access and determined its constitutionality, what burden
of proof must the custodial parent meet to obtain an order restricting access?  3.  Evidence                      As I noted above,
the Court of Appeal has equated the alleged absence of harm in this case with
the best interests of the child.  However, no rationale is proposed for so
defining the best interests of the child.  Moreover, nothing in the Act 
mandates or even suggests that "real danger of significant harm to the
child" be the sole consideration in matters of custody and access.                      The harm test by
which the Court of Appeal proposes to qualify the best interests test inverts
the basic focus of the inquiry into custody and access.  Under the best
interests test, courts must consider how to best foster the child's overall
development and protect the child from conflict and the disruptive effects of
divorce at a vulnerable point in his or her life.  In contrast, the harm test
essentially requires a court to determine how much conflict and stress a child
should be required to endure in order that the parent's wishes may prevail. 
Once the pendulum swings in that direction, it is difficult to control.  If not
this much stress, why not a little more?  If one type of conflict, why not
that?  Moreover, it may be difficult if not impossible, even for an expert, to
determine with any degree of accuracy whether the child has been harmed or will
be harmed in the long run.  However, the most serious deficiency of the harm
test is the following.  While the effects of custody and access decisions
always remain uncertain to some degree, the harm test places any risk of
miscalculation in the degree of stress or conflict occasioned by such decisions
squarely on the back of the child, depriving the child of any presumption in
his or her favour.  Obviously this cannot be correct from the perspective of
the interests of the child.  To wait until harm has occurred to correct the
situation is not only to waive the benefit of prevention, but also to increase
the possibility of error.  Instead of minimizing the risks, the harm test would
maximize them.                     A discussion of the
research data on the long-term effects of divorce, as well as custody and
access decisions, on children is helpful at this point to assess the
consequences of adopting the harm standard as regards the welfare of children
and the importance of adhering to the best interests of the child as the
overarching goal in custody and access determinations.  While this remains an
area of social science that has yet to be comprehensively researched, studies
of both the effects of divorce and the role of conflict in the subsequent
family life indicate that children often suffer more extensively than is
generally acknowledged on divorce, and that those who must endure continuing
conflict after divorce stand at serious risk of harm down the road.  The
resounding message is that courts must pay more, not less, attention to the
needs of children on divorce.                     I acknowledge at
the outset the limits in applying such research to the wider population, as the
studies to date have tended to focus on groups within a particular social class
or locale.  Furthermore, the conclusions of some studies, for example those by
J. S. Wallerstein and J. B. Kelly, Surviving the Breakup:  How
Children and Parents Cope with Divorce (1980), have been used to support a
number of different propositions concerning the best interests of the child on
divorce. (See  Fineman, The Illusion of Equality: The Rhetoric and Reality
of Divorce Reform, supra, at p. 118.)  In addition, notions concerning
the optimum child rearing conditions on the breakdown of the marriage are
subject to a degree of difference and controversy between professionals working
in the field.  This is illustrated, for example, in the contrasting conclusions
reached by Goldstein, Freud and Solnit, supra, and those of Wallerstein
and Kelly, supra.                          Bearing in mind
these concerns, in particular the fact that harm to a child may only become
perceptible at a much later date, it is evident that the welfare of children is
put at considerable risk if the prospect of harm becomes the sole prerequisite
for restrictions on access.  In my view, the proper approach to access was
stated by Abella J.A. in M. (B.P.) v. M. (B.L.D.E.), supra, at p.
461.                     It
is not a question of what standard should be used to deprive a parent of
access, it is a question of what standard should be used in deciding what form
of access, if any, should be ordered.  The answer is clear from the statute: 
the standard is the child's best interests.                     The best interests
of the child is not simply the right to be free of demonstrable harm.  It is
the positive right to the best possible arrangements in the circumstances of
the parties.  This could not be more clearly indicated than in the report on Family
Law, supra, as the Law Reform Commission of Canada begins its
recommendations on children and the dissolution of marriage with the following
words at p. 63:                     1.  Children
should have two fundamental rights when their parents' marriage ends:  (a)the
right to social and psychological support by having the most suitable
arrangements possible in the circumstances made for their custody, care and
upbringing; and  (b)the
right to economic support.                     Without
disregarding the disruption inherent in divorce, courts must do whatever is
within their power to alleviate rather than disregard, minimize or normalize
difficulties, and should beware of adopting a needlessly cavalier attitude
where solutions can be seen to exist.  The fact that many children experience
stress and disruption upon the breakdown of the marriage, in my view, only
increases the obligation of courts to focus their attention on the best
interests of the child.  The primary goal of the legal system on divorce must
be to minimize the adverse effects on children.  However, this requires a
vision of the best interests of the child that is more than neutral to the
conditions under which custody and access occur.  The harm test clearly cannot
meet this objective.                     The Court of Appeal
concedes that a court could be obliged to determine whether or not either the
content of religious beliefs or conflict arising from exposure to conflicting
beliefs is threatening "real harm" to the child. However, in the view
of the majority, at p. 105, "it will be a rare case where such an
issue  could legitimately arise".  The Court of Appeal also concludes that
restrictions on access should only be allowed where harm can be demonstrated by
independent experts.                       It is clear that
the proposed test falls far short of protecting the best interests of the
child, as it may well be impossible to demonstrate the high level of harm the
test envisions in many cases even where there are real concerns for the welfare
of the child.  It is unrealistic to expect that the accumulated evidence of ill
effects engendered by separation or divorce will be immediate or readily
demonstrable to a court as, in the usual case, custody decisions are made
shortly after separation.  However this does not mean that such concerns should
therefore be readily dismissed. Rather, judges must exercise their discretion
in order to prevent harm to the child, rather than merely to identify or
establish its presence after the damage is done.                      Finally, it is
important to place this issue in its proper context by noting that the vast
majority of access orders contain no restrictions on access.  Over 96 percent
of divorces are now finalized with either an uncontested hearing or no court
hearing at all (Evaluation of the Divorce Act -- Phase II, supra,
at p. 44).  Of the remainder that are contested, most result in orders for
liberal or reasonable access without restrictions.  As a practical matter then,
the question of restrictions only arises where something in the evidence or the
circumstances of the parties suggests a concern or a potential problem.  Where
those concerns emanate from the custodial parent, that parent will, of course,
bear the evidentiary burden of establishing that access should be curtailed. 
However, the standard that must be met is not the harm standard but evidence
that restrictions are in the best interests of the child or, to put it
otherwise, that unlimited access is not in the best interests of the child.                     I agree with my
colleague that expert evidence should not be routinely required to establish
the best interests of the child.  In my view, it is a modern day myth that
experts are always better placed than parents to assess the needs of the
child.  Common sense requires us to acknowledge that the person involved in day
to day care may observe changes in the behaviour, mood, attitude and
development of a child that could go unnoticed by anyone else.  The custodial
parent normally has the best vantage point from which to assess the interests
of the child, and thus will often provide the most reliable and complete source
of information to the judge on the needs and interests of that child.                     Furthermore, it is
important to emphasize the importance of the evidence of children in custody
and access disputes, and I would not wish to suggest that their testimony alone
might not be a sufficient evidentiary basis upon which to restrict access. 
Courts have increasingly come to accept and understand in the criminal context
that children themselves can be a reliable source of evidence to the judge (R.
v. Khan, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 531).  To disregard their evidence when their own
interests are directly at issue would, in my opinion, be at odds with this
clear evolutionary trend in the law.                       Many legal
commentators have noted the degree to which custody and access disputes have
become a contest between experts, involving increasing amounts of time and
money.  (See N. Bala, "Assessing the Assessor:  Legal Issues" (1990),
6 C.F.L.Q. 179; P. J. Caplan and J. Wilson, "Assessing the Child
Custody Assessors" (1990), 27 R.F.L. (3d) 121; L. Gélinas and B. M.
Knoppers, "Le rôle des experts en droit québécois en matière de garde,
d'accès et de protection" (1993), 53 R. du B. 3; Fineman, The
Illusion of Equality: The Rhetoric and Reality of Divorce Reform, supra.) 
In the absence of clear legal presumptions about the best interests of
children, judges have increasingly come to rely on the recommendations of
experts to determine custody and access issues, believing that such experts
possess objective, scientific knowledge and can in fact "know" what
is in the best interests of the child.  However, expert testimony, while
helpful in some and perhaps many circumstances, is often inconclusive and
contradictory (Gélinas and Knoppers, supra, at p. 17).  That this
should be so is not surprising, since such assessments are both speculative and
may be affected by the professional values and biases of the assessors
themselves.                     Even where such
expertise is valuable, there are impediments in such reliance.  Assessments may
occasion delays in resolving proceedings and may at times constitute a
significant disruption in the lives of both parents and children.  The cost
involved in routinely hiring experts to establish the best interests of the
child only increases the expense of custody litigation and is far beyond the
resources of most divorcing couples.  Furthermore, as Professor Bala, supra,
points out, at p. 224, "much of what assessors ultimately recommend
may simply be a matter of `common experience and common sense'".                     Given these
concerns, while the evidence of experts may form a valuable and necessary part
of some custody and access decisions, most of the time they are unnecessary to
an ordinary determination of the best interests of the child.  Nor does the
prospect of access restrictions inevitably require resort to expert opinion, as
it may be apparent to the judge from the evidence of the parties and often the
children themselves that access should only be granted subject to certain
conditions.                     I am compelled to
address the issue of the right of the children to "know" their
father, as Wood J.A. suggested at several points that "contact" in
s. 16(10)  of the Act  encompasses the opportunity for the access parent and
the child to know each other well and to appreciate each other as individuals. 
My colleague has also found that the trial judge erred in failing to consider
the interest of the children in coming to "know" their father as he
is, and is of the view that unrestricted access, even if it causes the
deterioration of the relationship, is preferable to the alternative which
prevents them from "knowing" him as he is.  In my view, the
reproaches addressed by my colleague to the trial judge are totally unfounded. 
The trial judge carefully assessed all the interests at play and not only did
she not ignore the best interest of the children involved but also her whole
decision is based on their best interest.  That is, in fact, what the Court of
Appeal reproached her for since, in their view, she should have applied the
harm test.                       In brief, the
content of the rule, its constitutionality and the applicable standard of proof
do not favour the respondent's position.  The respondent's main argument,
however, which I will now discuss, relates to the infringement of his freedom
of religion under s. 2 (a) of the Charter  due to the trial
judge's access order.  Freedom of Religion                       It follows that,
once the best interests test itself has been found to accord with Charter 
values, the trial judge's order itself is not subject to further constitutional
review, as the necessary state infringement of religious rights required to
sustain a challenge based on the Charter  is no longer present.                       As s. 32
dictates, the Charter  applies to governments and legislatures.  Its
purpose is to provide a measure of protection from the coercive power of the
state and a mechanism of review to persons who find themselves unjustly
burdened or affected by the actions of government.  It is not meant to provide
a means to regulate the affairs of private citizens.  Thus, the sine qua non
to any application of the Charter  is the presence of state action, whether
by legislation or other means.                     In RWDSU v.
Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573, this Court first considered the
meaning of "government action", and articulated the principle which
established the threshold for judicial review under the Charter :  the Charter 
applies to the legislative, executive and administrative branches of government
but does not apply to judicial orders made in the resolution of private
disputes.  The issue arose again in Tremblay v. Daigle, [1989] 2 S.C.R.
530, when the appellant sought to uphold an injunction preventing his former
girlfriend from obtaining an abortion, relying on, among other grounds, the
alleged rights of the foetus under s. 7  of the Charter .  The Court
held that, as there was no state action to be impugned and the Charter 
could not be invoked in a civil action between two parties, the principle
outlined in Dolphin Delivery provided a complete answer to the Charter 
argument.                      The present case
clearly falls to be decided under the principles enunciated in Dolphin
Delivery as custody and access matters are essentially private in nature
and there exists no state action to be impugned.  In contradistinction to the
situation in Slaight Communications, the powers of a judge making an
order under the Act  cannot be equated with those of an adjudicator who derives
his authority from a legislative enactment.  The judiciary is a separate branch
of the government, and possesses the inherent jurisdiction under its parens
patriae power to rule in the interests of the child.  This power is both
distinct from and long predates the statutory entrenchment of the best
interests test.  In the result, the Charter  will not apply to the order.                      There is no
question that, had the order been based on the sole fact that the respondent
adheres to the Jehovah's Witness faith, the order could not be legitimized, as
it has long been a tenet of the common law that courts will not prefer one
religion over another in the adjudication of custody disputes.  (See  In re
McGrath (Infants), supra; Re Bennett Infants, [1952] O.W.N. 621
(Ont. C.A.) at p. 624; Delvenne v. Nabbie (1977), 4 R.F.L. (2d) 21
(Man. C.A.); Irmert v. Irmert (1984), 64 A.R. 342 (C.A.); Harvey v.
Lapointe (1988), 13 R.F.L. (3d) 134 (Que. C.A.).)  Nor is a court
authorized to dictate to a parent his or her religious philosophy (McQuillan
v. McQuillan (1975), 21 R.F.L. 324 (Ont. H.C.)).  Decisions regarding
custody and access must not be based on the parents' faith, whether or not that
religion is that of the majority.  However, the religion of the parties may be
relevant as one of the circumstances to be assessed along with all the others
in the determination of the best interests of the child, as it is in this case.                     In instances where
there is conflict over religion, it is important to emphasize that the court is
not engaged in adjudicating a "war of religion" nor are the religious
beliefs of the parties themselves on trial.  Rather, as courts have often
recognized, it is the manner in which such beliefs are practised
together with the impact and effect they have on the child which must be
considered (Struncova v. Guay (1984), 39 R.F.L. (2d) 298 (Que. S.C.); Brown
v. Brown, supra; Irmert v. Irmert, supra; Harvey v.
Lapointe, supra; Fougere v. Fougere, supra).  In all
cases where the effects of religious practices are at issue, the best interests
of the child must prevail (Sullivan v. Fox (1984), 38 R.F.L. (2d) 293
(P.E.I.S.C.)).  See also C. E. Schneider, "Religion and Child
Custody" (1992), 25 U. Mich. J.L. Ref. 879.                     In the vast
majority of cases, social values such as religion are shared between the
parents and pose no threat to the exercise of access.  It is when such values
clash, whether over religion, education, ethnic traditions, mores or the
lifestyles of the parents that problems arise.  It is probably safe to say that
in the "best case" scenario, courts would prefer to avoid orders
which touch on peoples' beliefs and religion, as few issues are more likely to
evoke the passions of both the parties and the wider community. However, it
must be remembered that courts are only called to adjudicate such issues when
the differences between the parties themselves have become irreconcilable.  At
this point, courts have no choice but to resolve the matter according to the
best interests of the child.                     Moreover, even if
the Charter  were to apply to custody and access orders, no infringement
of religious freedoms would occur where such orders are made in the best
interests of the child.  As this Court recognized in R. v. Big M Drug Mart
Ltd., supra, at pp. 336-37:  The
essence of the concept of freedom of religion is the right to entertain such
religious beliefs as a person chooses, the right to declare religious beliefs
openly and without fear of hindrance or reprisal, and the right to manifest
religious belief by worship and practice or by teaching and dissemination.  But
the concept means more than that.                     Freedom
can primarily be characterized by the absence of coercion or constraint. . . . 
Freedom means that, subject to such limitations as are necessary to protect
public safety, order, health, or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms
of others, no one is to be forced to act in a way contrary to his beliefs or
his conscience.  [Emphasis added.]  Thus, freedom of religion is
inherently limited by a number of considerations, including the rights and
freedoms of others.  While parents are free to engage in religious practices
themselves, those activities may be curtailed where they interfere with the
best interests of the child without thereby infringing the parent's religious
freedoms.   Such
constraints, provided they are reasonable in their content and application, do
not interfere in any way with a particular parent's freedom of religion.  They
simply reaffirm the principle that the best interest of the child must be
protected.  They are not inconsistent with the basic freedoms referred to in
the Charter .                      The only question
is the applicable standard for imposing such conditions.  As I have indicated
above, that standard is not one of harm but must at all times be the best
interests of the child.                      It appears that the
basis of that particular decision was the absence of any evidence before
the court of adverse effects on the children.  Moreover, the court in Hockey
v. Hockey explicitly recognized that the religious rights of the access
parent could be curtailed in the interests of the child.  Despite a contrary
interpretation by the Court of Appeal in the present case, in my view that case
does not support the conclusion that restrictions on religious activities
during access cannot be sustained unless harm, or the threat of harm, to the
child has been established.                        As one commentator
has pointed out, it is precisely the cases in which children become embroiled
in religious conflict that cast doubt on the wisdom of the decisions which have
allowed the religious rights of the access parent to prevail (J. T. Syrtash, Religion
and Culture in Canadian Family Law (1992), at p. 90). Where there is
conflict over religion, courts must secure the longstanding authority of the
custodial parent to make decisions over religious activities.  This ensures
that stress occasioned by such issues does not become a continuing and
ultimately destructive feature in the life of the child after divorce. (See S.
M. Zarowny, "The Religious Upbringing of Children After Divorce"
(1980), 56 Notre Dame Law. 160, at p. 173; Weiss and Abramoff, supra.)  Freedom of Expression                     The respondent also
argues that the restrictions on communicating his religious views to his
children infringe his rights to expressive freedom.  Wood J.A. agreed,
although he subsumed this right under the rubric of freedom of religion,
holding that an important part of the right to teach and disseminate religious
beliefs is the right to share those beliefs with one's children.  Southin J.A.,
for her part, was of the view that the appellant does not have the right to
control the conversations which take place between the respondent and his
children during access, reasoning that the child has a right to know anyone to
whom the court grants access and that a child cannot know anyone unless he or
she is able to speak freely to that person.                     I have no quarrel
with these conclusions as general principles, and would observe that they
normally reflect and enhance the very purpose of access itself.  In the
overwhelming majority of cases, courts do in fact recognize and give effect to
them, if only through the absence of any restrictions regarding communication
between the child and the access parent.  However, it is beyond contention that
rights do not exist in a vacuum but are shaped and formed both by the
particular context in which they are exercised and the rights of others (Edmonton
Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326). 
Dickson C.J. in Fraser v. Public Service Staff Relations Board,
[1985] 2 S.C.R. 455, at p. 463, after acknowledging the centrality and
importance of freedom of expression in our society, observed:                     But
it is not an absolute value.  Probably no values are absolute.  All important
values must be qualified, and balanced against, other important, and often
competing, values.                     In this case, there
are other powerful competing interests which must be recognized, not the least
of which, in addition to the best interests of the children, are the freedoms
of expression and religion of the children themselves.  There is cogent,
persuasive evidence, found credible by the trial judge, that the children
themselves do not want to discuss religion with their father or be subject to
his comments about beliefs which are at odds with their own religious
upbringing, whether they take the form of indoctrination, instruction or mere
observations.  Indeed, the letters written to the trial judge disclose that,
not only do they not want it, but also that the prospect of such discussions
has so profoundly disturbed the children and coloured the periods of access
that they no longer wish to continue to see the respondent according to a schedule.                     In such
circumstances, it is obviously inadequate merely to invoke freedom of religion
or expression of an access parent without considering the effect on the
children and their inability to assert their own desires and rights.  Rather,
both the best interests of the children and a respect for their rights may
require restrictions on communication, if only so that the larger interest,
maintenance and development of the relationship between the access parent and
child, is not frustrated by the means by which it is carried out.                     In the result, I
would dismiss the respondent's argument that his freedoms of religion and
expression have been infringed by the trial judge's order.  He remains totally
free to practise his religion.  I also reject his submission that he has the
right to engage his children in religious observances with him where it is
determined that such observances are detrimental to their best interests.                     In summary, as a
matter of statutory interpretation, the Divorce Act  mandates that, in
decisions of custody and access, the sole consideration be the best interests
of the child.  The focus must remain at all times on the child, not the needs
or interests of the parents, and parental rights play no role in such decisions
except in so far as they are necessary to ensure the best interests of the
child.                        Where the question
of restrictions on access arises, the best interests of the child must be
determined by considering the "condition, means, needs and other
circumstances of the child" as required by the Act .  The totality of these
circumstances must be considered.  Nothing in the Act  suggests that harm should
be the controlling factor.  To adopt the harm standard would be to invert the
focus of the best interests test and place the risk of error on the child,
contrary to the objectives of the Act .                     Expert evidence,
while helpful in some cases, is not routinely required to establish the best
interests of the child.  That determination is normally possible from the
evidence of the parties themselves and, in some cases, the testimony of the
children involved.                     Freedom of religion
and expression are fundamental values protected by the Charter . 
However, the best interests of the child standard in the Divorce Act 
does not offend Charter  values, but is completely consonant with the
underlying objectives of the Charter .  The Charter  has no
application to private disputes between parents in the family context, nor does
it apply to court orders in the area of custody and access.  While a child's
exposure to different parental faiths or beliefs may be of value, when such
exposure is a source of conflict and is not in the best interests of the child,
such exposure may be curtailed.                     This brings us to
the evidence in this case which led to the trial judge's order restricting the
respondent's access.  Application to the
Case                       At the outset, it
must be remembered that this Court has always emphasized the caution with which
an appellate court should interfere with the decision of a trial judge in
custody matters. (See Talsky v. Talsky, supra; Adams v. McLeod,
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 621; Novic v. Novic, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 696.) Because the
trial judge has the inestimable advantage of observing the parties and
assessing the witnesses first hand, such decisions should not be interfered
with unless there is a gross distortion of the evidence or misapprehension of
the relevant legal principles.  As the foregoing discussion demonstrates,
Proudfoot J. did not err in law as to the proper standard applicable to the
case.  She was entirely correct in holding that the only relevant consideration
is the best interests of the child.  The sole remaining question therefore, is
whether there is evidence that the best interests of the children would be
jeopardized by the respondent's unrestricted access to his children.                     The majority of the
Court of Appeal found no evidence of harm which would support the order made at
trial.  Even if I were to agree that some measure of harm must be demonstrated
before the trial judge is entitled to restrict the respondent's religious
activities with the children, a view I do not share, the evidence amply
demonstrates the harm such religious activity has brought about.  While the
rationale underlying the right of access and the objective of maximum contact
is to permit the relationship to flourish, in this case the contrary result has
occurred, as it has antagonized the children.                     I would begin by
noting that the appellant has always favoured access by the respondent to his
children.  This is not an iota of evidence that the respondent's general rights
of access were threatened.  Rather, the only restrictions that were requested
were aimed at reducing the area of conflict which had arisen on account of the
respondent's behaviour with his children during access.                     Although the
respondent characterizes this litigation as an attack on his religious freedom,
those beliefs are not at risk, as the restrictions place no limits on the
respondent's ability to engage in religious practices himself.  It is the
effect of his practices on the best interests of his three daughters that is in
question here.                     In reaching her
decision about the impact of these practices on the children, the trial judge
relied in large measure on the reports of the two witnesses for the court,
Donna MacLean, the family court counsellor whom she found to be thorough and
highly credible in both her reports and testimony, and Dr. Williams, a
psychologist.                     In his first
report, dated November 28, 1988, Dr. Williams found that the major obstacle to
smooth access was the matter of religion.  He found that the children were not
significantly distressed by the issue at that  time, but regarded it as a
potential problem in the future.  He stated:  I
see Natalie as being particularly vulnerable to such issues in light of the
dynamics of her personality as well as her age.  As such, in my judgement some
agreement and/or understanding will need to be arrived at as to the degree of
religious dogma to which Mr. Young can expose the children, bearing in mind
that such beliefs and related activities are anathema to Mrs. Young.  In his assessment the following year
(September 22, 1989), he reported that, although they were continuing to deal
with the separation adequately, the children were under increasing pressure
regarding family issues.  They expressed antagonism to their father, no longer
trusted him and generally did not view him in a positive light.  They were
firmly opposed to attending religious services or being schooled in the tenets
of his beliefs.  The expert found that they were under stress from the
religious issue and ongoing litigation and conveyed a need to get it settled in
order to get on with their lives.  Dr. Williams found, with respect to the
children's emotional and social foundation, that:                      Donna MacLean, in
her report of January 30, 1989 essentially corroborated this finding.  In the
updated report of April 18, 1989, she noted that the children were unhappy with
the access visits and that their relationship with their father was
deteriorating because he was making the children feel guilty and uncomfortable
by questioning them.                     The trial judge
also had access to the direct testimony of the two older children who wrote
letters to the judge which are most revealing of their state of mind.  From the
letters, it is evident that both are afraid to disclose their thoughts about
the visits to their father for fear that he will make them feel guilty. 
Adrienne, the eldest, wrote that she did not want to visit him or sleep
overnight because she thinks he will trick her into doing things and quiz her
about the Jehovah's Witness religion.  She expressed frustration regarding access,
visitation and the court proceedings, saying "It's driving me
crazy."  Natalie, the middle child, evinced considerable distress about
the family situation, stating that her father makes her feel guilty and makes
her cry when she wants to go home from access visits, and that she is afraid to
tell him.  She repeated that she wanted the court proceedings to be over.                     In my opinion, this
evidence amply demonstrates the stress the children were under, much of it
related to the children's resistance to becoming involved in their father's
religious practices.  The trial judge can in no way be said to have erred in
finding that the best interests of these children were served by removing the
source of conflict, particularly as the ultimate purpose of the restrictions
was to preserve the relationship between the respondent and his children.                     Moreover, there was
evidence leading the trial judge to conclude that the respondent would not
respect the wishes of the children without an order to do so.  As the family court
counsellor reported, "it is of concern that Mr. Young does not acknowledge
the choice of the older children to remain with their mother".  Proudfoot
J. found as a fact that the respondent wanted custody in order to control the
religious upbringing of the children.  In other words, she found that his
interest was not simply to share or communicate these beliefs;  rather he
fundamentally disagreed with allowing the appellant control over religious
matters.  This finding of fact is difficult to reconcile with the Court of
Appeal's ruling that the trial judge was in error since, in their view, the
respondent was bound to respect his children's wishes not to attend at his
place of worship or accompany him on his proselytization efforts, which is
exactly what the trial judge ordered.  However, they discarded the evidence
that the respondent was not willing to do so voluntarily.  The trial judge had
made a finding that the respondent could not be relied upon to act in the best
interests of the children as regards his religious practices when exercising
access.  That finding should have been respected by the Court of Appeal.                      In my opinion, the
fact that the circumstances in this case were found by the Court of Appeal not
to meet the harm threshold clearly demonstrates the difficulty, if not the
impossibility, of reconciling such a standard with the best interests of the
child even where experts testify, as they did in this case.                       As the trial
judge observed, the respondent was quite unconcerned with the conflict and
stress on the children caused by the pursuit of his own religious interests. 
At the same time as he found the resources to press his claims to religious
rights, he apparently did not find the payment of maintenance a top priority. 
Upon reading the evidence, I cannot disagree with the trial judge that the
respondent's concern with religious rights had clearly overtaken the practical
realities of parenthood and overshadowed his larger responsibilities to his
children in this case.                     Since writing these
reasons, I have had the opportunity to read the joint reasons of my colleagues
Justices Cory and Iacobucci.  They invite the following comments.                     First, as to the
first part of the trial judge's order, contrary to their affirmation, the issue
is not moot.  It is precisely because the trial judge found, as a fact, that
the respondent could not be trusted for the reasons she outlined, that she
issued that order.  How can a court of appeal reverse those findings of fact,
and yet, on the same facts, affirm that such an order is no longer necessary,
particularly when the court of appeal has not indicated where the trial judge
has erred in her assessment of those facts?                     As to the second
part of the order, my colleagues assert that the best interests test does not
support an order preventing the respondent from discussing religion with his
children, on the ground that it is (at p. 110) "difficult to accept that
any genuine and otherwise proper discussion between a parent and his or her
child should be curtailed by court orders".  Otherwise, they suggest, a
non-custodial parent who espouses a theory of evolution would be ordered, under
the best interests test, not to discuss or explain his or her views to a child
in the custody of a parent who is a member of a fundamentalist religion.                     However, this
scenario has nothing to do with the facts of this case.  With respect, to
equate the two scenarios is to misapprehend fundamentally the focus of the best
interests test.  It is not the fact that the parents differ in their
fundamental beliefs that warrants the restrictions in this case.  It is the
finding of fact made by the trial judge, on the basis of evidence she found
credible, that continuing conflict over religion, including the respondent's
repeated attempts to discuss religious matters with the children against their
clearly expressed desires, profoundly disturbed the children and was contrary
to their best interests.  At the time of trial, the respondent was not engaging
in other religious activities with the children, as they had already been
curtailed by the interim order almost a year and a half earlier.  Therefore, it
is precisely these continuing "discussions" that were
disturbing the children, causing the deterioration of their relationship with
their father and which, therefore, had to be curtailed.                     I wish to emphasize
two points.  As I thought I made clear earlier in my reasons, a child's
exposure to different parental faiths or beliefs may generally be of value and
even of great value; there is no presumption that such exposure is not in the
best interests of the child.  Rather, the contrary is true.  Second, as I also
emphasized earlier, generous and unrestricted access should be favoured except
where it is not in the best interests of the child.  Hence, restrictions such
as the trial judge found to be required in the second part of her order will be
rare indeed and there is no reason to suppose that, absent a threat to the best
interests of the child, any question of such restrictions will arise.  However,
it is important to acknowledge that in those rare cases where parents cross the
line and engage in conduct which constitutes, in the words of my colleagues at
p. 110, "indoctrination, enlistment or harassment", courts have a
duty to intervene in the best interests of children.  The evidence strongly
suggests that this is just such a case and that is the finding of the trial
judge.  In my view, these findings of fact must be respected absent, as here,
an error in the applicable principles.                     In the result, I
would allow the appeal and restore the order at trial, the whole with costs
throughout.  I would answer the constitutional questions in the negative.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     Sopinka
J. -- I have read the
reasons of my colleagues Justice L'Heureux-Dubé and Justice McLachlin and I
find myself in agreement with McLachlin J. as to the disposition of the appeal
and with most of her reasons.  While I agree with McLachlin J. that the
ultimate determination in deciding issues of custody and access is the
"best interests of the child test", it must be reconciled with the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  General language in a statute which, in
its breadth, potentially confers the power to override Charter  values
must be interpreted to respect those values.  See Slaight Communications
Inc. v. Davidson, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1038.  It cannot be done the other way
around and allow the best interests test in its broadest interpretation to read
down Charter  rights so as to accommodate this interpretation.                     In my view, the
test in s. 16(10)  of the Divorce Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp .),
and the Charter  right involved in this case, namely freedom of religious
expression, can best be reconciled by interpreting the best interests test to
allow the right to be overridden only if its exercise would occasion
consequences that involve more than inconvenience, upset or disruption to the
child and incidentally to the custodial parent.  The long-term value to a child
of a meaningful relationship with both parents is a policy that is affirmed in
the Divorce Act .  This means allowing each to engage in those activities
which contribute to identify the parent for what he or she really is.  The
access parent is not expected to act out a part or assume a phony lifestyle
during access periods.  The policy favouring activities that promote a
meaningful relationship is not displaced unless there is a substantial risk of
harm to the child.                     In this regard, I
agree with Wood J.A. in the Court of Appeal (1990), 50 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1.  In his
reasons he states, at p. 96:                     I
believe the whole of s. 16  of the Divorce Act  of 1985, when properly construed,
reflects the modern view that the best interests of a child are more aptly
served by a law which recognizes the right of that child to a meaningful
post-divorce relationship with both parents.  That construction in turn
requires that the distribution of "rights", between the custodial and
the access parent, be such as to encourage such a relationship.  And such a
construction is inconsistent with the full-blooded traditional notion of
guardianship which would give the custodial parent the absolute right to
exercise full control over the child even when the other parent is exercising
his or her right of access.                     "Harm" is
a term which in this context connotes an adverse effect on the child's
upbringing that is more than transitory.  The impugned exercise by the access
parent must be shown to create a substantial risk that the child's physical,
psychological or moral well-being will be adversely affected.  Exposure to new
experiences and ideas may upset children and cause them considerable
discomfort.  Anything from starting school to having to go to bed may evoke a
strong emotional response.  This does not mean that these experiences are not
in the long-term best interests of the child.  Similarly, conflict between
parents on many matters including religion is not uncommon, but in itself
cannot be assumed to be harmful unless it produces a prolonged acrimonious
atmosphere.                     I would, therefore,
go a step further than my colleague McLachlin J. and conclude that what is
in the best interests of the child is the generally applicable test, but in its
application to restrict religious expression, risk of substantial harm is not
only an important factor but also must be shown.                     Interpreted in this
way, the statutory test in s. 16(10)  of the Divorce Act  does not
constitute a limitation on freedom of religious expression.  As my colleague
points out, this freedom does not extend to protect conduct which is harmful to
others.  I would not, however, adopt her expansion of the term
"injure" as used in R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd., [1985] 1
S.C.R. 295, to arrive at the conclusion that anything that is not in the best
interests of the child (on the basis of her definition of this test) is
subtracted from the Charter  right involved.                     I would dispose of
the appeal and the constitutional questions as proposed by McLachlin J.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     Cory
and Iacobucci JJ. -- We
have read with great interest the excellent reasons of Justice L'Heureux-Dubé
and Justice McLachlin.  We are in agreement with their conclusions that the
best interests of the child standard provided in ss. 16(8)  and 17(5)  of
the Divorce Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp .), does not violate
ss. 2 (a), (b) and (d), and s. 15  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  substantially for the reasons given by our
colleagues.  In this respect, however, we wish to refrain from expressing any
opinion on McLachlin J.'s discussion of whether, if an infringement of the Charter 
were found, such an infringement would be so trivial as not to warrant Charter 
protection.  We similarly wish to reserve our views on the question discussed
by L'Heureux-Dubé J. of whether or not the Charter  applies to judicial
orders made in custody or access proceedings.                     We agree, again for
many of the reasons she advances, with L'Heureux-Dubé J. that the issue of
access to children should be determined on the basis of what is in the best
interests of the child.  In that respect, we also agree with both our
colleagues that expert evidence is, while admittedly helpful is some cases, not
always necessary to establish the best interests of the child; that question
can be determined normally from the evidence of parties themselves and the
testimony, where appropriate, of the children concerned.                     We note that the
majority of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (1990), 50 B.C.L.R. (2d)
1, held that the matters of the children attending religious services with the
respondent and accompanying him on his proselytizing activities were resolved
by the respondent's undertaking to respect his children's wishes in this
regard.  This leaves as the only remaining issue, whether the order forbidding
the respondent from discussing his religion is valid.  On this point, we agree
with McLachlin J. that a proper application of the best interests of the
child test does not support such an order.  We find it difficult to accept that
any genuine and otherwise proper discussion between a parent and his or her
child should be curtailed by court orders.  Indeed, curtailment of explanatory
or discursive conversations or exchanges between a parent and child should be
rarely ordered in our view.  To take an example, suppose custodial
Parent A is a member of a fundamentalist religion and access Parent B
is a scientist who espouses the pure Darwinian theory of evolution.  We find it
unacceptable that Parent B should be ordered, under the rubric of the best
interests of the child test, not to discuss or explain his views to his child
as opposed to being forbidden from indoctrinating or otherwise undermining the
religious choice made by the custodial parent for the child or children
involved.  Surely the best interests of the child test embraces genuine
discussion of religious belief as opposed to indoctrination, enlistment or
harassment having the aim or effect of undermining the religious decision made
by the custodial parent.                     On the property,
monetary, and costs issues, we agree with the reasons of McLachlin J. and
would dispose of the appeal in the manner proposed by her.                     The following is
the judgment delivered by                     McLachlin
J. -- This case raises
the question whether a divorced parent, who does not have custody, should be
able to offer his children his religious views over the objection of the
custodial parent.  This issue raises, in turn, the question of the place of the
"best interests of the child" standard in the Canadian constitutional
system.  The Background                     Mr. and Mrs. Young
were married in 1974.  They had three daughters.  In 1987 the Youngs separated. 
Mrs. Young took custody of the children; Mr. Young had access, subject to
court-imposed restrictions following from Mrs. Young's objection to his
religious activity with the children.                     The separation was
marked by a protracted series of court battles.  It is unnecessary to detail
the many disputes over which the parties joined issue before the case finally
came on for trial.  Suffice it to say that one of those issues was the
disagreement between the parents over which religious activities Mr. Young
might appropriately undertake with his daughters.  Mrs. Young was brought up in
the Anglican church.  She expressed a wish that her children be brought up in
the United Church, although the evidence suggests that religion, particularly
organized religion, does not play an important role in the life of Mrs. Young. 
Mr. Young converted to the Jehovah's Witness faith two years prior to
separation from his spouse.  He wished, at the very least, to communicate his
faith to his children.  To this end, he read bible stories, and discussed his
beliefs with his children during his periods of access.  He also questioned
them about religious matters during these periods.                     The evidence shows
that the elder two daughters like their father but, as time went on, came to
dislike his religious instruction.  There was evidence that by exposing his
elder children to his religious beliefs, Mr. Young was damaging his
relationship with his children and contributing to the stress the children were
experiencing in adjusting to their parent's separation.  On the other hand, the
evidence also established that the children were functioning in an entirely
normal fashion, suggesting that neither their mental nor physical health had
been adversely affected by the dispute between their parents over Mr. Young's
religious instruction, or by that instruction itself.                     The trial judge
granted custody of the children to Mrs. Young and access to Mr. Young.  But Mr.
Young's access was again restricted by court order.  The order provided that
Mr. Young not discuss the Jehovah's Witness religion with the children, not
take them to any religious services, canvassing or meetings, and not expose the
children to religious discussions with third parties without the prior consent
of Mrs. Young.  Both parties were ordered not to make adverse remarks about the
other's beliefs.  Mr. Young was also enjoined from preventing blood
transfusions for the children, should the need arise.  The basis of the order
was the trial judge's finding (1989), 24 R.F.L. (3d) 193, at p. 211, that
"the religious conflict [between the parents] was causing a problem for
the children."   She wrote at p. 215:                     There
will be certain restrictions because that is necessary to protect the best
interests of these children.  That can only be done by putting an end to this
religious conflict.  The respondent has become so involved in enforcing his
rights he has completely overlooked the welfare of the children.  The
respondent can have a meaningful relationship with his children without
promoting his religious beliefs . . . . If the respondent is seriously
interested in retaining a relationship with his children, he will have no
difficulty abiding by the restrictions I propose to place on him when he has
access.  The trial judge also made orders for
the distribution of property and for costs which are considered later in these
reasons.                     Mr. Young
appealed.  The Court of Appeal (1990), 50 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, Southin J.A.
dissenting in part, set aside the limitations on religious discussion and
attendance, on the ground that it is in the best interests of children that
they come to know their non-custodial parent fully, including his or her
religious beliefs.  The majority concluded, at p. 108, that restrictions
should not be placed on the freedom of an access parent to discuss religion
with his or her child, or to involve the child in religious activities, unless
either "the existence of, or the potential for, real harm" to the
child was established on the evidence, or the evidence established that the
child did not consent to being subject to the access parent's views or
practices.  The Court of Appeal also altered the division of property and the
awards of costs made by the trial judge.  Mrs. Young appeals these rulings to
this Court.  I will consider each issue in turn.  A.  The
Limitations on Mr. Young's Access  1.  The
Constitutional Validity of the Best Interest of the Child Standard                     The Divorce Act,
R.S.C., 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp .), provides that a court shall abide by the
following matters in deciding questions of custody and access:                     16. . . .                     (8)  In
making an order under this section, the court shall take into consideration only
the best interests of the child of the marriage as determined by reference to
the condition, means, needs and other circumstances of the child.                                                                     .
. .                     (10)  In
making an order under this section, the court shall give effect to the
principle that a child of the marriage should have as much contact with each
spouse as is consistent with the best interests of the child and, for that
purpose, shall take into consideration the willingness of the person for whom
custody is sought to facilitate such contact.  [Emphasis added.]  The courts are to heed the following
provision in s. 17 when varying a custody order made under s. 16 :                     17.  . . .                     (5)  Before
the court makes a variation order in respect of a custody order, the court
shall satisfy itself that there has been a change in the condition, means,
needs or other circumstances of the child of the marriage occurring since the
making of the custody order or the last variation order made in respect of that
order, as the case may be, and, in making the variation order, the court
shall take into consideration only the best interests of the child as
determined by reference to that change.  [Emphasis added.]                     Two questions
arise.  First, what does the "best interests of the child" test
require?  Second, does this test, properly understood, infringe upon the
guarantees of freedom of religion, expression, association and equality under
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?  The sections of the Charter 
relevant to the case at bar read as follows:                     1.  The Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms  guarantees the rights and freedoms set out in it
subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic society.                     2.  Everyone has the following
fundamental freedoms:  (a)  freedom
of conscience and religion;  (b)  freedom
of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the press and
other media of communication;                                                                     .
. .  (d)  freedom
of association.                     15. (1)  Every individual
is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and
equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, without
discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex,
age or mental or physical disability.                     The answers to the
questions set out above depend upon an examination of what is meant by the
"best interests of the child" test and the constitutional guarantees
which are put in issue.                     (a)  The
Best Interests of the Child Test                     The Historical
Perspective                     The express rule
that matters of custody and access should be resolved in accordance with the
"best interests of the child" is of relatively recent origin. Under
the common law regime of the 18th and 19th centuries the governing principle in
a custody dispute was the rule of near-absolute paternal preference: see R.
v. De Manneville (1804), 5 East. 221, 102 E.R. 1054; In re Taylor
(1876), 4 Ch. D. 157.  The rule was defended on pragmatic grounds,
including what was thought to be the general interest of children: see In re
Agar-Ellis (1883), 24 Ch. D. 317.  In truth, the rule probably had
more to do with the acceptance of the father's dominant right in all family
matters, which in turn found its roots in the notion of the inherent
superiority of men over women.                     The rule of
paternal preference was displaced by a rule establishing in the mother a
primary right to custody of a child of tender years: see, for instance, An
Act to Amend the Law relating to the custody of Infants, S. Prov. Can.
1855, c. 126, s. 1.  Later still there arose a presumption, in many
foreign jurisdictions and to a more limited extent in Canada, of maternal
preference: Talsky v. Talsky, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 292, Kades v. Kades
(1961), 35 A.L.J.R. 251 (Aust. H.C.); see also Susan Maidment, Child Custody
and Divorce (1984), Robert H. Mnookin, "Child-Custody Adjudication:
Judicial Functions in the Face of Indeterminacy" (1975), 39 Law &
Contemp. Probs. 226, and Allan Roth, "The Tender Years Presumption in
Child Custody Disputes" (1976-77), 15 J. Fam. L. 423.   This
presumption, like the paternal preference rule, was justified on pragmatic
grounds; the welfare of the child was the often cited reason for the
presumption.  So justified, the presumption carried the seeds of its own
demise.  Courts increasingly looked behind the preference to focus directly
upon what was in the child's interest, which was sometimes found to conflict
with a maternal preference.                     By the 1970s, a
number of western countries had accorded statutory recognition to a "best
interests" or "welfare of the child" test.  Questions relating
to the weight to be given these interests, and the proper means of
understanding these interests, remained.  In England, the child's welfare is
stipulated as the "first and paramount" consideration: Guardianship
of Minors Act, 1971 (U.K.), 1971, c. 3, s. 1.  English jurisprudence
indicates that the child's welfare has, in fact, become the sole consideration:
J. v. C., [1970] A.C. 668; Re K. (minors), [1977] 1 All E.R.
647.  In Norway, decisions in respect of custody shall "mainly" (or
"primarily") consider the interests of the child: Lov 8 April nr 7
om barn og foreldre, s. 34 (Law about Children and Parents, of April 7,
1981, no. 7, s. 34).  In practice it appears that other criteria do not simply
function as "tiebreakers" where the interests of the child would be
equally well served by either parent, but can, in certain cases, determine the
issue:  see Jon Elster, "Solomonic Judgments: Against the Best Interest of
the Child" (1987), 54 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1; also Lucy Smith and Peter
Lødrup, "The Child in the Divorce Situation -- Factors Determining the
Custody Question and the Use of Experts in Custody Cases in Norway", in
Ian F. G. Baxter and Mary A. Eberts, eds., The Child and the Courts
(1978).                     Some variant of the
best interests of the child test is in place in most American states, although
in certain states the application of the test is delimited by a renewed concern
that the debate be organized by certain presumptions, either a "primary caregiver"
presumption, or a presumption in favour of the mother of a child of tender
years:  see David L. Chambers, "Rethinking the Substantive Rules for
Custody Disputes in Divorce" (1984), 83 Mich. L. Rev. 477, and
Roth, "The Tender Years Presumption in Child Custody Disputes", supra.                     The
Wording of the Act                     Parliament has
adopted the "best interests of the child" test as the basis upon
which custody and access disputes are to be resolved.  Three aspects of the way
Parliament has done this merit comment.                     First, the
"best interests of the child" test is the only test.  The
express wording of s. 16(8)  of the Divorce Act  requires the court
to look only at the best interests of the child in making orders of
custody and access.  This means that parental preferences and
"rights" play no role.                     Second, the test is
broad.  Parliament has recognized that the variety of circumstances which may
arise in disputes over custody and access is so diverse that predetermined
rules, designed to resolve certain types of disputes in advance, may not be
useful.  Rather, it has been left to the judge to decide what is in the
"best interests of the child", by reference to the "condition,
means, needs and other circumstances" of the child.  Nevertheless, the judicial
task is not one of pure discretion.  By embodying the "best
interests" test in legislation and by setting out general factors to be
considered, Parliament has established a legal test, albeit a flexible one. 
Like all legal tests, it is to be applied according to the evidence in the
case, viewed objectively.  There is no room for the judge's personal
predilections and prejudices.  The judge's duty is to apply the law.  He or she
must not do what he or she wants to do but what he or she ought to do.                     Third,
s. 16(10) provides that in making an order, the court shall give effect
"to the principle that a child of the marriage should have as much contact
with each spouse as is consistent with the best interests of the child." 
This is significant.  It stands as the only specific factor which Parliament
has seen fit to single out as being something which the judge must consider. 
By mentioning this factor, Parliament has expressed its opinion that contact
with each parent is valuable, and that the judge should ensure that this
contact is maximized.  The modifying phrase "as is consistent with the
best interests of the child" means that the goal of maximum contact of
each parent with the child is not absolute.  To the extent that contact
conflicts with the best interests of the child, it may be restricted.  But only
to that extent.  Parliament's decision to maintain maximum contact between the
child and both parents is amply supported by the literature, which suggests
that children benefit from continued access:  Michael Rutter, Maternal
Deprivation Reassessed (1981), Robin Benians, "Preserving Parental
Contact: a Factor in Promoting Healthy Growth and Development in
Children", in Jo Tunnard, ed., Fostering Parental Contact: Arguments in
Favour of Preserving Contact Between Children in Care and Their Families
(1982).                     Wood J.A. in the
Court of Appeal, put the matter as follows at p. 93:  It
seems to me that at the very least, by enacting this subsection [s. 16(10)  of
the Divorce Act ], Parliament intended to facilitate a meaningful, as
well as a continuing, post-divorce relationship between the children of the
marriage and the access parent.                     Without
limiting the generality of the adjective "meaningful", such a
relationship would surely include the opportunity on the part of the child to
know that parent well and to enjoy the benefit of those attributes of
parenthood which such person has to share.  In most cases that would clearly be
in the best interests of the child, and the best interests of the child, not
parental rights, are the focus of the whole of s. 16  of the Act .                     I would summarize
the effect of the provisions of the Divorce Act  on matters of access as
follows.  The ultimate test in all cases is the best interests of the child. 
This is a positive test, encompassing a wide variety of factors.  One of the
factors which the judge seeking to determine what is in the best interests of
the child must have regard to is the desirability of maximizing contact between
the child and each parent. But in the final analysis, decisions on access must
reflect what is in the best interests of the child.                     It follows from
this that the proposition, put to us in argument, that the custodial parent
should have the right to forbid certain types of contact between the access
parent and the child, must fail.  The custodial parent's wishes are not the
ultimate criterion for limitations on access: see King v. Low, [1985] 1
S.C.R. 87, at p. 101.  The only circumstance in which contact with either
parent can be limited is where the contact is shown to conflict with the best
interests of the child.                     Risk of harm to the
child is not a condition precedent for limitations on access.  The ultimate
determinant in every case must be the best interests of the child. Many
decisions on access may involve no reference to harm.  For example, a judge
might conclude that it is not in the best interests of a child that he or she
see the access parent every day on the ground that this would result in undue
disruption to the child's schedule of activities.  Again, a judge might
conclude that it is in the best interests of the child that he or she move with
the custodial parent to a distant location, notwithstanding that this will
limit the access of the other parent.  Optimum access may simply not be in the
best interests of the child for a variety of circumstances.                     On the other hand,
in some cases the risk of harm may be a factor to be considered in determining
what is in the child's best interests.  For example, where the limits on access
relate to the quality of the access -- what the access parent may say or do
with the child -- the question of harm may become highly relevant.  Given the
interest of the child in coming to know his or her access parent as fully as possible,
judges may well be reluctant to impose limits on what the access parent may say
or do with the child in the absence of some evidence suggesting that the
activity may harm the child.  The legal test is not harm; the Divorce Act 
makes this clear.  However, in some circumstances, the risk of harm to the
child or the absence thereof may become an important factor to be considered.
To this extent I agree with the Court of Appeal that, in determining whether
religious discussions and activities between parent and child should be
curtailed, it may well behoove the judge to enquire whether the proposed
conduct poses a risk of harming the child.  In doing so, the judge should bear
in mind that conflict between parents over the access issue does not
necessarily indicate harm, nor does the objection of the child necessarily
impose that conclusion.  In some circumstances they may; in some they may not.                     I conclude that the
ultimate criterion for determining limits on access to a child is the best
interests of the child.  The custodial parent has no "right" to limit
access.  The judge must consider all factors relevant to determining what is in
the child's best interests; a factor which must be considered in all cases is
Parliament's view that contact with each parent is to be maximized to the
extent that this is compatible with the best interests of the child.  The risk
of harm to the child, while not the ultimate legal test, may also be a factor
to be considered.  This is particularly so where the issue is the quality of
access -- what the access parent may say or do with the child.  In such cases,
it will generally be relevant to consider whether the conduct in question poses
a risk of harm to the child which outweighs the benefits of a free and open
relationship which permits the child to know the access parent as he or she
is.  It goes without saying that, as for any other legal test, the judge, in
determining what is in the best interests of the child, must act not on his or
her personal views, but on the evidence.                     (b)  The
Constitutionality of the Test                     The first question
is whether the Charter  applies.  Because of my conclusion later in these
reasons that valid orders under the "best interests of the child"
standard cannot violate the Charter , I find it unnecessary to decide
whether the Charter  applies to an action for access under the Divorce
Act  between two parents.  For the purposes of this section, I assume that
it does.                     The constitutional
focus in this case centres on the guarantee of freedom of religion in
s. 2 (a) of the Charter  and the guarantee of freedom of
expression in s. 2 (b) of the Charter .  The guarantees of freedom
of association and equality apply only tangentially, if at all, and were not
emphasized in argument.                      The respondent
says that legislative provision for the "best interests of the child"
violates his religious and expressive freedom.  The argument is that in some
cases the "best interests of the child" will require a judge to make
an order limiting expressive or religious freedom.  Therefore, it is submitted,
the test is unconstitutional, unless it can be saved under s. 1 .                     In my view, this
argument cannot stand.  The reason is that the guarantees of religious freedom
and expressive freedom in the Charter  do not protect conduct which
violates the best interests of the child test.  Whether Application of the Best
Interests Standard Violates the Charter                     Does the Charter 
 protect religious expression which is not in the best interests of the
child? In my view, the answer to this question is no.                     It is established
that the guarantee of freedom of religion does not extend to religious activity
which harms other people.  In R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd., [1985] 1
S.C.R. 295, this Court held that freedom of religion is not absolute; in
particular, it does not extend to conduct that would injure or interfere with
the parallel rights of others.  Dickson J., (as he then was), after a lengthy
historical review of freedom of religion in our society and legal system, concluded
at p. 346:                     Viewed
in this context, the purpose of freedom of conscience and religion becomes
clear.  The values that underlie our political and philosophic traditions
demand that every individual be free to hold and to manifest whatever beliefs
and opinions his or her conscience dictates, provided inter alia only
that such manifestations do not injure his or her neighbours or their
parallel rights to hold and manifest beliefs and opinions of their own. 
[Emphasis added.]                     The next question
is whether conduct which is not in the best interests of the child amounts to
an "injury" or intrusion on the rights of others within the meaning
of this comment.  If so, the guarantee of freedom of religion will not protect
such conduct.                     It is clear that
conduct which poses a risk of harm to the child would not be protected.  As
noted earlier, religious expression and comment of a parent which is found to
violate the best interests of a child will often do so because it poses a risk
of harm to the child. If so, it is clear that the guarantee of religious
freedom can offer no protection.  But I think a case can be made that even in
cases where a risk of harm may not have been established, the guarantee of
freedom of religion should not be understood to extend to protecting conduct
which is not in the best interests of the child.  I understand
"injure" in the passage cited from R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd.,
supra, to be a broad concept.  To deprive a child of what a court has found
to be in his or her best interests is to "injure", in the sense of
not doing what is best for the child.  The vulnerable situation of the child
heightens the need for protection; if one is to err, it should not be in favour
of the exercise of the alleged parental right, but in favour of the interests
of the child. An additional factor which may come into play in the case of
older children is the "parallel right" of others referred to by
Dickson J., "to hold and manifest beliefs and opinions of their
own".  For these reasons, I conclude that the Charter   guarantee of
freedom of religion does not extend to protect conduct which is not in the best
interests of the child under the Divorce Act .                     I come then to
freedom of expression. The ambit of this right has been more broadly drawn than
freedom of conscience and religion, in that even harmful expression may be
protected:  Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Quebec (Attorney General), [1989] 1 S.C.R.
927; R. v. Keegstra, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 697; Reference re ss. 193
and 195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code (Man.), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1123.  On the
other hand, some forms of harmful expression are not constitutionally
protected.  Violence or threats of violence are not protected: see RWDSU v.
Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573, Keegstra, supra,
at p. 733.  Nor is expression which takes the form of "direct attacks by
violent means on the physical liberty and integrity of another person"
protected: Reference re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code
(Man.), supra, at p. 1186.  The fact that conduct has been criminalized
by Parliament is an indication, although not a conclusive one, that expressive
conduct falls in the latter category:  Reference re ss. 193 and
195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code (Man.), supra, at p. 1185.                     The expression
challenged in the case at bar does not take the form of violence or threats of
violence, nor does it constitute a direct attack on the physical integrity or
liberty of another.  The harm done, if any, is of a psychological nature. (In
saying this, I do not overlook the fact that some religious practices or forms
of expression may involve psychological violence or physical violence.)  Thus a
prima facie  case for protection under the guarantee of freedom of
expression can be made out.                     This poses a
problem.  Virtually every form of religious practice is expressive. 
Interpreting freedom of expression broadly, in the religious context, will
nullify the principle that freedom of religion does not protect conduct which
injures others or which conflicts with their parallel rights to hold and
manifest beliefs of their own.                     The answer to this
apparent dilemma is found in the admonition of Dickson J. in R. v. Big M
Drug Mart Ltd., supra, at p. 344, that a purposive approach to Charter 
interpretation requires that associated rights -- in this case religious
freedom and freedom of expression -- be interpreted in a consistent and
coherent manner:  . .
. the purpose of the right or freedom in question is to be sought by reference
to the character and the larger objects of the Charter  itself, to the
language chosen to articulate the specific right or freedom, to the historical
origins of the concepts enshrined, and where applicable, to the meaning and
purpose of the other specific rights and freedoms with which it is associated
within the text of the Charter .  [Emphasis added.]  This admonition must be coupled with
the canon that the ambit of a particular right or freedom cannot be defined in
the abstract but should rather be defined in the context of the particular
activity in questions:  Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General),
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326. Taking these two injunctions together, one arrives at the
conclusion that the court, focusing on the context of the particular case, must
strive to interpret the related rights in a coherent manner.                     The conduct with
which this appeal is concerned -- the teaching of religious beliefs and
practices to one's children -- while it has an expressive aspect, is
predominantly religious.  In seeking to reconcile the rights of freedom of
religion and freedom of expression in this context, it is the religious aspect
which must dominate.  Reading the two guarantees together, it is my view that
the limits of the guarantee of freedom of expression should govern in the
context of religious instruction of children.                     For these reasons,
I conclude that the best interests of the child test under the Divorce Act 
does not violate the Charter  and is constitutionally valid.                     Whether the Order
of the Trial Judge is Valid Under the Divorce Act                     The question is
whether the trial judge correctly applied the "best interests of the
child" test set out in s. 16(8)  and (10)  of the Divorce Act .                     The trial judge
took a custody-oriented approach to the question of whether the father should
be allowed to discuss and practise his religion with the children. For her the
first question (at p. 205) was "who gets custody and guardianship of
the children and what flows from that."  She concluded that custody
confers on the custodial parent the exclusive "right" to make all
decisions with respect to the child's education, health care and religion.  It
followed inevitably from this (at p. 205) that she saw the custodial
parent as possessing the "sole responsibility for . . . the religious
instruction of the child."  This exclusive right in Mrs. Young to
determine the child's religious instruction led directly to her conclusion that
Mr. Young should be prevented from discussing his religious ideas with the
children.  Having concluded that the religious conflict "must stop",
she ordered it stopped in the manner which the custodial parent desired,
without further discussion of whether another alternative might better serve
the interests of the children.                     This reasoning
departs from the best interests of the child test as outlined earlier in these
reasons in three respects.  First, it places undue emphasis on the wishes of
the custodial parent.  The custodial parent is viewed as having the
"right" to determine limits on access.  In my respectful opinion,
this rights-based approach is erroneous.  The only question to be considered
where limitation of access is in issue is what is in the best interests of the
child.  While the custodial parent has the obligation to make certain basic
decisions as to how the child is educated, which may extend to religious
matters, this does not automatically mean that religious contacts with the
access parent of a different faith are to be excluded.  It is not the wishes of
the custodial parent that govern terms of access, but the best interests of the
child.                     Second, the trial
judge failed to consider the benefits which might enure to the children from
coming to know their father as he was -- that is, as a devoutly religious man
devoted to the Jehovah's Witness faith.  She made no reference to Parliament's
instruction in s. 16(10)  that the child shall have as much contact with
both parents as is compatible with her best interests.                     Thirdly, the trial
judge failed to consider adequately whether there was any evidence of a risk of
harm to the children which might offset the benefit of full access to their
father's values, including those related to religion.  While in some
circumstances access may be limited on grounds unrelated to harm, in cases such
as this, where the issue is whether entirely lawful discussions and activities
between the access parent and the child should be curtailed, it behooves the
judge to enquire whether the conduct poses a risk of harming the child.                            
While the trial judge alluded to the possibility that if Mr. Young continued to
share his religion with the children, he would damage his relationship with the
elder two, she failed to allude to any other suggestion of harm and failed to
consider whether such harm might outweigh the benefit to be gained from a
freer, fuller relationship with their father.                     The trial judge's
undue emphasis on the "rights" of the custodial parent, coupled with
her failure to consider the benefits to be gained from unrestricted contact
with the access parent or whether those benefits were offset by a greater risk
of harm to the children, may have clouded her appreciation of what was in their
best interests.  It was therefore open to the Court of Appeal to reconsider the
matter and seek to give further guidance as to the factors to be considered in
determining what is in the child's best interests in cases such as these.                     Southin J.A. in the
Court of Appeal took a similar but less absolute view of the rights conferred
by custody.  The custodial parent, according to her, has the "final
say" on all matters of religion, although the "right to know"
the access parent and the problems with the enforceability of any order
restricting the conversation of the access parent, led her to conclude that the
trial judge's restriction in respect of religious conversations could not
stand.                     The majority of the
Court of Appeal, by contrast, saw the matter less in terms of the custodial
parent's "right" to decide all religious matters affecting the
children, and more in terms of the best interests of the children.  Unfettered
by notions of the custodial parent's rights, the majority of the Court of
Appeal asked simply what was in the best interests of the child.  Wood J.A.
began by noting at p. 92 that "the provisions of s. 16  of the Divorce
Act  of 1985 must be applied in a manner which is both consistent with the
intentions of Parliament and relevant to the evolving role of parents in the
modern structure of today's society".  He found s. 16(10)  to be
particularly important in determining Parliament's intent in respect of access,
stating at p. 93:                     Viewed
in that way, real contact would necessarily include the opportunity for an
access parent to whom a religious belief is important to share that belief, at
least in a consensual way, with his or her children.                     Thus, for the
majority in the Court of Appeal, the prime concern was the best interests of
the child.  An order for custody vests the custodial parent with the power to
determine the child's religious upbringing, to the extent that this parent can
require the child to observe a faith until the age of discretion; this is in
the child's best interests where the parents cannot agree.  A custody order
does not, however, give the custodial parent the "right" to limit the
access parent's ability to share his or her religious views with the child,
unless that is shown on the evidence not to be in the child's best interests. 
Viewed thus, the notions of custody and access unite in a common purpose of
promoting the child's best interests.                     The majority held
that an access parent's conduct with his child may be limited where the
evidence shows the existence of, or potential for, real harm to the child, or
where the child does not consent to the instruction.  On the latter point, Wood
J.A. noted that while it may be in the best interests of the child that the
custodial parent be allowed to enforce religious practices against the child's
wishes, that rationale did not extend to the access parent.  Both limitations
on the right to access found by the Court of Appeal are grounded in the best interests
of the child.  The majority also held that expert evidence, based on scientific
criteria, is required to show harm.  While, for the reasons discussed earlier,
I would not agree as a general proposition that in every case the risk of harm
to the child must be established to justify limitations on access, in the
context of the dispute in this case, I do not think that the majority of the
Court of Appeal erred in placing considerable emphasis on the absence on the
evidence of a risk of harm to the child.                     I do not share the
view of the majority of the Court of Appeal that expert evidence is required in
all cases.  Nor am I convinced that the failure of the child to consent to
instruction necessarily precludes the conclusion that such instruction by the
access parent is in the best interests of the child.  Apart from these caveats,
I substantially subscribe to the views expressed by Wood J.A.                     The majority of the
Court of Appeal held that the evidence did not establish that harm was being
caused to the children.  On the issue of the children's consent, Wood J.A.
concluded that no order was necessary because Mr. Young had confirmed under
oath that he would respect his children's wishes with respect to the activities
they objected to -- attending services with him and accompanying him on his
proselytizing missions.  In the end, the majority did not find that it was in
the best interests of the children, all factors considered, that even this
limited form of religious activity by the access parent be restricted.                     If one accepts, as
did the majority of the Court of Appeal, that the issue of the children's
accompanying Mr. Young to services and in his evangelical efforts is resolved
by Mr. Young's undertaking -- and I see no reason not to do so given his record
of compliance to date -- the only issue is whether the order forbidding Mr.
Young to discuss religion with his children is valid.  Apart from the value of
getting to know their father and the difficulty of enforcement which led
Southin J.A. to reject this restriction, it is questionable that a proper
application of the "best interests of the child" test supports it. 
Conflict between the parents is, in and of itself, not a sufficient basis for
assuming that the child's interests will not be served.  There was, in this
case, evidence that the children were functioning in an entirely normal
fashion, and had not been adversely affected by the dispute between their
parents or by their father's religious instruction.  We are left then with the
trial judge's concern that Mr. Young's relationship with his children
would deteriorate if he persisted in his religious instruction during his
periods of access.                     With the greatest
respect to the trial judge, this was not on the record in this case a
sufficient reason for restricting access.  In so far as the possible
deterioration of Mr. Young's relationship with his daughters can be considered
unfortunate, the alternative -- a relationship which prevents them from knowing
him as he is -- is also undesirable.   In these circumstances, any perceived
harm to the children cannot be said to outweigh the benefits of unrestricted
access.  In short, this is not a case where the evidence supports the view that
the best interests of the children requires further curtailment of the father's
communication of religious views and practices than already had been agreed to.                     I conclude that the
trial judge's orders preventing Mr. Young from discussing religion with his
children were not supportable on the evidence.  In view of Mr. Young's
undertakings, the orders relating to church attendance and proselytizing were
unnecessary.  The order enjoining the respondent from preventing blood
transfusions was unnecessary from a practical point of view.  Parents should,
of course, not make disparaging comments about the other parent's religion, but
the matter might, on the record here, best have been left to the parents' good
sense.  B.  Financial Matters                     The trial judge
found that each party initially had a one-half interest in the family home
where the wife was living with the three children of the marriage.  She held
that the husband's half interest was extinguished by the costs ordered against
him, half the value of the family car which he kept, arrears of maintenance,
and lump sum maintenance over and above the monthly maintenance awarded to the
wife.  As the trial judge put it, at p. 202, "[a]ny further interest
that the [husband] has in the matrimonial home will be transferred to the
petitioner in the form of lump sum maintenance to assist in the petitioner's
efforts to become self-sufficient."                     The trial judge
ordered that $80,000 owed to the wife's mother by a corporation, which the
parties had formed to begin a jewellery business, was a family debt for which
the husband and wife were jointly liable.  She also held that the sum of
$27,586.57 which the appellant had borrowed to support herself before she
obtained an order for interim maintenance was a family debt for half of which
the respondent was liable.                     The trial judge
ordered that the husband pay to the wife monthly maintenance in the sum of
$1400, and $400 a month support for each of his children.                     Two aspects of
these orders are appealed to this Court.  The first is the trial judge's
determination that whatever interest the husband might have in the matrimonial
home, after setting off costs and arrears of maintenance, should be absorbed by
an order for lump sum maintenance.  The Court of Appeal set this order aside. 
The power to award lump sum maintenance is found in the Divorce Act, s.
15(2) :                             15. . . .                     (2)  A
court of competent jurisdiction may, on application by either or both spouses,
make an order requiring one spouse to secure or pay, or to secure and pay, such
lump sum or periodic sums, or such lump sum and periodic sums, as the court
thinks reasonable for the support of                     (a)  the
other spouse;                     (b)  any
or all children of the marriage; or                     (c)  the
other spouse and any or all children of the marriage.  Southin J.A. stated at p. 41:                     If
the learned judge wished to fix lump sum maintenance, she was obliged to fix it
in a sum certain and to fix it with reference to the principles applicable to
such an award.  I agree that she was obliged to fix
the maintenance with reference to the principles applicable to such an award. 
The trial judge did not express any jurisprudential or evidentiary basis for
awarding the lump sum maintenance.  The goal was no doubt to achieve the end of
conveying the entire interest in the matrimonial home to the wife.  But this
justification does not support an award of lump sum maintenance; more is
required.                     That said, the fact
remains that the trial judge was convinced that a fair allocation of the assets
of the marriage required that the house be transferred entirely to the wife. 
The British Columbia Family Relations Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 121,
permits an unequal division of family assets where the trial judge is satisfied
that this is required having regard to various enumerated factors.  The
relevant sections are ss. 51 and 52 of this Act .  Section 51  reads:                     51. Where the provisions for
division of property between spouses under section 43 or their marriage
agreement, as the case may be, would be unfair having regard to                     (a)   the
duration of the marriage;  (b)the
duration of the period during which the spouses have lived separate and apart;  (c)               the
date when property was acquired or disposed of;  (d)the
extent to which property was acquired by one spouse through inheritance or
gift;  (e)the
needs of each spouse to become or remain economically independent and self
sufficient; or  (f)any
other circumstances relating to the acquisition, preservation, maintenance,
improvement or use of property or the capacity or liabilities of a spouse,  the
Supreme Court, on application, may order that the property covered by section
43 or the marriage agreement, as the case may be, be divided into shares fixed
by the court.  Additionally or alternatively the court may order that other
property not covered by section 43 or the marriage agreement, as the case may
be, of one spouse be vested in the other spouse.  Section 52  of the Act  provides that
where a determination of an unequal allocation has been made, the trial judge
may, by way of remedy, make an order as to the ownership of property.                     In the case at bar
there was ample basis for an order under s. 51 awarding Mrs. Young a greater
portion of the family assets on the ground that, for a considerable period of
time, Mr. Young had paid little or nothing for the support of his family.  As
will be seen below, I do not agree that the debts incurred during this period
can, in law, be attributed to Mr. Young.  However, they can serve as a
consideration supporting reduction of his interest in the family property.  It
may also be noted that the equity in the home was not substantial and that Mr.
Young was permitted to retain other assets.  It is on these grounds that I
depart from Southin J.A.'s view that there were insufficient reasons to order a
reapportionment.  Although the matter is not free from difficulty, I incline to
the view that a trial judge, looking at all the circumstances, could have made
such an order.                     The problem, as
noted by Southin J.A., is that the trial judge made no reference to s. 51 of
the Family Relations Act or the factors on which reapportionment of the
presumed equal interest in family assets can be made.  This presents this Court
with two alternatives: return the matter for a new trial or make the order
which it thinks the trial judge should have made.  The Court of Appeal chose
the latter, and I think they were right in so doing.  In this case it is open
to inference that the trial judge concluded that a de facto
reapportionment of the interest in the family assets was required to do
justice.  It also appears that there was, on the facts and the law, a method of
achieving this end.  The fact that the trial judge did not expressly allude to
the factors for reallocation under s. 51, which in other circumstances might be
sufficient reason for ordering a new trial, must here be weighed against the
fact that this litigation has already gone on far too long and cost far too
much.  Like the Court of Appeal, I am loath to send the matter back to the
trial division for further proceedings.  In these circumstances, it seems to me
that the better course is to endorse the result achieved by the trial judge on
the ground that the evidence is capable of supporting an order for reallocation
of the parties' interest in the family assets to the extent required to give
Mrs. Young the entire interest in the matrimonial home.                     I come finally to
the matter of the family debts.  The $80,000 owed by the corporation to Mrs.
Young's mother cannot in law be characterized as a debt for which Mr. Young is
personally liable, as ordered by the trial judge.  The only entity liable for
repayment is the corporation.  There is no legal basis on which either Mr. or
Mrs. Young can be said to be legally liable to repay the money borrowed by the
company.  The debt incurred by Mrs. Young to support herself and the children
before she applied for maintenance is similarly unenforceable against Mr. Young
as a debt, although it can be taken into consideration in an order for
reduction of his interest in the family assets, as suggested above.  I agree
with Southin J.A., at p. 39, that "[t]he court cannot make a spouse
jointly liable to a creditor for a debt of the other spouse, no matter for what
purpose it was incurred, or, in the absence of some contractual foundation,
make one spouse liable to indemnify the other, either in whole or in part, for
a liability of the latter." Accordingly, the paragraphs of the order
making Mr. Young liable for one-half of these debts must be struck out.  C.  Costs  1.                Costs
Against the Respondent                     The trial judge
ordered solicitor-client costs against the respondent.  This award was made on
the basis that the custody claim had "little merit", that the
respondent attempted to mislead the court, that the respondent was recalcitrant
on matters of custody and maintenance and, finally, on the basis that
unnecessary proceedings had resulted.  The trial judge also referred to the
fact that someone else was promoting and paying for the legal action and that
repetitive and irrelevant evidence was tendered.                     The Court of
Appeal, per Cumming J.A., upheld the imposition of solicitor-client
costs for four days of the trial and for four days of the interlocutory
proceedings concerned with financial issues, on the basis of the husband's
non-disclosure of financial information.  Otherwise, costs against the
respondent were reduced to party-and-party costs.                     The Court of
Appeal's order was based on the following principles, with which I agree. 
Solicitor-client costs are generally awarded only where there has been
reprehensible, scandalous or outrageous conduct on the part of one of the
parties.  Accordingly, the fact that an application has little merit is no
basis for awarding solicitor-client costs; nor is the fact that part of the
cost of the litigation may have been paid for by others.  The Court of Appeal
meticulously considered all the proceedings in the light of these principles to
arrive at its conclusion that only partial solicitor-client costs were
justified.                     Finding no error in
the reasoning or conclusion of the Court of Appeal on this question, I conclude
that its order for costs should remain, save to the extent different
conclusions on the merits in this Court require that an adjustment be made.  As
I have made clear, the only respect in which I would vary the order of the
Court of Appeal is that instead of ordering lump sum maintenance and a
moratorium on the sale of the matrimonial home, I would restore the trial
judge's order that the entire interest in the home be conferred on the wife. 
In my view, this difference does not warrant altering the award of costs
against the respondent made below.  2.  Costs Against the
Respondent's Counsel                     The trial judge
ordered solicitor-client costs against counsel for the husband, Mr. How.  For
the reasons recited above in connection with costs against the respondent, she
concluded that the proceedings had been unnecessarily lengthened. She also
referred, at p. 216, to the fact that "[c]ounsel for the respondent
had a forum and a cause to pursue.  Unfortunately, what was in the best
interests of the children, their welfare, was totally lost by the respondent
and his counsel in these protracted proceedings. . . .  The court was subjected
to unwarranted abuse, criticism and insult."  She made no finding,
however, that Mr. How had been in contempt of court.                     The Court of Appeal
held that no order for costs should have been made against Mr. How.  There is
no need to repeat that entirely satisfactory analysis.  The basic principle on
which costs are awarded is as compensation for the successful party, not
in order to punish a barrister.  Any member of the legal profession might be
subject to a compensatory order for costs if it is shown that repetitive and
irrelevant material, and excessive motions and applications, characterized the
proceedings in which they were involved, and that the lawyer acted in bad faith
in encouraging this abuse and delay.  It is clear that the courts possess
jurisdiction to make such an award, often under statute and, in any event, as
part of their inherent jurisdiction to control abuse of process and contempt of
court.  But the fault that might give rise to a costs award against Mr. How
does not characterize these proceedings, despite their great length and
acrimonious progress.  Moreover, courts must be extremely cautious in awarding
costs personally against a lawyer, given the duties upon a lawyer to guard
confidentiality of instructions and to bring forward with courage even
unpopular causes.  A lawyer should not be placed in a situation where his or
her fear of an adverse order of costs may conflict with these fundamental
duties of his or her calling.                     The Court of Appeal
found that the trial judge's criticism of Mr. How related to his conduct in
bringing the action.  Assuming that costs might, in certain circumstances, be
imposed for contempt of court, none was found.  Accordingly, no order for costs
should have been made against Mr. How.  I see no error in the conclusion of the
Court of Appeal in this regard.  3.  Costs Against Burnaby
Unit (Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society)                     Since the Watch
Tower Bible and Tract Society (the Society) did not appear as a party, the
costs awarded against it must be taken to have been premised on the fact that
it supported the litigation financially.  In effect, this was equivalent to an
award for the tort of maintenance: see Re Sturmer and Town of Beaverton
(1912), 25 O.L.R. 566 (Div. Ct.), at pp. 568-69.  To be liable for maintenance,
a person must intervene "officiously or improperly": Goodman v.
The King, [1939] S.C.R. 446.  Provision of financial assistance to a
litigant by a non-party will not always constitute maintenance.  Funding by a
relative or out of charity must be distinguished from cases where a person
wilfully and improperly stirs up litigation and strife:  Newswander v.
Giegerich (1907), 39 S.C.R. 354.                     In this case there
was no evidence that the respondent had been induced to allow the Society to
use his name in order that it might avoid liability for costs while advancing
its own interests, that he would not have advanced his own interests in the
absence of its help, that the Society's funding was for other than charitable
motives, or that it controlled or directed the proceedings.  Its support was
"out of charity and religious sympathy" and did not constitute
maintenance.  The fact that the Society had a common interest with the
respondent (as followers of the same religion) did not affect this.                     Cumming J.A. so
found, and then qualified his position at p. 85 by stating:                     I
hasten to add that it does not follow that the resources of the Watch Tower
Bible & Tract Society can be brought to bear in every dispute between a
Jehovah's Witness parent and a non-Jehovah's Witness parent.  Once an issue of
constitutional law of the kind raised here is settled then, if further litigation
of the point between other litigants is supported, another question might
arise.  It may be that the right to assist without facing an award of costs
cannot itself be used by the rich and powerful, no matter how great their
interest in the issue, as an instrument of the oppression of those who must
fight their battles alone.                     I find again that
no error has been made in the Court of Appeal's reasoning or conclusion.  The
evidence established that the respondent paid for a considerable portion of the
cost of the proceedings personally, that the dispute was instigated at least in
part by the appellant, and that the Society could not be considered to have
stirred up the litigation, much less to have done so wilfully or improperly.                     One argument,
however, was not touched on by the Court of Appeal.  This is the argument that
the Society was an unnamed party to the litigation and, as such, should
properly bear its portion of the costs.  I would not discount the possibility
that a court might properly hold an unnamed party liable for costs. The rule is
that a non-party who has put forward another person in whose name the
proceedings are taken cannot escape liability for costs in putting forward
another: R. v. Sturmer and Town of Beaverton, supra.  However, it
seems to me that the evidence here falls short of establishing that the society
was a party in this sense.  Even on the constitutional issue, it cannot be said
that the Society put Mr. Young forward, in effect bringing its own action in
his name.  The constitutional issue was first raised by Mrs. Young's objection
to Mr. Young's communicating his religious beliefs to the children and was
validly pursued by Mr. Young in his own interest.  The Society's interest in
the constitutional issue is insufficient, as I see it, to distinguish it from
interveners who appear on constitutional cases and who have never been liable
for costs.  Disposition                     I would affirm the
order of the Court of Appeal, except in respect of the matrimonial home, which
should be transferred to Mrs. Young.   In the circumstances of this case, I
would order that each party bear his or her own costs on this appeal.                     I would answer the
constitutional questions as follows:  1.Do
ss. 16(8) and 17(5) of the Divorce Act, 1985, which provide that
judicial decisions regarding custody and access be made "in the best
interests of the child", deny the rights and freedoms guaranteed in s. 2 (a),
(b), and (d) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?                     No.  2.If
the answer to question 1 is affirmative, are ss. 16(8) and 17(5) of the Divorce
Act, 1985, justified as reasonable limits by s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and therefore not inconsistent with the Constitution
Act, 1982 ?  Given
my answer to question 1, it is unnecessary that I answer this question.  3.Do
ss. 16(8) and 17(5) of the Divorce Act, 1985, violate the guarantees to
equality set out in s. 15  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ?                     No.  4.If
the answer to question 3 is affirmative, are ss. 16(8) and 17(5) of the Divorce
Act, 1985, justified as reasonable limits by s. 1  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and therefore not inconsistent with the Constitution
Act, 1982 ?  Given
my answer to question 3, it is unnecessary that I answer this question.                      Appeal allowed in
part, L'Heureux-Dubé J. dissenting in the
result.  Sections 16(8)  and 17(5)  of the Divorce Act , 1985 did not violate ss.
2 (a), (b), (d) or 15(1)  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  MacLean, Nicol & Wong, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
respondent James K. C. Young:  W. Glen How &
Associates, Halton Hills (Georgetown), Ontario.                     Solicitors for the
respondent W. Glen How:  Douglas, Symes and Brissenden,
Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
respondent Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of
Canada:  W. Glen How & Associates, Halton Hills
(Georgetown), Ontario.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Canada:  The Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General for Ontario:  The  Attorney General
for Ontario, Toronto.                      Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Manitoba:  The Attorney General of
Manitoba, Winnipeg.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia: The Attorney General
of British Columbia, Victoria.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Law Society of British Columbia:  Blake, Cassels & Graydon,
Vancouver.       * See Erratum [1995] 1 S.C.R. iv  