Gilles E. Néron Communication Marketing Inc. v. Chambre
des notaires du Québec, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 95, 2004 SCC 53  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation                                                               Appellant  v.  Gilles E.
Néron Communication Marketing Inc. and Gilles E. Néron                                                                                            Respondents  and  Chambre des notaires du Québec                                                                  Intervener  Indexed as:  Gilles E.
Néron Communication Marketing Inc. v. Chambre des notaires du Québec  Neutral citation:  2004 SCC 53.  File No.:  29519.  2004:  February 18; 2004:  July 29.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Iacobucci, Major,
Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel and Deschamps JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec  Civil liability — Defamation — Television network —
Public affairs program citing only erroneous portions of letter sent by
communications consultant to director of program to request right of reply —
Contents of letter presented in incomplete and misleading manner — Whether
broadcast legitimate given the public’s right to be informed and freedom of
expression — Whether broadcast fell short of professional standards of
reasonable journalist — Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64,
art. 1457.  Civil liability — Defamation — Damages — Television
network held liable in defamation solidarily with professional order — Damages
difficult to divide between parties — Whether trial judge erred in imposing
solidary liability — Whether liability in solidum should be ordered.   Held (Binnie J.
dissenting):  The appeal should be dismissed.  Per McLachlin C.J.
and Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache, LeBel and Deschamps JJ.:  Freedom of
expression, and its corollary, freedom of the press, play an essential and
invaluable role in our society.  These fundamental freedoms are protected by
s. 3 of the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms and
s. 2 (b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
However, freedom of expression is not absolute and can be limited by the
requirements imposed by other people’s right to the protection of their
reputation.  This right also receives protection under s. 4 of the Quebec Charter
and under art. 3 C.C.Q. In an action in defamation, the two fundamental
values of freedom of expression and the right to reputation must be weighed
against each other to find the necessary equilibrium.   In holding the CBC liable for defamation, the Superior
Court and the Court of Appeal achieved the correct balance between freedom of
expression and N’s right to respect for his reputation.  Even though N’s
handwritten letter cannot be considered private, in focussing only on the two
errors in that letter, the second broadcast was misleading, giving the
impression that the substance of N’s letter was limited to these two erroneous
statements.  The letter discussed other concerns relating to the image of
notaries created by the broadcast.  A person viewing the report in question
would not be aware of these other concerns.  Nor would the viewer be aware,
from the structure of the report, that the letter was really just a request for
a meeting and a right of reply. By leaving out vital pieces of information the
CBC misrepresented N’s letter as a disingenuous attempt to mislead the CBC, and
thereby the public.  Moreover, the CBC intentionally and deliberately broadcast
the errors in the letter before N could attempt to set things straight.  The
tone and tilt of the second broadcast pointed to its being more of a response
to N’s criticism than an exercise in protecting the public interest. Lastly,
the CBC’s own ombudsman found one of N’s complaints to be quite serious and
considered the second broadcast to have the appearance of a settling of
accounts. This is highly detrimental to the CBC’s case.  The Ombudsman also
openly implied that the journalists did not live up to proper journalistic
standards, given the selective use of certain portions of the letter.  These
factors lead to the conclusion that the CBC intentionally defamed N and did so
in a manner that fell below the professional standards of a reasonable
journalist.  By not respecting professional standards in this case, and given
all the other surrounding circumstances, the CBC was at fault.  An order for liability in solidum is
appropriate.  The damages were of a global nature and it would be difficult, in
practical terms, to divide the object of the global debt.  Moreover, the trial
judge is to be afforded significant deference in respect of his finding that
the damages could not be easily divided.  There has been little evidence
adduced to explain how the damages could be apportioned between the CBC and CNQ
in a just fashion.  As such, this is the kind of case where the liability of
the parties should be in solidum.  Per Binnie J.
(dissenting):  A legal rule that awards $673,153 in damages to N and his
corporation on the basis of a broadcast which stated true facts, the
publication of which was undoubtedly in the public interest, just because other
lesser matters might also have been mentioned but were not, or further context
might have been provided but was not, is inconsistent with s. 3 of the
Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms including the public’s right
to have access to true and accurate information about matters of legitimate
interest and concern. In this case, despite the journalists’ boorish refusal to
meet promptly with N and the poor quality of presentation evident in the second
broadcast, civil fault should not be attributed to the CBC when all the
relevant public interest issues are taken into account.  The first broadcast relied in part on two
complainants, T and L, who agreed to be interviewed on the air.  On learning
about the broadcast, the CNQ (without checking its facts) leapt to the attack,
alleging (erroneously) that L had lied about his complaint because the CNQ had
in fact reimbursed him for a loss suffered at the hands of one of its members,
and that T’s brother was the leader of a bizarre and violent cult.  It was
appropriate to bring these allegations to the attention of viewers, together
with the journalists’ response.  First, while the second broadcast ought to have
presented N’s letter in a more complete and balanced fashion, the lack of
balance did not subvert the truth of the real matter of interest to the public,
namely the truth of the CNQ’s allegations pertaining to the complainants. 
Second, although N ought to have been given time to verify the errors in the
letter, the allegations against the complainants were demonstrably false
whether or not N took the opportunity to verify them.  Had N publicly
acknowledged the falsity of the allegations, it would simply have added to the
impression that the CNQ had responded impetuously to the original broadcast with
a misinformed attack on the complainants, for which it should justly be called
to account.  Furthermore, it would not have improved N’s reputation for the CBC
to report that he wanted time to find out about the truth of the CNQ’s
allegations only after they were made.  Third, the CBC was entitled to consider
the information it had received to be public.  There was no indication in N’s
letter to the contrary. Fourth, the criticism of some aspects of the second
broadcast by the CBC’s ombudsman cannot be equated with a finding of civil
fault.  He was not concerned with balancing the values of a free press and the
respect for reputation.  Had the other points made in N’s letter been broadcast
they would not have pulled the sting, or served the public interest in any
substantial way, or for that matter, have helped to save N’s reputation.  Cases Cited  By LeBel J.   By Binnie J. (dissenting)   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, s. 2 (b).   Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64, preliminary provision, arts. 3, 35,
36, 1457, 1478, 1525, 1619, 2125.   Authors Cited   Pineau, Jean, Danielle Burman et
Serge Gaudet.  Théorie des obligations, 4e éd. par Jean
Pineau et Serge Gaudet.  Montréal:  Thémis, 2001.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[2002] R.J.Q. 2639 (sub nom. Société Radio-Canada v. Gilles E. Néron
Communication Marketing Inc.), [2002] Q.J. No. 4727 (QL) reversing in part
a decision of the Superior Court, [2000] R.J.Q. 1787, [2000] Q.J. No. 2011
(QL).  Appeal dismissed, Binnie J. dissenting. Sylvie Gadoury and Judith
Harvie, for the appellant.  Jacques Jeansonne and Alberto
Martinez, for the respondents.  Michel Jetté, for the
intervener.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and Iacobucci, Major,
Bastarache, LeBel and Deschamps JJ. was delivered by  LeBel J. —  I.       Introduction  1                                  
This is an appeal from a majority judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal
dismissing the appeal of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (“CBC”) from the
decision of Tellier J. at trial.  Tellier J. found the CBC liable in
defamation, solidarily with the Chambre des notaires du Québec (“CNQ”),
for damages stemming from a program aired on January 12, 1995 on the CBC’s
French language television network.  The CNQ is not a party to this appeal.  I
dismiss the CBC’s appeal for the reasons that follow.  II.      Background  2                                  
In the months preceding January 12, 1995 (the date of the relevant
broadcast), it appears that the CNQ was having difficulty managing certain
disciplinary complaints and claims for compensation brought by the public.  At
the same time, starting in September 1994, the broadcasting team of the
CBC’s Le Point news program undertook to produce a series of programs
aimed at examining whether Quebec professional orders like the CNQ adequately
protect the interests of the public.  On December 15, 1994, the CBC aired a
report on delays at the CNQ in dealing with disciplinary complaints against
notaries and compensation claims made to the CNQ’s Indemnity Fund.  A
journalist from Le Point named Ms. Johanne Faucher interviewed two
particularly disgruntled complainants, Mr. Yvon Thériault and
Mr. Richard Lacroix.  3                                  
It was at this point that the respondent Gilles E. Néron came into the
picture.  Mr. Néron is the founder of the respondent company Gilles E. Néron
Communication Marketing Inc. (“GEN Communication”).  Through his company, he
acted as a communications consultant for public institutions, including the CNQ. 
On December 16, 1994, the CNQ set out immediately to counter the negative
effects of the CBC broadcast.  It was in this context that Mr. Néron drafted
the following handwritten letter, on December 18, 1994, to request a meeting
with Ms. Kateri Lescop, director of Le Point.  In it, he
lamented the prejudicial effect that the December 15th broadcast had on the
CNQ, and points out certain errors.  At this point, it would be useful to quote
the handwritten letter in full:  [translation]  Kateri Lescop Director Le Point — CBC  Dear Ms. Lescop:  We met at the opening of the CNQ convention in
Quebec City.  I also helped make it possible for the CNQ, its president, Louise
Bélanger, and its syndic, Mr. Mercier, to provide you with assistance in
preparing your report on professional corporations.  I work with the CNQ as an
adviser.  I therefore watched last Thursday’s report on Le Point with interest.  I was unable to reach you Friday and would like to meet
with you as soon as possible.  I invite you to read the news release and letter
that I forwarded to Claude Langlois at the Journal de Montréal.  Personally, I found your report to be accurate for
the most part.  You referred to two cases, most regrettable ones at
that, and gave two CNQ representatives the opportunity to comment.  However, I must take issue with the following:  1-  The introduction, which was run repeatedly
(the night before on Le Point, on the 10 o’clock news, that morning in the
Journal de Montréal and again at the beginning of the report), led viewers to
believe that notaries are not to be trusted and that the CNQ does not
protect the public well.  2-  Your conclusion that “Mr. Lacroix is considering
writing to the Minister to ask him to put the CNQ under trusteeship”
gave some people the impression that the chairman of the Office [des
professions] was going to make this request, while others were left thinking
that Le Point’s reporters came to this conclusion after their investigation.  3-  In the report, the death threats made against
the president are referred to as nonsense.  Mr. Thériault is presented
as a person who would be justified in making such threats.  You failed to
mention that he is the brother of the Thériault who was the Pope of the
Infinite Love cult and who cut off his spouse’s arm.  4-  You also failed to mention in the report that
Mr. Lacroix was reimbursed by the CNQ for the money he lost.  5-  I also have difficulty understanding the
reference to notary Potiron, the fusty old man.  I found this allusion
inappropriate.  The notarial profession has a 128-year history of faithful
service in Quebec.  There are many young notaries.  They are excellent, dynamic
and innovative legal professionals.  In recent years, more than 70% of all newly
admitted notaries have been women.  All notaries, women and men, have been affected by
your report.  When you work hard and conscientiously for your clients, it is
difficult to hear someone call you a thief and irresponsible.  There are people in any profession or situation who
will take advantage of others, but the supervision and monitoring system
established by the CNQ works.  As Ms. Bélanger and Mr. Mercier explained
to you, the notarial profession is, by its very nature and by the training
required, a very demanding one, and this ensures a very high degree of
integrity.  However, if in an exceptional case a notary takes a chance,
he or she will always be caught very quickly.  It is the subsequent process relating to justice
and human rights that takes time.  Today, some notaries are rebuking the president for
co-operating with you, but she did so in good faith, and also because it is her
responsibility.  When things like this take place, rationality does not always
prevail.  Le Point is an important program that influences
many people.  There are things that must be put in perspective, and I would
like to discuss them with you and Mr. Lépine if you see fit to do so.  The president, Ms. Bélanger, also hopes to have
an opportunity very soon to make a comment in an upcoming broadcast of Le
Point.  Ms. Lescop, for over 20 years my name has, by
choice, been linked with ethics.  I can attest that the last things
notaries can, as a group, be accused of are failings at the level of rigour or
of ethics.  I look forward to meeting with you in the
next few days.  Yours sincerely,  (Signed) Gilles E. Néron, President  (Underlining
in original.)  4                                  
Mr. Néron personally delivered this letter to the CBC’s offices.  The
following day, Monday, December 19th, a change of strategy occurred at the
CNQ.  A decision was made internally no longer to seek a right of reply. 
However, Mr. Néron’s letter was already in the CBC’s hands. 
Mr. Néron continued to attempt to contact Ms. Lescop between
December 22, 1994 and January 6, 1995, leaving a few telephone messages
for her.  Although the CNQ had decided that it would no longer seek a right of
reply, Mr. Néron still had a mandate from the CNQ to meet with Ms. Lescop
and attempt to repair the negative image of notaries resulting from the
December 15th broadcast.  Ms. Lescop did not return any of Mr. Néron’s calls. 
On January 4th, however, the journalist Ms. Johanne Faucher contacted the CNQ’s
internal communications adviser (Mr. Antonin Fortin) at the CNQ.  In keeping
with the CNQ’s decision, Mr. Fortin refused Ms. Faucher’s offer of a follow-up
interview.  Ms. Faucher questioned the internal communications adviser
about the content of Mr. Néron’s letter to Ms. Lescop, to which he replied
that the letter was a personal initiative of Mr. Néron’s.  5                                  
In the afternoon of January 10, 1995, Ms. Faucher contacted Mr. Néron,
who reiterated that the CNQ no longer sought a right of reply.  He added that
the December 18, 1994 letter was nothing more than a request for a right of
reply.  The letter was addressed to Ms. Lescop personally and was not meant for
publication [translation] “or to
be communicated in any form whatsoever”.  Ms. Faucher pointed out two
errors in the letter.  She informed Mr. Néron that Mr. Thériault was
not the brother of the infamous Roch Thériault (alias Moses) and that Mr.
Lacroix had not yet been compensated by the CNQ.  Mr. Néron’s response was that
he was going to verify this information, which he had received from the CNQ,
and that he would “get back to her no later than the upcoming Friday[, January
13, 1995] at the end of the day”.  6                                  
Late in the afternoon of Thursday, January 12, 1995, Mr. Néron learned
that the letter was the subject of a report to be aired that same night.  This
was a day before Mr. Néron’s requested time was to expire.  7                                  
The report that night was crafted as a response to Mr. Néron’s letter of
December 18th.  First, significant portions of the December 15th broadcast
were reproduced, in particular those parts relating to Mr. Thériault and Mr.
Lacroix.  The journalist then quoted the erroneous portions of the letter
relating to Mr. Thériault and Mr. Lacroix.  Since the content of the January
12th report is so relevant to the outcome of this appeal, I shall reproduce the
same extracts that the trial judge chose to quote at pp. 1797-98 of his
reasons.  The segment was entitled Mise au Point:  [translation]  Achille Michaud  The CNQ was shocked and shaken by the report. It
even refused to comment on it.  However, one of its communications advisers
wrote to us, accusing us of having made several errors.  Tonight, we will respond to this criticism.  .
. .  Johanne Faucher  The testimony of two individuals who have filed complaints with the CNQ
revealed the following:  — the CNQ is slow to take action against notaries who are guilty of
fraud;  — their investigations are unduly long; and  — these delays cause serious harm to the victims of fraud.  .
. .  Johanne Faucher  The CNQ’s slowness to take action left him so
distraught that he eventually made threats against its president.  A bodyguard keeps watch at the entrance to the CNQ’s offices.  The
president has received death threats.  Yvon Thériault  I scared them, but I told them.  I don’t mind spending the rest
of my life in jail, and it’s not certain that I won’t be spending time in
prison.  I’m going to break windows.  I’m going to make noise.  I’m going to
raise a ruckus.  I’m not going to leave them alone, in other words.  I’m not a
murderer; I won’t kill anyone.  I told them I wouldn’t kill anybody.  They
were the ones who thought I wanted to kill somebody.  I basically let them
think that.  But I would have broken things.  I would have made noise,
that’s for sure.  I would have raised hell to get my case to the top of the
pile, because they told me that the president had just gotten back from
vacation and that she had 200 cases.  .
. .  Johanne Faucher  The CNQ didn’t like our report one bit; it, and in particular its
communications adviser, Gilles E. Néron, accuses us of having
tarnished the reputation of all of Quebec’s notaries.  In his criticism of
our report, Mr. Néron made a number of erroneous statements, and we would
like to set the record straight.  Mr. Thériault is presented as a person who would be justified in
making such threats.  You failed to mention that he is the brother of the
Thériault who was the Pope of the Infinite Love cult and who cut off his
spouse’s arm.  [Excerpt from Mr. Néron’s letter]  Mr. Thériault, are you the brother of Rock Thériault, also known as
Moses?  Yvon Thériault  Absolutely not.  I’m not his brother and I’m not a relative of his either, not a close
or distant relative.  If you need proof, here’s my birth certificate, which is
from New Brunswick: Drummond, New Brunswick, the son of René Thériault.  I even obtained a copy of Rock Thériault’s baptismal certificate, which
doesn’t come from New Brunswick but from the parish of the Cathedral in
Chicoutimi.  Rock Thériault was born in Rivière du Moulin, near Chicoutimi. 
When he was young, his family moved to Abitibi and then moved to Thetford Mines
not long after that.  I found out that the CNQ was spreading totally unverified
information like this and I would suggest that they check their facts. 
It’s easy to get someone’s birth certificate.  I was able to do it myself.  . . .  Johanne Faucher  In his criticism, the CNQ’s adviser claims that we did not
tell the whole truth.  You also failed to mention in the report that Mr. Lacroix was
reimbursed by the CNQ for the money he lost.  [Excerpt from
Mr. Néron’s letter]  In an affidavit, R. Lacroix confirms that he has never received a
single penny in compensation from the CNQ.  In fact, the CNQ has not yet
decided if it will investigate Claude Laurier’s case. [Emphasis added by
Tellier J.]  8                                  
The effect of the January 12th broadcast was felt immediately at the
CNQ, most particularly by Mr. Néron.  A rash of letters were received from
notaries who, after seeing the broadcast, expressed indignation and dismay
about the communication policies of the CNQ.  Nobody from the CNQ contacted Mr.
Néron the next day, but a communiqué signed by its president was circulated to
all notaries and professional corporations, the Interprofessional Council, the
media, the Office des professions and the Minister of Justice.  The CNQ
asserted that Mr. Néron had sent his letter on his own, without its
authorization:   [translation]  On
January 12, 1995, Le Point (CBC) quoted two specific passages
from a letter written by Gilles E. Néron, an outside communications
consultant, to the program’s director in response to a report that had aired on
December 15, 1994, concerning the Ordre professionnel’s mission to
protect the public.  We would like to state that Mr. Néron sent this letter on his own
initiative, without instructions from or the prior authorization or consent of
the Chambre des notaires du Québec.  Louise
Bélanger, President   9                                  
Not long thereafter, on January 19, 1995 to be precise, at a meeting of
the CNQ’s Administrative Committee, it was decided that the CNQ would
immediately terminate contractual relations with Mr. Néron and his company. 
Mr. Néron received a letter of termination from the president that same
day.  10                              
On January 24, 1995, another communiqué was signed by the president and
sent to all notaries and professional corporations, the media, the
Interprofessional Council, the Office des professions and the Minister of
Justice.  This communiqué made it known that the CNQ had terminated its
business relationship with Mr. Néron and his company.  The final two paragraphs
of this communiqué read as follows:  [translation] 
Furthermore, the Chambre des notaires will be meeting soon with the Le Point
team to correct the negative perceptions conveyed on two occasions in these
programs and to explore the possibility of airing a new report that would more
accurately reflect the professionalism and integrity of notaries and of the
Ordre.  Also, the Chambre des notaires has ceased all business relations with
the communications firm Gilles E. Néron, Communication marketing inc.  It would be
six months before Mr. Néron learned of the wide distribution of this memo.  The
effect on him would be devastating.  11                              
On May 18, 1995, Mr. Néron lodged a complaint with the Conseil de presse
du Québec against Ms. Lescop and Ms. Faucher, and he later included
Jean Pelletier as editor-in-chief.  A similar complaint was filed with the
CBC’s ombudsman.  The Conseil de presse decided to abandon its investigation
into Mr. Néron’s complaints on December 18, 1996, stating that the
affair was sub judice.  On July 12, 1995, the CBC’s ombudsman,
Mr. Mario Cardinal, rendered a decision concerning Mr. Néron’s
complaints.  He dismissed four of the grievances, but acknowledged that one of
them was well founded:  [translation]  You also
accuse them of referring to two errors you allegedly made in your letter in
order to make a story out of them.  This part of your complaint is valid.  Le
Point decided to air a program entitled Mise au point, which it even
described as a response to your criticism.  Such a broadcast, like any news
broadcast, must be subject to the journalistic principles of accuracy,
integrity and fairness.  The January 12 broadcast seriously compromised
the principle of fairness by failing to mention the five grievances that are
central to your letter and only reporting on the two errors.  The host did say
at the beginning of the program, “One of its [the CNQ’s] communications
advisers wrote to us, accusing us of having made several errors.  Tonight, we
will respond to this criticism”.  It might have been expected that the
“errors” you accused them of making would be looked at one by one in the
program and that the point of view you expressed would be reflected
impartially, thereby treating your criticism fairly and with dignity.  This was
not the case.  In my view, making a complaint is the same as expressing an
opinion.  Therefore, when a complaint is discussed on air, the person making
the complaint should be accorded the same rights and respect as any other
person interviewed for a program, and the excerpts from the complaint that are
actually broadcast must be selected, similarly to how an interview is edited,
so as to represent the essence of the complaint, without distortion.  Instead, they chose to discuss only the two errors in your letter. 
This gave the program the appearance of a settling of accounts, something that
has no place at the CBC. . . . [Emphasis in original.]  12                              
On January 11, 1996, GEN Communication and Gilles E. Néron in his
personal capacity initiated a claim for damages against the CBC, the CBC’s
ombudsman, and the CNQ in the amounts of $1,650,000 for the company and
$4,285,608 for Mr. Néron.  The claims against the Ombudsman and the CNQ are not
before this Court.  The claim against the CBC is essentially one of
extra-contractual liability under art. 1457 of the Civil Code of Québec,
S.Q. 1991, c. 64 (“C.C.Q.”).  III.   Decisions of the Courts Below  A.    Superior Court, [2000] R.J.Q. 1787  13                              
On June 20, 2000, Tellier J. rendered judgment. He found the CBC and the
CNQ liable and ordered them to pay damages to the plaintiffs Néron and GEN
Communication.  14                              
The case against the CBC was grounded in art. 1457 C.C.Q.  Mr. Néron
and his company asserted that the CBC had defamed them in the preparation and
in the content of a public information program.  Only the content of the
January 12th broadcast was called into question.  Tellier J. found that the
journalists were subject to an obligation of means (Société Radio-Canada v.
Radio Sept-Îles Inc., [1994] R.J.Q. 1811 (C.A.)).  According to the
judge, the use in the broadcast of Mr. Néron’s handwritten letter of
December 18, 1994 was problematic.  The letter was an attempt to arrange a
meeting and set things straight.  The trial judge found that the letter was not
a formal response to the December broadcast, but a set of specific concerns the
CNQ had, which were listed with a view to obtaining a meeting to further
discuss the matter.  15                              
The trial judge rejected the journalists’ contention that the letter was
an official document of the CNQ.  It was a handwritten letter with Mr. Néron’s
letterhead and should be considered a “private letter”.  The journalists should
have sought the author’s permission before going public with the letter, which
they did not do.  16                              
The trial judge conceded that the letter contained two errors.  Le
Point’s journalists were perfectly aware of this and let Mr. Néron
know they were on January 10, 1995, two days before the broadcast.  In
response, Mr. Néron requested three days to verify the information. 
Nevertheless, the erroneous portions of the letter were broadcast only two days
later.  This, said the trial judge, had the effect of denying Mr. Néron the opportunity
to correct his mistakes.   18                              
Tellier J.’s first step, before assessing damages, was to affirm his
reprobation of the acts committed by the defendants CBC and CNQ.  This he saw
as necessary and proper in circumstances like these where the fundamental
rights of a person have been violated.   [translation] 
Since December 1994, Néron has lost all credibility in his field.  His biggest
client wrongfully repudiated him and made sure everyone knew about it.  For its
part, the CBC aired its second report, disclosing a letter without first
obtaining the author’s authorization, and committed other wrongful acts against
him.  The combined effect of these two events was to put an abrupt end to his
career as a communications adviser with no hope of resuming it.  20                              
Tellier J. awarded Mr. Néron, in his personal capacity, $475,000 for
loss of salary and other pecuniary benefits.  The judge awarded moral damages
in the amount of $300,000, based on his finding that the same elements were in
play in this case as in Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995]
2 S.C.R. 1130.  The judge then considered jurisprudence indicating that a party
can request the payment of extrajudicial fees if they have resulted from the
adverse party’s bad faith.  The judge awarded $246,311.54 in this respect for
the legal fees of lawyers past and present, the costs of expert evidence, and
the time that Mr. Néron spent personally preparing his case.  Having concluded
that the fault of the CBC and its journalists was intentional, the learned
judge granted a further $50,000 in exemplary damages, to be divided equally
between Mr. Néron and  his company GEN Communication.  Finally, the trial judge
dismissed Mr. Néron’s claims in respect of his personal debt and the loss of
his RRSP.  Tellier J. considered that both these items were covered by the
award for lost salary.  In total, Mr. Néron was personally granted damages in
the order of $1,039,207.  With the exception of the exemplary damages, the
judge decided that the liability was solidary and that the damages (other than
exemplary), with interest and an additional indemnity (art. 1619 C.C.Q.), were
to be split equally (50-50) between the CBC and its journalists on the one hand
and the CNQ on the other.  21                              
The pecuniary losses of GEN Communication were set at $200,000 for loss
of sales and $25,000 for defamation, and $50,000 was awarded in exemplary
damages.  Here again, with the exception of the exemplary damages, the learned
judge determined that the liability was solidary and, consequently, that the
sum of $225,000, with interest and an additional indemnity (art. 1619 C.C.Q.),
was to be shared equally between the CBC and its journalists on the one hand,
and the CNQ on the other.  22                              
Finally, Tellier J. ordered provisional execution for payment in full of
the exemplary damages, lawyer’s fees and personal preparation costs (art. 547
of the Code of Civil Procedure, R.S.Q., c. C-25).  As concerns the rest
of the damage award, the provisional execution order was set at 50 percent of
the amount.  The Quebec Court of Appeal would later reduce the amount of this
provisional execution order to $200,000 while the matter was before that court.  23                              
The trial judge dealt with several other legal issues that are no longer
relevant to the outcome of this appeal.  He rejected Mr. Néron’s claim against
the CBC’s ombudsman for having rebroadcast the content of the Mise au Point segment
without his authorization, based on the absence of causation and on the absence
of intention on the Ombudsman’s part.  The judge dismissed Mr. Thériault’s
action against Néron and GEN Communication, stating that any damage to Mr.
Thériault’s reputation caused by the broadcast of the content of the letter was
the responsibility of the CBC and of Mr. Thériault himself.  As for the
actions in warranty, the judge ordered the CBC and the Commerce Group to pay
the costs of the actions in warranty against each of them, and also ordered the
Commerce Group to pay $82,103 to Gilles E. Néron with interest and an
additional indemnity starting from the time of the summons.  24                              
Néron and GEN Communication’s action against the CNQ is of greater
relevance to this appeal because the trial judge held the CNQ and the CBC to be
solidarily liable, on a 50-50 basis, for all the above-mentioned damages, with
the exception of the exemplary damages.  The trial judge found that the CNQ was
liable in contract to Néron and his company.  Under art. 2125 C.C.Q., the CNQ
had the right to unilaterally end its contractual relations with Néron and GEN
Communication.  However, the means used to do so were indicative of bad faith
on the CNQ’s part.  The trial judge concluded that the CNQ had put an end to
the contract for false reasons, which the CNQ intentionally circulated to a broad
public.  By doing so, it caused damage to Mr. Néron and his company.  B.   Quebec Court of Appeal, [2002] R.J.Q.
2639  25                           
The CBC (including its journalists and the Ombudsman), the CNQ and
Mr. Thériault all appealed.  Gilles E. Néron and GEN Communication
cross-appealed against the CBC and the CNQ, seeking a revision of Tellier J.’s
decision not to include in his damage calculations Mr. Néron’s RRSP loss of
$440,901 and personal debt of $48,500.  Mr. Néron and GEN Communication also
sought to vary the judgment below with respect to the liability of the
Ombudsman and damages stemming from his actions, which were claimed to be in
the order of $75,000 for damage to reputation and $200,000 ($100,000 H 2) in exemplary damages.  Mr. Néron and
GEN Communication further sought authorization to amend their claim for
exemplary damages against the CBC by raising it to $500,000 for each appellant,
or $1,000,000 in total, based on Hill, supra, and Whiten v.
Pilot Insurance Co., [2002] 1 S.C.R. 595, 2002 SCC 18.  (1)     Majority Judgment of Mailhot and Fish
JJ.A.  (a)     Mailhot J.A.  26                           
Dealing with the appeal of the CBC and its journalists, Mailhot J.A.
considered the trial judge’s ruling that Mr. Néron’s handwritten letter was a
private letter to be wrong.  The letter could not be considered private, as it
was addressed to a media organization with a clear public role, and to a person
who was the director of a television program.  Without some contrary indication,
it would be difficult to conclude that the letter was private.  Mailhot J.A.
noted that this Court had held in Canadian Broadcasting Corp. v. Lessard,
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 421, that a media outlet that receives information can presume
that it has consent to broadcast it, absent any indications to the contrary. 
Here, the letter was written by someone with a mandate from the CNQ, which
points to its being more public in nature.  Furthermore, Mr. Néron’s
actions indicated that he understood that the content of the letter could be
broadcast once he had had time to verify the purported errors.  It could not be
said that it was a private letter.  27                           
Mailhot J.A. found, however, that Mr. Néron had clearly not given his
consent to the publication of the letter and had indeed asked that the letter
not be aired before he had had time to verify the two errors.  Clearly the
object of the letter was to arrange a meeting.  For these reasons, the CBC had
an obligation to at least afford Mr. Néron the time he had requested
before broadcasting the content of the letter.  Mailhot J.A. agreed with the
trial judge that the CBC’s actions looked more like a settling of accounts. 
The CBC knew that the information in the letter about Mr. Thériault and
Mr. Lacroix was false but chose to point the errors out on television even
though it knew that Mr. Néron was taking the time to look into them. 
Mailhot J.A. quoted with approval, at para. 73, the following passage from
the reasons of the learned trial judge:  [translation]  Similarly,
the evidence shows that on January 10, 1995, Faucher contacted  Néron
to tell him that the letter of December 18 contained two inaccurate
statements.  Faucher acknowledges that Néron’s reaction was one of surprise and
that he asked her for a few days to check the accuracy of his statements. 
Néron says that he asked her for three days.  This conversation took place on
January 10, and the program aired on January 12, before Néron was
even able to get back to her with his version.  Thus, the following question must be asked: Why was there such a rush
to air the second report, which contained information known to be false,
without giving Néron the opportunity to check and correct the statements that
turned out to be inaccurate?  Can it not be assumed that, if Néron had been
able to give his side of the story and correct the inaccuracies, the content of
the report would have been different?  This haste is attributable not only to
the journalist, but to the entire team.  Pelletier, the editor-in-chief, admitted to the Court that he was aware
of the telephone conversation that took place between Faucher and Néron on
January 10, 1995.  He knew that Néron had asked for a short period of time
to check the information himself.  He knew that the Chambre [des notaires] had
refused to comment on the letter and, consequently, on its content.  The team
nevertheless decided to broadcast the report anyway, which leads one to believe
that the decision was deliberate and intentional.   28                           
Mailhot J.A. also agreed with the trial judge that the content of the
letter was portrayed in a misleading and incomplete fashion.  Instead of an
accurate synopsis of the content of the letter, Le Point’s
journalists engaged in a [translation]
“wrongful pruning”, selectively choosing to highlight only the two errors, and
not Mr. Néron’s other concerns.  Mailhot J.A. agreed with the trial judge
that Le Point’s journalists took the letter as a criticism of their work
[translation] “and that they had
to show the person who wrote it that you do not attack journalists like that”
(para. 81), even if the letter’s sole purpose was to arrange a meeting.  The
apparent purpose of the first broadcast was to look into whether professional
bodies like the CNQ were fulfilling their mandate to the public.  In the
opinion of Mailhot J.A., however, the second broadcast no longer had this as
its purpose, but was instead a response to Mr. Néron’s criticism of their
work.  This was evidenced by the fact that in the report Le Point used
language such as “the CNQ accuses us” (para. 74 (italics in original)),
even though the CNQ had already disassociated itself from the content of the
letter.  29                           
Mailhot J.A. found further evidence that Le Point was more
interested in responding to this criticism than protecting the public interest
in the following excerpt from a letter written by the editor-in-chief, Mr.
Pelletier, to the Conseil de presse du Québec (at para. 75):  [translation]  The
lawsuit that public relations specialist Gilles E. Néron has brought against us
results from his decision to send us, on December 18, 1994, a letter
critical of our December 15, 1994 report on his client, the Chambre
des notaires du Québec.  This letter, of which he sent a copy to the Chambre des notaires du
Québec on the same day he sent it to us, contained very serious accusations
levelled not only against Le Point, but also against citizens who had for some
time been accusing the Chambre of treating them unfairly and who were
interviewed as part of our December 15 report on the CNQ.  30                           
Mailhot J.A. went on to note that, although it was true that Mr. Lacroix
had not been reimbursed by the CNQ, he had been at least partially reimbursed
by a third party.  This attenuated somewhat the gravity of the error with
respect to Mr. Lacroix.  She did agree that circulating the unverified rumour
that Mr. Thériault was the brother of Roch Thériault could justifiably be
considered reprehensible by the journalist, if it was done intentionally. 
Mailhot J.A. went on to rule that even if it could be said that the CBC had an
obligation to inform the public that the CNQ was circulating false information
and had a negative attitude towards the people it was supposed to protect, the
CBC first had to ensure that the false information was in fact endorsed by the
professional order.  It is also important to transmit all the information to
the public, that is to say, the content of the letter as a whole.  It was not
sufficient to simply verify that Mr. Néron had a general mandate from the CNQ
at the time the letter was written, especially since Le Point’s
journalists knew about the rumours as far back as November 1994, when they were
preparing for the first broadcast.  31                           
In short, Mailhot J.A. agreed with the trial judge that Le Point’s
journalists had entrapped Mr. Néron and used him to get back at the CNQ.  She
stated the following at para. 82:  [translation]  There is
no doubt that a news organization may publish information contained in a
communication when the information is of public interest.  However, if the
organization knows that the information is incorrect and that the sender of the
communication is unaware of the error and has even asked for a short period of
time to check it, if the organization rushes to release the information after
first subjecting it to a wrongful pruning, and if what appears on the screen
seems to attribute the letter to the author, then, in those circumstances, the
organization has maliciously abused its position.    Mailhot J.A.
referred to the decision of the Quebec Court of Appeal in Radio Sept-Îles,
supra, at p. 1818.  She adopted the definition of civil liability for
defamation established in that case and concluded that the trial judge had
correctly found fault in the case at bar.  32                           
Mailhot J.A. then turned to a consideration of damages.  She upheld the
trial judge’s award for pecuniary and moral damages.  The appeal judge did,
however, decide that the award for punitive damages was too low.  She raised
the amount owed by the CBC to Mr. Néron and his company to $100,000 each from
the $50,000 awarded by the trial judge and stated that the CBC’s liability for
this amount was not solidary.  Mailhot J.A. further clarified that it was the
CBC that was to be held liable, and not its employees in any direct sense.  33                           
Mailhot J.A. adopted the reasons of Fish J.A. (as he then was) who, as
shall be noted below, varied the trial judge’s decision to find the CNQ and the
CBC solidarily liable, ruling instead that the two were to be held liable in
solidum.  Based on a recent decision of the Quebec Court of Appeal in Viel
v. Entreprises immobilières du terroir ltée, [2002] R.J.Q. 1262, Mailhot
J.A. ruled that the trial judge’s award of extrajudicial fees should be set
aside.  She adopted the reasons of Fish J.A. on this point as well, with the
exception that she upheld the trial judge’s award of $8,153 for expert fees,
which she did not view as extrajudicial fees.  (b)     Fish J.A.  34                           
Fish J.A. found that the trial judge committed a palpable error in
concluding that the factors in this case were essentially the same as in Hill,
supra.  He reduced the trial judge’s award of moral damages to $150,000
from the $300,000 awarded at trial.  He also set aside entirely the moral damages
awarded by the trial judge to GEN Communication ($25,000).  He found that the
interposition of GEN Communication between the CNQ and Néron provided no legal
or logical justification for awarding GEN Communication any moral damages at
all.  Fish J.A. further reduced, for the same reason, the award of pecuniary
damages in favour of GEN Communication to $25,000 from $200,000.  35                           
Fish J.A. otherwise agreed with Mailhot J.A. that the CBC’s Mise au
Point segment was defamatory.  It damaged Mr. Néron’s reputation by
misrepresenting his letter to Ms. Lescop as a disingenuous attempt to mislead
the CBC and, through it, the public that is its audience.  Neither of the CBC’s
defences to this established defamation could stand.  Its claim that Mr. Néron
consented to the January 12th broadcast is contradicted by the evidence
that the letter was aimed at arranging a meeting with Ms. Lescop and by Mr.
Néron’s evidence that he had repeatedly stressed that the letter was not
intended for publication.  The CBC’s argument that the mere delivery of the
letter constituted consent flies in the face of these facts, and of the trial
judge’s finding that it was evident from both the form and content of the
letter that it was not meant for publication.  36                           
Fish J.A. then responded to the CBC’s second defence, namely that its
constitutionally enshrined freedom of expression and freedom of the press
obviated the need for consent.  Freedom of expression and freedom of the press
do not grant the right to broadcast or publish with impunity letters, telephone
calls, faxes and e-mail messages received by electronic or print media that are
not sent to them for broadcast or publication.  Such communications are
“private”, in the sense that the senders are entitled to expect that their
words will not, without their consent, be made public.  Nor can it be said that
freedom of expression and freedom of the press carry with them a licence to
defame.  In purporting to exercise these freedoms, no one may unjustifiably
damage another person’s reputation.  37                           
Finally, Fish J.A. dealt with the CBC’s argument that a publisher of
defamatory matter can escape condemnation by demonstrating that the impugned
publication was carried out in good faith and in the public interest.  He held
that such a defence cannot stand where, as here, the defamatory material was
published “in an incomplete, tendentious or unfair manner” (para. 259).  Fish
J.A. agreed with the trial judge, and the CBC’s ombudsman, that the broadcast
had the appearance of a settling of accounts.  “It certainly had that tilt,
tone and texture” (para. 264).  Moreover, he found no reason to disturb the
trial judge’s determination that the two errors in Néron’s letter were not
matters of public importance (see para. 272).  As such, Fish J.A. found that
the broadcast was not a legitimate exercise in freedom of expression, “but
rather an abuse by the CBC and its employees of their vast power to influence
public perception and to shape public opinion” (para. 272).  38                           
Fish J.A. found, as mentioned above, that the trial judge erred in
condemning the CNQ and the CBC solidarily.  The CBC’s fault was
extra-contractual and juridically independent of the contractual fault
attributed by the trial judge to the CNQ.  Solidarity between debtors exists,
as art. 1525 C.C.Q. makes clear, “only where it is expressly stipulated by the
parties or imposed by law”.  Fish J.A. concluded that neither condition was met
in the case at bar.  However, although the faults imputed to the CBC and the
CNQ are from different sources, they are factually related, reasonably
contemporaneous and cumulative in their impact on Mr. Néron and his company. 
It would be difficult, in these circumstances, to divide the global debt owed
to Mr. Néron by the CBC and the CNQ.  So Fish J.A. relied on this Court’s
decision in Prévost-Masson v. General Trust of Canada, [2001] 3 S.C.R.
882, 2001 SCC 87, and concluded that “[i]t seems preferable by far to hold them
responsible in solidum” (para. 281).  Then, based on the findings
of the trial judge he held them equally responsible as regards one another.  39                           
Fish J.A. agreed with Mailhot J.A. that this was not a case for an award
of extrajudicial fees, or solicitor-client costs, relying on the decision of
this Court in Aubry v. Éditions Vice-Versa inc., [1998] 1 S.C.R. 591. 
He further ruled that taking into account all the circumstances, especially the
very substantial and generous damages awarded by the trial judge under other
heads, he would reduce the award of punitive damages against the CBC and the
CNQ to $15,000 each, payable to Néron alone.  (2)     Minority Judgment of Otis J.A.  40                           
Otis J.A. agreed with Mailhot J.A.’s assessment of damages, with the
exception that she would have awarded solicitor-client costs against the CNQ. 
Otis J.A. concluded, though, that the CBC and its journalists were not at
fault with respect to Mr. Néron and GEN Communication.  She noted the trial
judge’s finding that [translation]
“[t]he two errors Néron may have unintentionally made originated with the CNQ,
which conveyed unfounded rumours” (para. 323).  She also focussed on the fact
that, in the months following the January 12th broadcast, the Office des
professions du Québec had intervened to demand that the CNQ institute a
remedial plan, and in the absence of this, threatened to place the CNQ under
administrative trusteeship in order to properly assure the protection of the
public.  The committee formed to address the problems at the CNQ produced a
report in November 1995.  The trial judge considered this report and noted: [translation] “This report is especially
critical of the president, the director general and the syndic’s office.  It recommends
a series of measures that are indicative of a deplorable internal situation”
(para. 326).  Moreover, at about the same time the president, director general
and syndic all offered to resign.  The two notaries mentioned in the broadcasts
were struck off the roll, one of them for life and the other for a period of
32 years.  In short, Otis J.A. chose to highlight the positive effects
that the January 12th broadcast may have had on protection of the public,
and on turning things around at the CNQ.  41                           
From a legal perspective, Otis J.A. ruled that the CBC had not committed
any fault.  The public’s right to information is embodied in freedom of
expression and freedom of the press.  She stated that such fundamental
liberties are essential to our democratic institutions.  They are the
foundation for the dissemination of ideas, opinion and knowledge, inspiring
critical thinking and ensuring that the moral and intellectual character of our
political and social stakeholders is put to the test.  42                           
Otis J.A. ruled that the December 18th letter could not receive privacy
protection under s. 5 of the Quebec Charter and arts. 35 and 36 C.C.Q. 
It could not be said that the information communicated was confidential, or
that the author of the information viewed it as essentially a private exchange.  43                           
Otis J.A. further held that the trial judge erred in denying the CBC the
right to  broadcast information that was true and in the public interest.  In
her opinion, this error stemmed from the trial judge’s earlier error of
characterizing the letter as a private letter.  It was in the public’s interest
to know that the CNQ was circulating false information about the complainants,
who were people the CNQ had a legal mission to protect.  The essence of the
January 12th report was not to tarnish the reputation of the CNQ’s agent, Mr.
Néron, but to alert public opinion.  44                           
Nor was it a civil fault that not all elements of the letter were
revealed.  The letter was not private, or protected by confidentiality.  Otis
J.A. then stated, at para. 356:  [translation] 
It would certainly have been desirable, in keeping with journalistic standards,
to cover all aspects of the letter in the report.  However, this lack of
fairness does not constitute civil fault.  Neither the nature nor the purpose
of the report would have changed in any way had the public known that the CNQ
was unhappy (1) that the December 15, 1994 broadcast of the
first report was repeatedly advertised in advance, (2) that viewers may have
been left with the impression that the chairman of the Office des professions
was going to ask that the CNQ be placed under trusteeship, or (3) that an
inappropriate reference had been made to the notary Potiron.  None
of these three minor points would have justified the January 12, 1995
update.  The complaint of the CNQ and Gilles E. Néron is that the CBC
did not allow them to retract their erroneous statements gracefully.  In fact,
the public interest made it imperative that this conduct be brought to light in
order to contribute to the CBC’s mission to keep the public informed. 
[Emphasis in original.]  For these
reasons, Otis J.A. concluded that the CBC was not at fault for the broadcast of
the December 18, 1994 letter.  C.    The Granting of Leave to Appeal to This
Court  45                           
On June 19, 2003, the CBC was granted leave to appeal to this Court. 
The CNQ chose not to appeal from the decision against it by the Quebec Court of
Appeal.  Consequently, the CNQ has already paid the sum of $783,153 in
compensatory damages and $100,000 in exemplary damages, plus interest and an
additional indemnity.  The CBC, given the condemnation in solidum, has
also paid the CNQ the portion of the damages imputed to it, as well as $15,000
in exemplary damages to Mr. Néron, all with interest and an additional
indemnity.  IV.    Relevant Legislative Provisions  46                           
Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64  3.      Every person is the holder of personality rights, such
as the right to life, the right to the inviolability and integrity of his
person, and the right to the respect of his name, reputation and privacy.  These rights are inalienable.  35.    Every person has a right to the respect of his reputation
and privacy.  No one may invade the privacy of a person without
the consent of the person or his heirs unless authorized by law.  36.    The following acts, in particular, may be considered as
invasions of the privacy of a person:  (1)  entering or taking anything in his dwelling;  (2)  intentionally intercepting or using his private
communications;  (3)  appropriating or using his image or voice while
he is in private premises;  (4)  keeping his private life under observation by
any means;  (5)  using his name, image, likeness or voice for a
purpose other than the legitimate information of the public;  (6) using his correspondence, manuscripts or other
personal documents.  1457.  Every person has a duty to abide by the rules of conduct
which lie upon him, according to the circumstances, usage or law, so as not to
cause injury to another.  Where he is endowed with reason and fails in this
duty, he is responsible for any injury he causes to another person by such
fault and is liable to reparation for the injury, whether it be bodily, moral
or material in nature.  He is also liable, in certain cases, to reparation
for injury caused to another by the act or fault of another person or by the
act of things in his custody.  1478.  Where an injury has been caused by several persons,
liability is shared by them in proportion to the seriousness of the fault of
each.  The victim is included in the apportionment when the
injury is partly the effect of his own fault.  1525.  Solidarity between debtors is not presumed; it exists
only where it is expressly stipulated by the parties or imposed by law.  Solidarity between debtors is presumed, however,
where an obligation is contracted for the service or carrying on of an
enterprise.  The carrying on by one or more persons of an
organized economic activity, whether or not it is commercial in nature,
consisting of producing, administering or alienating property, or providing a
service, constitutes the carrying on of an enterprise.  Charter of
Human Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q., c. C-12  3.      Every person is the possessor of the fundamental freedoms,
including freedom of conscience, freedom of religion, freedom of opinion,
freedom of expression, freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of association.  4.      Every person has a right to the safeguard of his
dignity, honour and reputation.  5.      Every person has a right to respect for his private
life.  Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  2.      Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms:  . . .  (b)  freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression,
including freedom of the press and other media of communication;  V.     Analysis A.     Statement of Issues and Positions of the
Parties  47                           
The legal issue is whether the CBC committed a fault giving rise to
civil liability.  The CBC argues that it is not at fault.  The broadcast of
January 12, 1995 was legitimate given the public’s right to be informed
and the right to freedom of expression with respect to issues of public
interest.  The trial judge was wrong in his characterization of the facts.  He
and the majority of the Quebec Court of Appeal further erred in holding the CNQ
and the CBC liable in solidum.  The respondents Néron and GEN
Communication, on the other hand, argue that the CBC committed a grave and
intentional fault, going so far as to indicate malice.  The finding of
liability in the courts below was justified.  The respondents are asking that
costs be awarded on a solicitor-client basis.  B.      The Importance of Freedom of the Press  48                           
It is beyond doubt that freedom of expression, and its corollary freedom
of the press, play an essential and invaluable role in our society.  These
fundamental freedoms are protected by s. 3 of the Quebec Charter and s.
2 (b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  In fact,
freedom of expression was protected even before the Quebec and Canadian Charters. 
Consider the following comment from McIntyre J. in RWDSU v. Dolphin Delivery
Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573, at p. 583:  Freedom of expression is not, however, a creature of the Charter.
It is one of the fundamental concepts that has formed the basis for the
historical development of the political, social and educational institutions of
western society. Representative democracy, as we know it today, which is in
great part the product of free expression and discussion of varying ideas,
depends upon its maintenance and protection.  49                           
The importance of freedom of expression and freedom of the press has
been affirmed by this Court on numerous other occasions.  Cory J. wrote in Edmonton
Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326, at p. 1336:  It is difficult to imagine a guaranteed right more
important to a democratic society than freedom of expression.  Indeed a
democracy cannot exist without that freedom to express new ideas and to put
forward opinions about the functioning of public institutions.  The concept of
free and uninhibited speech permeates all truly democratic societies and institutions. 
The vital importance of the concept cannot be over-emphasized.  No doubt that
was the reason why the framers of the Charter set forth s. 2 (b)
in absolute terms which distinguishes it, for example, from s. 8  of the Charter 
which guarantees the qualified right to be secure from unreasonable search.  It
seems that the rights enshrined in s. 2 (b) should therefore only be
restricted in the clearest of circumstances.  50                           
On the same note, Cory J. made the following comment in Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. v. New Brunswick (Attorney General), [1991] 3 S.C.R.
459, at p. 475:  The media have a vitally important role to play in a
democratic society.  It is the media that, by gathering and disseminating news,
enable members of our society to make an informed assessment of the issues
which may significantly affect their lives and well-being.  51                           
This Court spoke of the importance of freedom of expression quite
recently in Prud’homme v. Prud’homme, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 663, 2002 SCC 85. 
The Court’s comments in that case are of particular relevance to the case at
bar because the context was one of defamation.  At para. 38, L’Heureux-Dubé J.
and myself stated that:  . . . it is important to note that an action in
defamation involves two fundamental values: freedom of expression and the right
to reputation.  This Court has long recognized the importance of the first of
those values in a democratic society.   C.     The Importance of the Right to Respect
for One’s Reputation  52                           
Despite its undoubted importance, freedom of expression is not
absolute.  As this Court noted in Prud’homme, supra, at para. 43,
freedom of expression can be limited by the requirements imposed by other
people’s right to the protection of their reputation.  Cory J. observed in Hill,
supra, at para. 108, that reputation, as an aspect of personality, is
equally worthy of protection in a democratic society concerned about respect
for the individual:  Democracy has always recognized and cherished the
fundamental importance of an individual.  That importance must, in turn, be
based upon the good repute of a person.  It is that good repute which enhances
an individual’s sense of worth and value.  False allegations can so very
quickly and completely destroy a good reputation.  A reputation tarnished by
libel can seldom regain its former lustre.  A democratic society, therefore,
has an interest in ensuring that its members can enjoy and protect their good
reputation so long as it is merited. [Emphasis added.]  53                           
The right to reputation also receives protection in Quebec under s.
4 of the Quebec Charter, and under art. 3 C.C.Q.  This Court further
stated in Prud’homme, supra, at para. 44, that “although it is
not specifically mentioned in the Canadian Charter , the good reputation
of the individual represents and reflects the innate dignity of the individual,
a concept which underlies all the Canadian Charter  rights (Hill, supra,
at para. 120)”.  D.     The Importance of Finding an Equilibrium
Between the Two Rights in the Law of Civil Liability for Defamation   [translation]  This area
of the law of civil liability also requires a particular sensitivity to values
that at times conflict with each other, such as the public’s right to
information and the freedom of the media to disseminate it, on the one hand,
and, on the other, the right to respect for one’s private life and the
protection of some of its core components, namely anonymity and privacy.  55                           
In Prud’homme, the balance to be struck was that between the need
for free and open speech in municipal democracy on the one hand, and the right
of those impugned by the municipal councillor’s statements to respect for their
reputations on the other.  Similarly, a balance had to be struck in Radio
Sept-Îles, between the right to broadcast information that was true and in
the public interest on the one hand, and the right of those mentioned in the
broadcast to respect for their reputations on the other.  In Radio Sept-Îles,
as in the case at bar, I noted that even where the information being broadcast
is true, it is still not certain that civil liability is precluded.  It is all
the more important in such circumstances — where the information being
broadcast is true, but could still potentially attract delictual liability — to
strike the correct balance.  I made the following comment at p. 1821:  [translation] “[t]he right to
information sometimes clashes here with the right to respect for one’s private
life, and in particular with its basic components of anonymity and the privacy
of the individual.”  I went on to note that it might be appropriate to consider
whether the information is in the public interest when assessing the facts and
circumstances and determining whether there is fault.  This case, however,
highlights a different circumstance, one where the information broadcast may
have been true — at least in part (to be discussed below) — and it may have
been in the public interest to broadcast it, but the whole of the broadcast
quite simply did not measure up to professional standards.  In such a case,
fault can still exist.  I turn now to an analysis of the law of defamation, and
of the establishment of fault under art. 1457 C.C.Q.  E.      Jurisprudential Principles — The
Prud’homme and Radio Sept-Îles Judgments   [translation] 
It can be seen from the leading cases how often the Quebec courts have, when
dealing with defamation and verbal abuse, borrowed from common law concepts
(good faith and justification, qualified privilege), from decisions of English
or Canadian courts or from common law commentators, such as Odgers. 
Borrowing from the common law in this manner is totally unnecessary and
unwarranted . . . and it has the effect of greatly complicating a subject
that, when examined in light of the Civil Code and the general principles of
civil law, has the merit of being relatively straightforward.  57                           
The existence of an injury is not at issue in this appeal, but suffice
it to say that in order to prove injury the plaintiff must convince the judge
that the impugned remarks were defamatory.  As noted in Prud’homme, supra,
at para. 34, this involves asking “whether an ordinary person would believe
that the remarks made, when viewed as a whole, brought discredit on the
reputation of another person”.  The CBC does not argue that Mr. Néron’s
reputation was not defamed and that he did not suffer injury as a result of the
January 12th broadcast.  58                           
Nor is the causal connection portion of the art. 1457 test for liability
seriously at issue in this case.  I shall discuss this further below, when I
deal with the solidarity issue, but the causal link between the January 12th
broadcast and all that subsequently befell Mr. Néron has not been effectively
challenged by the CBC.  The thrust of the CBC’s argument is instead the absence
of fault, as determined in an action in defamation in Quebec.  59                           
The determination of fault in an action in defamation involves a
contextual analysis of the facts and circumstances.  As noted in Prud’homme,
supra, at para. 83, “it is important to note that the
respondents’ statement must be considered in context and in its entirety.  The
general impression that it conveys must govern in determining whether a fault
was committed” (emphasis added).  Thus, it is insufficient for the
determination of fault to focus merely on the veracity of the content of the
January 12th report.  One must look globally at the tenor of the
broadcast, the way it was conducted and the context surrounding it.  60                           
This is not to say that it is irrelevant that the defamatory remarks are
true, nor is it irrelevant that they were made in the public interest.  Truth
and public interest are merely factors to consider in the overall contextual
analysis of fault in an action in defamation under the Civil Code of Québec. 
Truth and public interest are relevant pieces of the puzzle, but are still only
pieces of the puzzle and not necessarily the determinative factors, as can be
seen in the comments of this Court, at para. 37 of Prud’homme, supra:  . . . in Quebec civil law, communicating false information is
not necessarily a wrongful act.  On the other hand, conveying true information
may sometimes be a wrongful act.  This is an important difference between the
civil law and the common law, in which the falsity of the things said is an
element of the tort of defamation.  However, even in the civil law, the truth
of what is said may be a way of proving that no wrongful act was committed, in
circumstances in which the public interest is in issue.  61                           
The determinative factor, or guiding principle, of liability for
defamation is to be found in the Quebec Court of Appeal decision in Radio
Sept-Îles, supra.  For journalists and the media, there will not be
fault until it has been shown that the journalist or media outlet in question
has fallen below professional standards.  As Baudouin and Deslauriers note in
their text, at p. 207:  [translation] 
Compliance with journalistic standards — Journalists who are subject to
liability comparable to that of professionals must comply with the standards of
the profession and attempt, to the extent possible, to disseminate accurate and
complete information resulting from a serious investigation.  Thus, I added
the following at p. 1820 of Radio Sept-Îles:  [translation] 
The liability at issue here is much more like professional liability.  The
function of the media is to gather, process and disseminate information.  Their
role also includes commentary and interpretation.  When gathering information,
the media’s liability seems to be essentially professional in nature and to be
based on a test of fault.  This of course requires that the courts apply the
test of the reasonable person working in the news sector. . . .                                                                     . . .  Fault cannot be reduced to the mere publication of
false information.  Rather, it is linked to the failure to discharge an
obligation of diligence or means, as frequently occurs in cases of
professional liability.  [Emphasis added.]  In sum, the
existence of a fault is the general and fundamental requirement in the law of
defamation and fault is measured against professional journalistic standards. 
A journalist is not held to a standard of absolute perfection; he or she has an
obligation of means.  On the one hand, if a journalist disseminates erroneous
information, this will not be determinative of fault.  On the other hand, a
journalist will not necessarily be exonerated simply because the information he
or she disseminated is true and in the public interest.  If, for other reasons,
the journalist has fallen below the standard of the reasonable journalist, it
is still open to the courts to find fault.  Viewed this way, civil liability
for defamation continues to fit nicely within the general framework of
art. 1457 C.C.Q.  62                           
As such, the conduct of the reasonable journalist becomes the all
important guidepost.  It is the tool which allows us to assess what
conduct is reasonable within the context of art. 1457 C.C.Q.  It is the
ultimate standard against which fault is determined, and the framework through
which other important considerations such as truth, falsity and the public
interest are filtered.  The question to be answered in this case thus becomes
whether Le Point’s journalists lived up to the professional standards of
a reasonable journalist when they broadcast the January 12th report.  F.      The Element of Fault in This Case  63                           
It is my conclusion that the courts below, in holding the CBC liable for
defamation, achieved the correct balance between freedom of expression and
Mr. Néron’s right to respect for his reputation.  For several reasons, I
find serious fault in the manner in which the CBC prepared for and broadcast
the January 12th report.  I make this finding even though Mr. Néron’s
handwritten letter cannot be considered private.  Taking into consideration all
the factors discussed below, it is my conclusion that the January 12th
report falls short of the professional standards of the reasonable journalist.  (1)     The Broadcast Contained Incomplete
Information About the Content of the Letter  64                           
In many ways, the January 12th broadcast was misleading.  The report
focussed in on the two errors.  Why did it refer only to the errors?  Doing so
gave the impression that the substance of Mr. Néron’s letter was limited to
these two erroneous statements about Mr. Thériault and Mr. Lacroix.  In truth,
the letter discussed other concerns relating to the image of notaries created
by the broadcast.  For example, Mr. Néron noted in the letter that 70
percent of recent promotions to the profession were women, so it was misleading
that the CBC portrayed notaries as being “fusty old men”.  Mr. Néron also
expressed concern about certain things that could be insinuated from the
report, such as the idea that the CNQ should be put under trusteeship.  In
short, there was more to the letter than the two erroneous comments about
Mr. Thériault and Mr. Lacroix.  Having viewed the report in question, I am
not at all convinced that the viewer would ever be aware of these other
concerns.  65                           
Nor could the viewer be aware, from the structure of the report, that
the letter was really just a request for a meeting and a right of reply.  One
has the impression that Mr. Néron and the CNQ wanted the content of the letter
to be broadcast, that this was a criticism of the CBC’s work that was meant to
be aired.  The context surrounding the receipt of the letter is entirely
absent, if not falsely portrayed by the CBC.  Thus, the CBC report starts off
with the following words:  [translation] . . . one
of its communications advisers wrote to us, accusing us of having made several
errors.  Tonight, we will respond to this criticism.  The CBC then
goes on to highlight the portions of the letter relating to Mr. Thériault
and Mr. Lacroix.  The viewer is led to believe that the full content of the
letter is being addressed, which is not the case.  Furthermore, the impression
left of Mr. Néron is quite unflattering.  The broadcast suggests that he
wrote a letter criticizing the CBC and that the entire content of the letter
was erroneous.  66                           
In a further sense, the viewer was provided with incomplete information
about the letter and its content with respect to Mr. Lacroix.  True, he was not
reimbursed by the CNQ, but he was reimbursed by a third party.  This was not
mentioned.  If it had been, it might have made the errors seem somewhat less
egregious and Mr. Néron might not have been cast in such a negative light.  67                           
In sum, I agree with Fish J.A. of the Quebec Court of Appeal that,
by leaving out vital pieces of information, the CBC misrepresented Mr. Néron’s
letter as a disingenuous attempt to mislead the CBC, and thereby the public.  (2)     Refusal to Allow Mr. Néron Time to Check
up on His Errors  68                           
I am also troubled by the haste with which the CBC set out to broadcast
the errors in the letter.  It does indeed seem that Mr. Néron was entrapped. 
Ms. Faucher contacted Mr. Néron to inform him of the errors.  Mr. Néron
made it very clear that the letter was merely a request for a right of reply
and was not meant for publication, [translation]
“or to be communicated in any form whatsoever”.  Furthermore, Mr. Néron
requested three days to verify the information about Mr. Thériault and
Mr. Lacroix.  The CBC ignored this request.  Moreover, it made no mention
of Mr. Néron’s request for time in the January 12th report.  All in all, I
agree with the following finding of the trial judge, at p. 1809:  [translation] 
Thus, the following question must be asked:  Why was there such a
rush to air the second report, which contained information known to be false,
without giving Néron the opportunity to check and correct the statements that
turned out to be inaccurate?  Can it not be assumed that, if Néron had been
able to give his side of the story and correct the inaccuracies, the content of
the report would have been different?  This haste is attributable not only to
the journalist, but to the entire team.  Pelletier, the editor-in-chief, admitted to the
Court that he was aware of the telephone conversation that took place between
Faucher and Néron on January 10, 1995.  He knew that Néron had asked
for a short period of time to check the information himself.  He knew that the
Chambre [des notaires] had refused to comment on the letter and, consequently,
on its content.  The team nevertheless decided to broadcast the report
anyway, which leads one to believe that the decision was deliberate and
intentional. [Emphasis added.]  The trial
judge’s conclusion makes sense.  The CBC intentionally and deliberately
broadcast the errors in the letter before Mr. Néron could attempt to set things
straight.  69                           
I further agree with Mailhot J.A. that the tone and tilt of the January
12th broadcast pointed to it being more of a response to Mr. Néron’s criticism
than an exercise in protecting the public interest.  It might indeed be
concluded that it is in the public interest to know that false rumours were
circulating at the CNQ about Mr. Thériault, whom the CNQ had a mandate to
protect.  Unfortunately, this matter of public interest seems to have been lost
in a broadcast aimed more at settling accounts for what the CBC likely saw as
unjustified criticism.  In the end, it may be said that the appellant broadcast
information that was partly true about a question of public interest, but that
was presented in an incomplete and misleading manner designed to have a maximum
impact on the reputation of the claimant.  (3)     The Report of the CBC’s Ombudsman  70                           
Finally, it is in my opinion of great relevance that the CBC’s own
ombudsman found Mr. Néron’s complaint to be quite serious.  I will recite the
relevant portion of the Ombudsman’s report:  [translation]  You also
accuse them of referring to two errors you allegedly made in your letter in
order to make a story out of them.  This part of your complaint is valid.  Le
Point decided to air a program entitled Mise au point, which it even
described as a response to your criticism.  Such a broadcast, like any news
broadcast, must be subject to the journalistic principles of accuracy,
integrity and fairness.  The January 12 broadcast seriously compromised
the principle of fairness by failing to mention the five grievances that are
central to your letter and only reporting on the two errors.  The host did say
at the beginning of the program, “One of its [the CNQ’s] communications
advisers wrote to us, accusing us of having made several errors.  Tonight, we
will respond to this criticism”.  It might have been expected that the
“errors” you accused them of making would be looked at one by one in the
program and that the point of view you expressed would be reflected
impartially, thereby treating your criticism fairly and with dignity.  This was
not the case.  In my view, making a complaint is the same as expressing an
opinion.  Therefore, when a complaint is discussed on air, the person making
the complaint should be accorded the same rights and respect as any other
person interviewed for a program, and the excerpts from the complaint that are
actually broadcast must be selected, similarly to how an interview is edited,
so as to represent the essence of the complaint without distortion.  Instead, they chose to discuss only the two errors in your letter. 
This gave the program the appearance of a settling of accounts, something that
has no place at the CBC. . . . [Emphasis in original.]  71                           
The CBC’s ombudsman considered the broadcast to have the appearance of a
settling of accounts.  This is highly detrimental to the CBC’s case.  The
Ombudsman also openly implied that Le Point’s journalists did not
live up to proper journalistic standards, given the “wrongful pruning”, that
is, the selective use of certain portions of the letter.  72                           
Even Otis J.A., in dissent in the Quebec Court of Appeal, seemed to
recognize that, by selectively quoting the letter, the broadcast fell below
professional standards for journalists: [translation]
“[i]t would certainly have been desirable, in keeping with journalistic
standards, to cover all aspects of the letter in the report.  However, this
lack of fairness does not constitute civil fault” (para. 356).  With respect,
by not respecting professional standards in this case, and given all the other
surrounding circumstances, the CBC was at fault.  (4)     Conclusion With Respect to Establishing
Fault  73                           
In conclusion, several factors in combination lead me to conclude that
the CBC was at fault:  the incomplete and misleading manner in which the
content of the letter was broadcast, the refusal to allow Mr. Néron time to
verify his errors, the refusal to mention that he sought this time, the fact
that Mr. Néron never wanted the content of the letter to be broadcast and the
adverse conclusion of the CBC’s ombudsman.  The CBC intentionally defamed Mr.
Néron, and it did so in a manner that fell below the professional standards of
a reasonable journalist.  G.     Appropriate Deference to the Trial
Judge’s Findings  74                           
In keeping with this Court’s recent decision in Housen v. Nikolaisen,
[2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, 2002 SCC 33, I have come to the conclusion that the trial
judge committed no palpable and overriding errors in his determination of the
facts.  Likewise, I cannot conclude that the trial judge committed a palpable
and overriding error in his determination that the CBC was at fault.  The trial
judge did not err with respect to the proper legal test.  He properly grounded
his test for liability in art. 1457 C.C.Q. and referred to Radio Sept-Îles,
supra, and he correctly noted that journalists are subject to an
obligation of means.  Based on his strong findings of fact, the trial judge was
correct in determining that the CBC’s journalists had failed to meet their
professional obligations.  H.     Condemnation In Solidum  75                           
The trial judge found the CBC and the CNQ solidarily liable for the
damages awarded as a result of their separate faults.  On appeal, Fish J.A.
held that it was wrong to impose solidary liability since the basis of the
CBC’s fault was extra-contractual and juridically independent of the
contractual fault attributed by the trial judge to the CNQ.  Solidarity between
debtors exists, as art. 1525 C.C.Q. provides, “only where it is expressly
stipulated by the parties or imposed by law”.  Fish J.A. concluded that
neither condition was met in the case at bar.  Instead, he found that in light
of this Court’s decision in Prévost-Masson, supra, the CBC and
the CNQ should be held responsible in solidum for Mr. Néron’s
damages.  76                           
The CBC submits that the Quebec Court of Appeal erred in finding it
liable in solidum with the CNQ since solidarity is available only in
cases where the wrongful acts caused a single injury or prejudice.  The CBC
also briefly suggests that Mailhot J.A. erred in concluding that
there was a causal link between the news broadcast and the damages suffered by
Mr. Néron.  As an alternative to the order for liability in solidum, the
CBC argues that the majority of the Court of Appeal should have ordered
liability according to a “fair apportionment of the legal responsibilities of
each party” (see Prévost-Masson, supra, at para. 21, and art.
1478 C.C.Q.).  77                           
The respondents note that, in challenging the finding of causation, the
CBC has failed, in its very brief submission, to show that the trial judge
committed a palpable and overriding error.  The respondents also contend that
the CBC has failed to adduce any evidence as to how the damages should be
apportioned and that, in these circumstances, the order of liability in
solidum is well founded.   79                           
J. Pineau, D. Burman and S. Gaudet have indicated that liability in
solidum should be applied in situations such as this where two parties are
responsible for an injury and one of them is liable extra-contractually while
the other is liable contractually (see Théorie des obligations (4th ed.
2001), at pp. 676-77).  In this case, the courts below concluded that, although
the faults of the CBC and the CNQ were distinct in that one was based on
extra-contractual liability and the other on contractual liability, the faults
were “factually related, reasonably contemporaneous and cumulative in their
prejudicial impact on Néron and GEN [Communication]” (see Court of Appeal
judgment, at para. 280, and see also the trial judgment, at p. 1832). The
damages, however, were of a global nature and, as Fish J.A. explained, it
would be difficult, in practical terms, to divide the object of the global
debt.  Moreover, the learned trial judge is to be afforded significant
deference in respect of his finding that the damages could not be easily divided. 
As the respondents indicate, there has been little evidence adduced to explain
how the damages could be apportioned between the parties in a just fashion.  As
such, this is the kind of case, like Prévost-Masson, where the liability
of the parties should be in solidum.  I would thus dismiss the CBC’s
appeal on this ground.  I.    Costs  80                           
I see no reason to depart from the usual rules with respect to
costs.  VI.    Conclusion  81                           
As a result, I would dismiss the appeal with costs.  The following are the reasons delivered by  82                           
Binnie J. (dissenting) — I
cannot subscribe to the proposition of my colleague LeBel J. that civil
liability should be imposed on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (“CBC”) to
pay $673,153 in damages because, as he puts it (at para. 55):  . . . the information broadcast may have been true _ at least in part (to be discussed
below) _ and it may have been in
the public interest to broadcast it, but the whole of the broadcast quite
simply did not measure up to professional standards.  83                           
The information that was published was perfectly true, but my
colleague’s concern seems to be that the “truth” could have been put in a
different light if additional matters had been included in the broadcast (para.
68).  I do not agree that in this case what was not broadcast made what was
broadcast any the less true.  My deeper concern is that in balancing press
freedom against the respondents’ interest in the protection of their
reputation, my colleague puts insufficient weight on the constitutional right
of members of the Quebec public to have access to true and accurate information
about matters of legitimate interest and concern.  An award of this size built
on such a thin foundation can only discourage the fulfilment by the media of
their mandate in a free and democratic society to afflict the comfortable and
to comfort the afflicted, to quote Joseph Pulitzer, a mandate now protected by
s. 2 (b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and
s. 3 of the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q., c.
C-12.  84                           
I agree with Otis J.A. of the Quebec Court of Appeal ([2002] R.J.Q.
2639) that the real culprit in this case is the Chambre des notaires du Québec
(“CNQ”).  For many of the same reasons that she has given, I would allow the
appeal of the CBC.  The effect of such a disposition would be to leave the
liability for the payment of the respondents’ damages with the CNQ, where it
belongs.  I.       Facts  85                              
The relevant circumstances are fully set out by my colleague LeBel J.
and I will therefore limit myself to the facts needed to explain my legal
conclusion.  86                              
The original broadcast on Le Point on December 15, 1994 dealt
with the CNQ as an important public institution exercising self-government
responsibilities over the notarial profession.  It was strongly critical.  One
of its allegations was that the CNQ had manifested a high-handed and
unprofessional approach to people who made legitimate complaints about the work
of its members.  The broadcast detailed a number of instances where
complainants had been ignored or abused.  The message was that the CNQ, in its
dealings with the public, was dysfunctional.  At the time, this seems to have
been true.  It was certainly in the public interest to draw attention to such a
deplorable state of affairs.  87                              
The broadcast relied in part on two complainants, Messrs. Yvon Thériault
and Richard Lacroix, who agreed to be interviewed on the air.  On learning
about the broadcast, the CNQ (without checking its facts) leapt to the attack,
alleging (erroneously) that Mr. Lacroix had lied about his complaint because
the CNQ had in fact reimbursed him for a loss suffered at the hands of one of
its members, and that Mr. Thériault’s brother was the leader of a bizarre
and violent cult.  The CNQ instructed their communications consultant,
Mr. Gilles Néron, to write to the CBC.   This instruction was carried out
by Mr. Néron in a letter to the director at Le Point dated December 18,
1994, the contents of which are set out in full by my colleague  LeBel J.
at para. 3.  88                              
After introducing himself as spokesperson for the CNQ and requesting a
meeting with the CBC to pursue an on-air reply, Mr. Néron’s letter went on
to confirm, albeit inadvertently, more or less what the CBC had said about the
CNQ in its December 15 broadcast; namely that by launching an attack on Messrs.
Thériault and Lacroix the CNQ showed again that it could not get its facts
straight and that its response to legitimate criticism was ill-informed,
ill-considered and unworthy of a professional governing body.  89                              
Specifically, the false allegations made by the CNQ and repeated by
Mr. Néron in his December 18 letter were as follows:  [translation]  3-    In the report, the death threats made
against the president are referred to as nonsense.  Mr. Thériault is presented
as a person who would be justified in making such threats.  You failed to
mention that he is the brother of the Thériault who was the Pope of the
Infinite Love cult and who cut off his spouse’s arm. [Emphasis deleted.]  It is now
accepted that the allegation about Mr. Thériault’s brother was totally
unfounded.  With respect to Mr. Lacroix, the CNQ, through Mr. Néron,
categorically stated that his complaint about non-reimbursement by the CNQ was
false:  [translation]  4-    You also failed to mention in the report
that Mr. Lacroix was  reimbursed by the CNQ for the money he lost.  . . .  2-    Your conclusion that “Mr. Lacroix is
considering writing to the Minister to ask him to put the CNQ under
trusteeship” gave some people the impression that the chairman of the Office
[des professions] was going to make this request, while others were left
thinking that Le Point’s reporters came to this conclusion after their
investigation. [Emphasis added; emphasis in original deleted.]  In fact, Mr.
Lacroix had been reimbursed, but not by the CNQ.  The CNQ was therefore wrong
to claim the credit.  Mr. Néron’s added complaint about the “impression”
attributed to some unidentified people added nothing of substance.  90                              
The other purported clarification by the CNQ, through Mr. Néron, was
flattering to the CNQ but simply argumentative:  [translation]  5-    I also have difficulty understanding the
reference to notary Potiron, the fusty old man.  I found this allusion
inappropriate.  The notarial profession has a 128-year history of faithful
service in Quebec.  There are many young notaries.  They are excellent, dynamic
and innovative legal professionals.  91                              
The subsequent behaviour of the CBC’s journalists in avoiding contact
with Mr. Néron was boorish, but boorishness without more is not actionable.
Eventually, on January 4, 1995, the CBC offered the CNQ a follow-up interview,
as it ought to have done more promptly.  However at that point, the CNQ, after
undergoing a reversal of position, refused the offer.  In the result, the
journalists were simply left with a potential story about the impetuous and
ill-founded allegations contained in Mr. Néron’s letter of December 18th.  92                              
Mr. Néron, as well as the CNQ, attempted in their different ways to
extricate themselves from the untenable position into which the CNQ blunders
had led them.  Belatedly, Mr. Néron asked for time to check the truth of the
CNQ’s allegations.  The CNQ, for its part, having withdrawn its request for a
reply, proceeded to disclaim responsibility for Mr. Néron’s original request
for a reply interview, and attempted to make Mr. Néron the scapegoat for its
own series of errors.  Thereafter, it completed the assault on Mr. Néron’s
professional reputation by circulating misleading statements about Mr. Néron to
the entire CNQ membership.  93                              
The CBC’s own ombudsman, as LeBel J. explains, found that the
CBC’s follow-up broadcast on January 12th showed selectivity and a lack of
balance.  He found that the focus on the CNQ’s misinformation gave the
broadcast [translation] “the
appearance of a settling of accounts”.  However, he did not
conclude that the public was misinformed or that the broadcast was not in
the public interest.  In fact, on this second point he concluded that the
public interest was well-served by calling attention to the CNQ’s continuing
parade of errors.  94                              
Journalism inevitably involves selectivity.  What was broadcast on
January 12th was true.  With all due respect for the contrary position,
my view is that despite the journalists’ boorish treatment of Mr. Néron prior
to January 12th and the selectivity evident in the January 12th broadcast
(which no doubt demonstrated elements of “gotcha” journalism), civil fault
should nevertheless not be attributed to the CBC when all the relevant public
interest issues are taken into account, a matter to which I will now turn.  II.      The Absence of Civil Fault  95                              
Article 1457 of the Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64
(“C.C.Q.”), which delineates the relevant principles of civil fault, is to be
interpreted in light of the Code’s preliminary provision:  The Civil Code of Québec, in harmony with the
Charter of human rights and freedoms and the general principles of law,
governs persons, relations between persons, and property. [Emphasis added.]  The public’s
right to a society where free expression can flourish is guaranteed by
s. 3 of the Quebec Charter.  Thus, the proper legal framework
within which to consider the present appeal is not simply a bilateral dispute
between the CBC and the respondents, but a multilateral dispute involving not
only the disputants but the broader Quebec public which had a serious ongoing
stake in the proper functioning of the CNQ as a vitally important public
institution.  Lamer J. (as he then was) commented in Snyder v. Montreal
Gazette Ltd., [1988] 1 S.C.R. 494, in speaking of the assessment of
non-pecuniary damages for defamation under the Civil Code of Québec, at
p. 510:  In coming to the rescue of a defamation victim, the courts must not
overlook the fact that the written and spoken press is indispensable and is an
essential component of a free and democratic society.  96                              
Despite the reference by my colleague LeBel J. at paras. 48 and
following to some of the leading decisions of this Court upholding the
importance of freedom of expression, including RWDSU v. Dolphin Delivery
Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573, Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney
General), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326, and Canadian Broadcasting Corp. v. New
Brunswick (Attorney General), [1991] 3 S.C.R. 459, I do not believe that
his proposed disposition of this appeal gives proper weight to that aspect of
the public interest.  97                              
I accept, as does LeBel J., that it is appropriate to anchor the
discussion in the Quebec Court of Appeal’s decision in Société Radio-Canada v.
Radio Sept-Îles Inc., [1994] R.J.Q. 1811.  That decision, interpreting
civil responsibility in matters of defamation under art. 1053 of the Civil
Code of Lower Canada, held that, unlike the situation in the common law
jurisdictions, [translation]
“there are situations in which a person who communicates information may be
civilly liable even if the information is true” (pp. 1818-19).  Thus:  [translation]  (a)  A person commits a fault by “saying” unpleasant or
unfavourable things about another that he or she knows to be false.                                                                     . . .  (b)  A person commits a fault by “saying” unpleasant or
unfavourable things about another that he or she ought to know to be false.                                                                     . . .  (c)  A person commits a fault by making unfavourable
comments about another, even if they are true, if he or she makes them without
valid reason.  [Italics deleted; underlining added.]  (Page 1819, citing J. Pineau and M. Ouellette, Théorie
de la responsabilité civile (2nd ed. 1980), at pp. 63-64.)  98                              
In Prud’homme v. Prud’homme, [2002] 4 S.C.R. 663, 2002 SCC 85,
this Court confirmed this same approach for the purposes of art. 1457 C.C.Q.
noting, with respect to the third branch, that “even in the civil law, the
truth of what is said may be a way of proving that no wrongful act was
committed, in circumstances in which the public interest is in issue”
(para. 37 (emphasis added)).  99                              
This is not to say that the media are unconstrained by the usual
principles of civil fault.  The media are bound by the same law as everybody
else.  It is the function of free expression that is protected, and the
media organizations derive their protection from what they do rather than who
they are.  100                          
Counsel for the CBC submitted with some indignation at the oral hearing:  [translation] 
If I may sum up the comments of Madam Justice Mailhot, she accuses my clients
of having discovered the truth and having spoken it.  This is an
oversimplification of a complex issue.  To agree to work professionally with
the media, as Mr. Néron did, is not to agree to dance with wolves.  There are
proper limits to the protection that ought to be extended to the media even in
the exercise of their constitutionally protected function.  The question is
whether those limits have been breached in this case.  101                          
My colleague LeBel J., at para. 73,  mentions five factors which lead
him to conclude that a finding of civil fault should be made against the CBC,
namely  the incomplete and misleading manner in which the content of the letter
was broadcast, the refusal to allow Mr. Néron time to verify his errors, the
refusal to mention that he sought this time, the fact that Mr. Néron never
wanted the content of the letter to be broadcast and the adverse conclusion of
the CBC’s ombudsman.  102                          
In my view, with respect, none of these factors (whether taken
individually or cumulatively) are sufficient to support a finding of civil responsibility. 
In so stating, I give very limited weight to the trial judge’s criticism of the
second broadcast.  The trial judge got off on the wrong foot in characterizing
Mr. Néron’s letter of December 18, 1994 as a private communication.  This
mischaracterization coloured the rest of his analysis.  A.     The Allegedly Incomplete and Misleading
Manner in Which the Content of the Letter Was Broadcast  103                          
I do not, with respect, accept my colleague’s characterization of the
December 18th letter as “really just a request for a meeting and right of
reply” (para. 65).  As is evident from a reading of the text set out at para.
3, the letter is approximately two pages in length, with only part of the first
page devoted to the request for a right of reply.  The letter alleges errors in
the original broadcast in relation to the on-air complainants
Messrs. Lacroix and Thériault, and it was appropriate to bring these
allegations to the attention of viewers, together with the journalists’
response.  104                          
Like Otis J.A., I accept as correct the finding of the Ombudsman that
according to desirable journalistic practice, the January 12th broadcast ought
to have  presented Mr. Néron’s letter in a more complete and balanced fashion. 
However, the real sting of the broadcast was that the CNQ was continuing to act
in an impetuous and unprofessional manner.  It documented why the allegations
contained in Mr. Néron’s December 18th letter were erroneous and pointed out
the ease with which these errors were verified by the journalists, and ought to
have been known to the CNQ.  Had the other points made in Mr. Néron’s letter
been broadcast they would not (as discussed below) have pulled the sting, or
served the public interest in any substantial way, or, for that matter, have helped
to protect Mr. Néron’s reputation.  The selectivity and lack of balance
found by the Ombudsman did not subvert the truth of the real matter of
interest to the public, namely the truth of the CNQ’s allegations pertaining to
Messrs. Thériault and Lacroix.  B.      The CBC’s Refusal to Allow Mr. Néron
Time to Verify His Errors  105                          
Again, while this courtesy ought properly have been extended to
Mr. Néron, the allegations against Messrs. Thériault and Lacroix were
demonstrably false whether or not Mr. Néron belatedly took the opportunity
to verify them.  Had Mr. Néron publicly acknowledged their falsity, it would
simply have added to the impression on viewers that the CNQ had responded to
the original broadcast with a misinformed  attack on Messrs. Thériault and
Lacroix, for which the CNQ could justly be called to account.  C.     The CBC’s Refusal to Mention That Mr.
Néron Sought a Delay  106                          
An accuser is supposed to know whereof he speaks before an attack
is launched.  It would not have improved Mr. Néron’s reputation to report that
he wanted time to find out about the truth of the CNQ allegations only after
they were made.  D.     The Fact That Mr. Néron Never Wanted the
Contents of the Letter Broadcast   107                          
This is a variation of the trial judge’s original ruling that the letter
of December 18 was somehow “private”.  I agree with Mailhot and Otis JJ.A. that
the CBC was entitled to consider the information it had received to be public. 
There was no indication in Mr. Néron’s letter to the contrary.  In this
respect, I adopt the reasoning of Otis J.A. (at para. 345):  [translation] 
Finally, no statement, either implied or express, of confidentiality was made
in the letter of December 18, 1994.  Nor was any promise of confidentiality
obtained from the CBC at the time of sending of the letter, which as of that
time became information that the television broadcasting media were entitled to
take note of and disseminate.  To send a
letter to the press alleging errors in a broadcast and launching a personal
attack against news sources without first verifying the foundation for these
allegations is to invite trouble.  Of course, once Mr. Néron recognized that he
might be on thin ice, he quite naturally sought a graceful exit.  However, by
that time the CNQ allegations were like missiles that once launched are beyond
recall.  E.      The Adverse Conclusions of the CBC’s
Ombudsman  108                          
The CBC’s ombudsman criticised aspects of the January 12th broadcast. 
However the effort of media organizations to improve their standards of
performance should not be discouraged by equating valid journalistic criticism
with a finding of civil fault.  The Ombudsman was not concerned with balancing
the values of a free press and the respect for reputation.  Nor was it within
the Ombudsman’s mandate to determine whether Mr. Néron’s reputation would
have fared better or worse had a higher standard of journalism been observed,
given that the damaging sting would have remained even in a more balanced
presentation, albeit more appropriately packaged.  Rather, the Ombudsman was
examining the second broadcast in light of the [translation]  “journalistic principles of accuracy, integrity
and fairness”.  No doubt these principles are all relevant in the determination
of reasonableness under art. 1457 C.C.Q., but they are not the only relevant
principles.  109                          
Our Court in Prud’homme, at para. 72, concluded with
respect to the allegation of defamation in that case that “[i]t would of course
have been wiser to mention” (emphasis added) some omitted information,
but that “having regard to the circumstances” these deficiencies of
presentation did not engage civil responsibility.  And so it is in this case. 
I concur with Otis J.A. that (at para. 356)  [translation]  this lack
of fairness does not constitute civil fault.  Neither the nature nor the
purpose of the report would have changed in any way had the public known
that the CNQ was unhappy (1) that the December 15, 1994
broadcast of the first report was repeatedly advertised in advance, (2) that
viewers may have been left with the impression that the chairman of the Office
des professions was going to ask that the CNQ be placed under trusteeship, or
(3) that an inappropriate reference had been made to the notary Potiron. 
None of these three minor points would have justified the
January 12, 1995 update.  [Italics deleted; underlining added.]  110                          
What sets this case apart from the usual action in delict is its
constitutional dimension, and the public’s right to know, and the role of the
press in discovering and getting the facts out into the public domain even
though on occasion, as here, the presentation of the facts leaves something to
be desired.  III.    Disposition  111                          
In my view, a legal rule that awards $673,153 in damages to
Mr. Néron and his personal company on the basis of a broadcast which
stated true facts, the publication of which was undoubtedly in the public
interest, just because other lesser matters might also have been mentioned but
were not, or further context might have been provided but was not, is simply
not consistent with the public’s right to know.  The position adopted by the
majority in this case goes well beyond what was decided in Radio Sept-Îles
and Prud’homme and, with respect, will result in an unnecessary chill on
the free flow of information which ought to be characteristic of a free and
democratic society.  The reputation of Mr. Néron and his company have
undoubtedly suffered, but the real cause of their suffering was the conduct of
their erstwhile client, the CNQ, which has already been held liable for the
respondents’ loss, and which did not appeal the question of its own liability
to this Court.  112                          
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs, Binnie J.
dissenting. Solicitor for the appellant:  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation,
Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondents:  Deslauriers Jeansonne, Montréal.     