Dobson (Litigation Guardian of)  v. Dobson, [1999] 2 S.C.R.
753  Cynthia Dobson                                                                                 Appellant  v.  Ryan Leigh MacLean Dobson by his Litigation Guardian, Gerald M. Price                                               Respondent  and  The Canadian Abortion Rights Action League, the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada and the Catholic Group for Health, Justice and Life                              Interveners  Indexed as:  Dobson (Litigation Guardian of) v.
Dobson  File No.:  26152.  1998:  December 8; 1999:  July 9.   on appeal from the court of appeal for new brunswick  Torts -- Negligence -- Motor vehicle accident --
Action by child  for prenatal negligence against mother -- Whether mother liable
in tort for damages to her child arising from an alleged prenatal negligent act
which injured her foetus.  The appellant was 27 weeks pregnant when the vehicle
she was driving collided with another resulting in prenatal injuries to her
foetus which resulted in his birth by Caesarian section later that day.  These
prenatal injuries caused  permanent mental and physical impairment.  The child
brought an action for damages against his mother alleging that the collision
was caused by her negligent driving.  The motion judge found that the
respondent had the legal capacity to sue for injuries caused by the appellant’s
alleged prenatal negligence.  The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal from
that decision.  At issue here is whether a mother should be liable in tort for
damages to her child arising from a prenatal negligent act which allegedly
injured her foetus.  Held (Major and Bastarache JJ. dissenting):  The appeal should be
allowed.   In light of the very demanding biological reality that
only women can become pregnant and bear children, the courts should be hesitant
to impose additional burdens upon pregnant women.  In addition, the
relationship between an expectant woman and her foetus is truly unique. 
Accordingly, there can be no meaningful analogy between a child’s action for
prenatal negligence against a third-party tortfeasor, on the one hand, and
against his or her mother, on the other.   There is as well a need for judicial restraint in the
development of tort law as it pertains to sensitive and far-reaching issues of
public policy.  The imposition of a legal duty of care upon a pregnant woman towards
her foetus or subsequently born child cannot be characterized as the simple
application of existing tort rules to meet the requirements of a specific
case.  Rather, it constitutes a severe intrusion into the lives of pregnant
women, with potentially damaging effects on the family unit.  Moreover, there can be no satisfactory judicial
articulation of a standard of conduct for pregnant women.  A rule based on a
“reasonable pregnant woman” standard raises the spectre of tort liability for
lifestyle choices, and undermines the privacy and autonomy rights of women.  A
compromise judicial solution, based on the murky distinction between “lifestyle
choices peculiar to parenthood” and a “general duty of care” owed to third
parties, is simply too vague to be manageable, and will inevitably lead to
inequitable and uncertain results.  Finally, a rule based on a strictly defined motor
vehicle exception to delineate the scope of maternal tort liability should not
be created by the judiciary.  To do so would be to sanction a legal solution
based solely on access to insurance.  If this approach were to be adopted, the
provincial legislatures would be required to amend their legislative
compensation regimes for motor vehicle accidents.  Any such amendment might
well be required to specify that it constituted an exception to the general
rule of maternal tort immunity for prenatal negligence, and that the injured
child could not recover damages above the limit established by the insurance
scheme.  A carefully tailored solution could benefit both the injured child and
his or her family, without unduly restricting the privacy and autonomy rights
of women.  Per L’Heureux-Dubé and
McLachlin  JJ.:  The common law must reflect the values reflected in the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  Applying common law liability for
negligence generally to pregnant women in relation to the unborn trenches
unacceptably on the liberty and equality Charter  interests of pregnant
women.  The intrusion on the autonomy of the pregnant woman by common law tort
liability cannot be reduced to the point where the infringement on a woman’s
liberty and equality interests is acceptable without distorting its methodology
and introducing new difficulties.  The proposal that only children “born alive”
can sue leaves a vast scope for curtailment of the pregnant woman’s autonomy. 
The proposal that liability follows only where the mother is insured against
the damage flies in the face of the maxim that tort liability cannot be
predicated on the defendant’s means.   The precept that a common law duty of
care arises from the relationship between the parties is violated by the
proposal that liability should be restricted  to where a pregnant women owes
“general” duty to hypothetical people or by its variant that duty is owed to
actual third parties.  Per Major and
Bastarache JJ. (dissenting):  The appellant mother  owed a duty of care to
other users of the highway, to passengers in her car and to her foreseeably
injured born alive child.  No intrusion into a pregnant woman’s freedom of
action can be demonstrated where a duty of care is owed to a third party in
respect of the very same behaviour of which the child complains.  The pregnant
woman’s freedom of action is not in issue in this appeal.  This bright-line
test easily distinguishes situations in which the pregnant woman’s freedom of
action is in issue from those where it is not.  Tort law is well equipped to
distinguish between the two.  The bare assertion of social policy concerns expressly
and unilaterally centred on a pregnant woman’s rights is not a sufficient
answer to determine whether a pregnant woman’s rights should prevail over the
equally recognized rights of her born alive child.  While the law may grant
immunity from liability based on policy reasons, those reasons, which must be
clear and compelling, are conspicuously absent here.  The removal of the
child’s cause of action is extreme and the policy reasons for doing so should
be obvious and persuasive.  No jurisprudence was advanced that would negate a
pregnant woman’s legal responsibility for negligent acts against her born alive
child where the effects of those acts are reasonably foreseeable and where they
violate the physical integrity of a legal person.  The special relationship
between a pregnant woman and her foetus is significant for both the
mother-defendant and the born alive child-plaintiff and the legal or social
policy implications to be drawn from this biological fact cannot be ascertained
in the absence of equal acknowledgment of the rights of the child.  To grant a
pregnant woman immunity from the reasonably foreseeable consequences of her
acts for her born alive child would create a legal distortion as no other
plaintiff carries such a one-sided burden, nor any defendant such an advantage.  Policy considerations flowing from concerns about the
appropriateness of intra-familial litigation may be sufficient to negate any
child’s right to sue his or her parents in tort.  The conclusion that such
concerns only bar tort action brought by born alive children who sustained
injuries while still in utero is not justified.  Cases Cited  By Cory J.  Applied: City of
Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; considered:  Montreal
Tramways Co. v. Léveillé, [1933] S.C.R. 456; R. v. Sullivan, [1991]
1 S.C.R. 489; Winnipeg Child and Family Services (Northwest Area) v. G.
(D.F.), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 925; Bonte v. Bonte, 616 A.2d 464 (1992); Duval
v. Seguin, [1972] 2 O.R. 686, aff’d (1973), 1 O.R. (2d) 482; Stallman v.
Youngquist, 531 N.E.2d 355 (1988); Lynch v. Lynch (1991), 25
N.S.W.L.R. 411; referred to:  Tremblay v. Daigle, [1989] 2 S.C.R.
530; Deziel v. Deziel, [1953] 1 D.L.R. 651; Donoghue v. Stevenson,
[1932] A.C. 562; Hartman by Hartman v. Hartman, 821 S.W.2d 852 (1991); Hogan
v. Hogan, 435 N.E.2d 770 (1982); Eisele v. Tenuta, 404 N.E.2d 349
(1980); Johnson v. Myers, 277 N.E.2d 778 (1972); Black v. Solmitz,
409 A.2d 634 (1979);  Hamstra (Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia
Rugby Union, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 1092; Lister v. Romford Ice & Cold
Storage Co., [1957] 1 All E.R. 125.  By McLachlin J. Referred to:  R. v.
Morgentaler, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30; Brooks v. Canada Safeway Ltd.,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 1219.  By Major J. (dissenting)  Deziel v. Deziel,
[1953] 1 D.L.R. 651; Montreal Tramways Co. v. Léveillé, [1933]
S.C.R. 456; Duval v. Seguin, [1972] 2 O.R. 686, aff`d
(1973), 1 O.R. (2d) 482; Winnipeg Child and Family Services (Northwest Area)
v. G. (D.F.), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 925; Anns v. Merton London
Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; City of Kamloops v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; R. v. Morgentaler, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30; Tremblay v.
Daigle, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 530.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, s. 15(1) .  Congenital Disabilities (Civil
Liability) Act 1976 (U.K.), 1976, c. 28,
s. 1(1).  Authors Cited  Canada.  Royal Commission on New
Reproductive Technologies.  Proceed with Care:  Final Report of the Royal
Commission on New Reproductive Technologies, vol. 2. Ottawa:  The
Commission, 1993.    Fleming, John G.  The Law of
Torts, 8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.   Santello, Deborah M.  “Maternal
Tort Liability for Prenatal Injuries” (1988), 22 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 747.  Steinbock, Bonnie.  Life Before
Birth: The Moral and Legal Status of Embryos and Fetuses.  New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1992.  United Kingdom.  Law Commission. 
Law Com.  No. 60.  “Report on Injuries to Unborn Children” Cmnd. 5709, in Law
Commission Reports, vol. 5.  Oxfordshire:  Professional Books, 1979.  United Kingdom.  Parliamentary
Debates, 5th ser., vol. 904, col. 1589 (6 February 1976).  APPEAL from a judgment of the New Brunswick Court of
Appeal (1997), 148 D.L.R. (4th) 332, 189 N.B.R. (2d) 208, 482 A.P.R. 208, 37
C.C.L.T. (2d) 103, 12 C.P.C. (4th) 191, [1997] N.B.J. No. 232 (QL),
affirming a decision of the Court of Queen’s Bench (1997), 143 D.L.R. (4th)
189, 186 N.B.R. (2d) 81, 476 A.P.R. 81, [1997] N.B.J. No. 17 (QL), that
the infant respondent had the legal capacity to sue his mother for the injuries
allegedly caused by his prenatal injuries.  Appeal allowed, Major and
Bastarache JJ. dissenting.  Robert L. Barnes, Q.C.,
and Colleen P. Keyes, for the appellant.  M. Ann MacAulay and James
W. A. MacAulay, for the respondent.  Beth Symes and Andrea
York, for the intervener the Canadian Abortion Rights Action League.  David M. Brown, for the
intervener the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada.  William J. Sammon, for
the intervener the Catholic Group for Health, Justice and Life.  The judgment of Lamer C.J. and L’Heureux-Dubé,
Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci and Binnie JJ. was delivered by  //Cory J.//   I.  Introduction   II.  Facts  2                                  
On March 14, 1993, the appellant was in the 27th week of her pregnancy. 
On that day, she was driving towards Moncton in a snowstorm.  She lost control
of her vehicle on a patch of slush and struck an oncoming vehicle.  It is
alleged that the accident was caused by her negligent driving.  The infant
respondent, Ryan Dobson, was allegedly injured while in utero, and was
delivered prematurely by Caesarean section later that same day.  He suffers
from permanent mental and physical impairment, including cerebral palsy.  3                                  
The infant respondent, by his grandfather and litigation guardian,
launched a tort claim against, inter alia, the appellant for the damages
he sustained.  The respondent’s father was the owner of the vehicle driven by
the appellant.  As required by provincial law, he was insured against damages
caused by the negligence of drivers of his motor vehicle.  4                                  
The issues of liability and quantum of damages were severed by a consent
order dated June 25, 1996.  Thus, the only question to be determined is whether
Ryan Dobson has the legal capacity to bring a tort action against his mother
for her allegedly negligent act which occurred while he was in utero. 
Miller J., on an application for determination of this question of law, found
that the infant respondent had the legal capacity to sue for injuries caused by
the appellant’s prenatal negligence.  The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal
from that decision.  III.  Judicial History  A.  New Brunswick Court of Queen’s Bench (1997), 186 N.B.R. (2d)
81  5                                  
Miller J. recognized the difficulty of reconciling competing legal
principles regarding the nature and extent of foetal rights.  He accepted that
legal personality begins at birth and ends at death:  Tremblay v. Daigle,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 530.  Therefore, at the time of the commission of the tort, the
infant respondent did not exist as a person in law.  6                                  
Miller J. based his decision on two principles of tort law.  First,
there is no common law bar to actions in tort by children against their
parents:  Deziel v. Deziel, [1953] 1 D.L.R. 651.  The doctrine of
parental tort immunity, which exists in certain American jurisdictions, has
never been a part of Canadian law.  Second, Canadian courts have recognized the
juridical personality of the foetus as a fiction which is utilized, at least in
certain contexts, to protect future interests.  Although a foetus is not a
legal person, certain rights accrue and may be asserted by the infant upon
being born alive and viable:  Montreal Tramways Co. v. Léveillé, [1933]
S.C.R. 456.  In this case, the injury was allegedly suffered by the foetus, but
the damages sued for are those sustained by the infant Ryan after his birth. 
Accordingly, if the damages had been caused by the negligence of some
third-party, the infant respondent would be entitled to seek compensation in a
tort action.  7                                  
Miller J. concluded that “if an action can be sustained by a child
against a parent, and if an action can be sustained against a stranger for
injuries suffered by a child before birth, then it seems to me a reasonable
progression to allow an action by a child against his mother for prenatal
injuries caused by her negligence” (p. 88).  He therefore held that the infant
respondent had the legal capacity to sue his mother for the injuries allegedly
caused by her prenatal negligence.  B.  New Brunswick Court of Appeal (1997), 189 N.B.R.
(2d) 208   9                                  
Hoyt C.J.N.B. further found that different considerations would arise if
this case involved damages resulting from lifestyle choices made by a woman
during pregnancy, such as smoking, drinking and the taking of or refusal to
take medication.  Although cases alleging such negligent conduct by a pregnant
woman would raise difficult policy decisions, those issues do not arise in this
case.  Hoyt C.J.N.B. found that the narrow issue to be resolved concerns the
allegedly negligent driving of a pregnant woman resulting in injuries to her
born alive child, and not injuries occasioned as a result of her lifestyle
choices.  Hoyt C.J.N.B. found support for this distinction in  Bonte v.
Bonte, 616 A.2d 464 (N.H. 1992), Lynch v. Lynch (1991), 25
N.S.W.L.R. 411, and J. G. Fleming, The Law of Torts (8th ed. 1992), at
p. 168.  He observed that, in Lynch, supra, Clarke J.A. stated
that different policy considerations arise in the context of a claim based on
negligent driving as opposed to a case involving a pregnant woman’s lifestyle
choices.  10                              
Hoyt C.J.N.B. concluded that the duty on the appellant in this case
arose from her general duty to drive carefully and could not be characterized
as a lifestyle choice which is “peculiar to parenthood” (p. 216).  He noted
that the same distinction was made in the Congenital Disabilities (Civil
Liability) Act 1976 (U.K.), 1976, c. 28.  That Act exempts a mother
from tort liability for prenatal negligence to her children who are born
alive.  However, the exemption does not apply to prenatal negligence which
occurs when the pregnant woman is in breach of her general duty to drive
carefully.  Therefore, Hoyt C.J.N.B. held that a pregnant woman has a general
duty to drive carefully, in relation to both her subsequently born child and
third-party motorists.  If, as alleged here, the child suffers injury during
his or her lifetime as a result of the mother’s negligent driving during
pregnancy, the child should be able to enforce his or her rights.  To hold
otherwise would create a partial exclusion to a pregnant woman’s general duty
to drive carefully.  IV.  Issue  11                              
This appeal raises but one issue.  Should a mother be liable in tort for
damages to her child arising from a prenatal negligent act which allegedly
injured the foetus in her womb?  V.  Analysis  12                              
Perhaps as a prelude to considering the public policy aspects of this
appeal, it may be helpful to begin with a review of the case law which allows
infants to receive compensation in tort for prenatally inflicted injuries.  A.  Tort
Liability for Prenatal Negligence  13                              
In Montreal Tramways, supra, a child born with club feet
two months after an incident of alleged negligence by the tramcar company
brought an action for the prenatal injuries which caused the damages.  Lamont
J., for the majority, held that the child did indeed have the right to sue.  He
based his conclusion on the following rationale (at p. 464):   14                              
The infant respondent argued that the underlined passage provides a born
alive child with the right to sue in tort for all prenatally inflicted
injuries, including those allegedly caused by the prenatal negligence of his or
her mother.  It is true that the reasoning of Lamont J., on behalf of the
majority of this Court, was based in part on general principles of compensation
and natural justice.  However, the decision contains no direct reference to the
tort liability of a mother for prenatal negligence. Even if Montreal
Tramways, supra, could be understood to encompass tortious acts by a
pregnant woman that cause injury to her foetus, it must be emphasized that the
decision dealt with the negligence of a third-party tortfeasor.  Nothing in the
decision  suggests that the Court directed its attention to the sensitive issue
of maternal tort liability for prenatal negligence.  Accordingly, the decision
in Montreal Tramways, while important, should not be taken as
determinative of the issue raised in this appeal.   [T]he law has been clear that it is unnecessary that the damages
coincide in time or place with the wrongful act or default.  In this connection
reference is made to Grant v. Australian Knitting Mills, Ltd., [1936]
A.C. 85, and to Dorset Yacht Co. v. Home Office, [1970] A.C. 1004.  In
these cases the existence of the plaintiffs was unknown to the defendant.  It
would have been immaterial to the causes of action if the plaintiffs had been
persons born after the negligent acts.                                                                     . . .  Procreation is normal and necessary for the preservation of the race. 
If a driver drives on a highway without due care for other users it is foreseeable
that some of the other users of the highway will be pregnant women and that a
child en ventre sa mère may be injured.  Such a child therefore falls
well within the area of potential danger which the driver is required to
foresee and take reasonable care to avoid.  16                              
The approach adopted in Duval applies the “neighbour principle”
articulated in the famous dictum of Lord Atkin in Donoghue v.
Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562 (H.L.), at p. 580.  Since it is reasonably
foreseeable at the time of an accident that negligent driving may cause injury
to a pregnant woman, the possibility of injury to the child on birth is, as
well, reasonably foreseeable.  It is this foreseeability that creates a relationship
which is sufficiently proximate to give rise to a duty of care.  Once the child
is born alive with injuries, the relationship crystallizes and the claim for
damages can be made.  By contrast, the holding in Montreal Tramways, supra,
is based in part on a legal fiction borrowed from the civil law.  Once the
child is born alive with injuries, it is “deemed to have been born at the time
of the accident to the mother” (per Lamont J., at p. 465).   18                              
It must be added that in City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2
S.C.R. 2, it was recognized that even where a duty of care exists, it may not
be imposed for reasons of public policy.  Although a duty of care to the born
alive child may exist, for reasons of public policy, which will be explored
later, that duty should not be imposed upon a pregnant woman.  Matters of
public policy are concerned with sensitive issues that involve
far-reaching and unpredictable implications for Canadian society.  It follows
that the legislature is the more appropriate forum for the consideration of
such problems and the implementation of legislative solutions to them.  B.  Imposing
a Duty of Care in this Situation  19                              
The test set out in Kamloops, supra, must be considered
and applied in determining whether the appellant mother should be held liable
to her child in the present case.  This analysis is particularly important in
light of the significant policy consequences raised by this appeal.  In Kamloops,
it was held that before imposing a duty of care, the court must be satisfied: 
(1) that there is a sufficiently close relationship between the parties to give
rise to the duty of care; and (2) that there are no public policy
considerations which ought to negative or limit the scope of the duty, the
class of persons to whom it is owed, or the damages to which a breach of it may
give rise.  20                              
The first criterion may be satisfied if it is assumed that a pregnant
woman and her foetus can be treated as distinct legal entities.  It should be
noted that this assumption might be seen as being contrary to the holding of
McLachlin J. in Winnipeg, supra, at p. 945 that “the law has
always treated the mother and unborn child as one”.  Nonetheless,  it is
appropriate in the present case to assume, without deciding, that a pregnant
woman and her foetus can be treated as separate legal entities.  Based on this
assumption, a pregnant woman and her foetus are within the closest possible
physical proximity that two “legal persons” could be.  With regard to
foreseeability, it is clear that almost any careless act or omission by a
pregnant woman could be expected to have a detrimental impact on foetal
development.  Indeed, the very existence of the foetus depends upon the
pregnant woman.  Thus, on the basis of the assumption of separate legal
identities, it is possible to proceed to the more relevant analysis for the
purposes of the present appeal, the second stage of the Kamloops test.    1.  Privacy and Autonomy Rights of
Women  23                              
First and foremost, for reasons of public policy, the Court should not
impose a duty of care upon a pregnant woman towards her foetus or subsequently
born child.  To do so would result in very extensive and unacceptable
intrusions into the bodily integrity, privacy and autonomy rights of women.  It
is true that Canadian tort  law presently allows a child born alive and viable
to sue a third-party for injuries which were negligently inflicted while in
utero:  Montreal Tramways, supra.  However, of fundamental
importance to the public policy analysis is the particularly unique
relationship that exists between a pregnant woman and the foetus she carries.  (a) Overview  24                              
Pregnancy represents not only the hope of future generations but also
the continuation of the species.  It is difficult to imagine a human condition
that is more important to society.  From the dawn of history, the pregnant
woman has represented fertility and hope.  Biology decrees that it is only
women who can bear children.  Usually, a pregnant woman does all that is
possible to protect the health and well-being of her foetus.  On occasion, she
may sacrifice her own health and well-being for the benefit of the foetus she
carries.  Yet it should not be forgotten that the pregnant woman -- in addition
to being the carrier of the foetus within her -- is also an individual whose
bodily integrity, privacy and autonomy rights must be protected.   Before birth the mother and unborn child are one in
the sense that “[t]he ‘life’ of the foetus is intimately connected with, and
cannot be regarded in isolation from, the life of the pregnant woman”:  Paton
v. United Kingdom (1980), 3 E.H.R.R. 408 (Comm.), at p. 415, applied
in Re F (in utero), [[1988] 2 All E.R. 193].  It is only after birth
that the fetus assumes a separate personality.  Accordingly, the law has always
treated the mother and unborn child as one.  To sue a pregnant woman on behalf
of her unborn fetus therefore posits the anomaly of one part of a legal and
physical entity suing itself.  26                              
It was recognized in both Montreal Tramways, supra, and Duval,
supra, that the strongest argument for imposing a duty of care upon
third parties towards unborn children is that tort law is designed to provide
compensation for harm caused by negligence and, to a lesser extent, to deter
tortfeasors.  It was submitted that to deny recognition to the type of action
at issue in this appeal could leave an infant plaintiff without the protection
and compensation provided by tort law, solely because the defendant is his or
her mother.  Accordingly, it was argued that the compensatory principle should
be the basis for the imposition of a similar duty of care upon expectant women.   28                              
Is she to be liable in tort for failing to regulate her diet to provide
the best nutrients for the foetus?  Is she to be required to abstain from
smoking and all alcoholic beverages?  Should she be found liable for failing to
abstain from strenuous exercise or unprotected sexual activity to protect her
foetus?  Must she undertake frequent safety checks of her premises in order to
avoid falling and causing injury to the foetus?  There is no rational and
principled limit to the types of claims which may be brought if such a tortious
duty of care were imposed upon pregnant women.      Permitting judicial intervention therefore has
serious implications for the autonomy of individual women and for the status of
women collectively in our society.  All individuals have the right to make
personal decisions, to control their bodily integrity, and to refuse unwanted
medical treatment.  These are not mere legal technicalities;  they represent
some of the most deeply held values in society and form the basis for
fundamental and constitutional human rights.                                                                      . . .  A woman has the right to make her own choices, whether they are good or
bad, because it is the woman whose body and health are affected, the woman who
must live with her decision, and the woman who must bear the consequences of
that decision for the rest of her life.   34                              
At trial, Miller J. observed that the existing jurisprudence permits
recovery from third parties, and permits a child to sue his or her parents for
postnatal negligence.  He held that to permit an action by a child against his
mother for prenatal negligence is a “reasonable progression” in tort
jurisprudence.  With respect, I believe that the imposition of a duty of care
upon pregnant women in these circumstances cannot be characterized as a
reasonable progression.  Rather, in my view, it constitutes a severe intrusion
into the lives of pregnant women, with attendant and potentially damaging
effects on the family unit.  This case raises social policy concerns of a very
real significance.  Indeed, they are of such magnitude that they are more properly
the subject of study, debate and action by the legislature.  (b)  Position in the United Kingdom  35                              
A similar concern with the privacy and autonomy rights of women led the
Parliament of the United Kingdom to fashion a rule of maternal tort immunity
for prenatal negligence, with a limited exception for negligent driving.  This
legislative solution is set out in the Congenital Disabilities (Civil
Liability) Act 1976 (U.K.), s. 1(1), and will be discussed in greater
detail below.  However, it should be noted at this point that, in its
memorandum to the U.K. Law Commission, the Bar Council emphasized the social
policy concerns inherent in the issue on appeal:  We recognise that logic and principle dictate that
if a mother’s negligent act or omission during or before pregnancy causes
injury to a foetus, she should be liable to her child when born for the wrong done. 
But we have no doubt at all that in any system of law there are areas in
which logic and principle ought to yield to social acceptability and natural
sentiment and that this particular liability lies in such an area. 
[Emphasis added.]  (Law Com. No. 60, “Report on Injuries to Unborn Children” Cmnd.
5709 in Law Commission Reports (1979), vol. 5, at para. 55.)   (c)  American Case Law  37                              
The American cases indicate that there is no judicial consensus on the
issue of maternal tort liability for prenatal negligence, in the context of
motor vehicle accidents or otherwise.  However, in Stallman v. Youngquist,
531 N.E.2d 355 (1988), the Supreme Court of Illinois declined to recognize a
cause of action by a foetus, subsequently born alive, against his or her mother
for the unintentional infliction of prenatal injuries caused by her negligent
driving.  Cunningham J. held that to impose a duty of care in this context
would infringe the mother’s rights of privacy and bodily integrity.  His
decision emphasized the policy concerns which militate against imposing tort liability
on mothers for prenatal negligence.  He articulates his position in this manner
(at pp. 359-60):  It is clear that the recognition of a legal right
to begin life with a sound mind and body on the part of a fetus which is
assertable after birth against its mother would have serious ramifications for
all women and their families, and for the way in which society views women and
women’s reproductive abilities.  The recognition of such a right by a fetus
would necessitate the recognition of a legal duty on the part of the woman who
is the mother; a legal duty, as opposed to a moral duty, to effectuate the best
prenatal environment possible.  .
. .  Holding a third person liable for prenatal injuries
furthers the interests of both the mother and the subsequently born child and
does not interfere with the defendant’s right to control his or her own life. 
Holding a mother liable for the unintentional infliction of prenatal injuries
subjects to State scrutiny all the decisions a woman must make in attempting to
carry a pregnancy to term, and infringes on her right to privacy and bodily
autonomy.  .
. .    Because our cases hold that a child born alive may
maintain a cause of action against another for injuries sustained while in
utero, and a child may sue his or her mother in tort for the mother’s
negligence, it follows that a child born alive has a cause of action against
his or her mother for the mother’s negligence that caused injury to the child
when in utero.  39                              
With respect, I believe that the public policy considerations are
paramount in this appeal.  Accordingly, I agree with the dissenting decision of
Brock C.J. and Batchelder J., which eloquently echoes the policy concerns that
pertain to this difficult case (at p. 467):  Holding a third party liable for negligently
inflicted prenatal injuries furthers the child’s legal right to begin life free
of injuries caused by the negligence of others, but does not significantly
restrict the behavior or actions of the defendant beyond the limitations
already imposed by the duty owed to the world at large by long standing rules
of tort law.  Third parties, despite this recently imposed duty to the fetus,
are able to continue to act much as they did before the cause of action was
recognized.  Imposing the same duty on the mother, however, will constrain her
behavior and affirmatively mandate acts which have traditionally rested solely
in the province of the individual free from judicial scrutiny, guided, until
now, by the mother’s sense of personal responsibility and moral, not legal,
obligation to her fetus.  Although it is true that the law may impose
liability based on the special relationship between certain parties, we can
think of no existing legal duty analogous to this one, which could govern such
details of a woman’s life as her diet, sleep, exercise, sexual activity, work
and living environment, and, of course, nearly every aspect of her health
care.  Imposing a legal duty upon a mother to her fetus creates a legal
relationship which is irrefutably unique.   41                              
Rather, it is the policy concerns, so central to this issue, which should
determine whether tort liability should be imposed on mothers for prenatal
negligence.  With the greatest respect, I am of the view that the judgments
below failed to appreciate fully the extensive intrusion into the privacy and
autonomy rights of women that would be required by the imposition of tort
liability on mothers for prenatal negligence.  Such a rule of law would have
profound implications and consequences for all Canadian women who are or may
become pregnant.  (d)  Consequences of Recognizing this Cause
of Action   43                              
Moreover, a pregnant woman will very often choose, or be compelled by
economic reality, to continue her employment in order to support and maintain,
or to assist in the support and maintenance, of her family.  It seems clear
that imposing a legal duty of care upon a pregnant woman would adversely affect
that woman’s ability to work during pregnancy.  Indeed, all of the legal
problems inherent in maternal tort liability for prenatal negligence, in the
context of household and highway accidents, are equally apparent in the
workplace setting.  Statistical data indicates that, of all the accidents in
which women were injured, 14 percent occurred in the course of employment: Health
Reports, supra, at p. 12.   45                              
It becomes apparent that many potential acts of negligence are
inextricably intertwined with the lifestyle choices, the familial roles and the
working lives of pregnant women.  Women alone bear the burdens of pregnancy. 
Our society collectively benefits from the remarkably important role played by
pregnant women.  The imposition by courts of tort liability on mothers for
prenatal negligence would restrict a pregnant woman’s activities, reduce her
autonomy to make decisions concerning her health, and have a negative impact
upon her employment opportunities.  It would have a profound effect upon every
woman, who is  pregnant or merely contemplating pregnancy, and upon Canadian
society in general.  Any imposition of such tort liability should be
undertaken, not by the courts, but by the legislature after careful study and
debate.  46                              
Moreover, the imposition of tort liability in this context would carry
psychological and emotional repercussions for a mother who is sued in tort by
her newborn child.  To impose tort liability on a mother for an unreasonable
lapse of prenatal care could have devastating consequences for the future
relationship between the mother and her born alive child.  In essence, the
judicial recognition of a cause of action for maternal prenatal negligence is
an inappropriate response to the pressing social issue of caring for children
with special needs.  Putting a mother through the trauma of a public trial to
determine whether she was at fault for the injury suffered by her child can
only add emotional and psychological trauma to an already tragic situation.   48                              
The primary purposes of tort law are to provide compensation to the injured
and deterrence to the tortfeasor.  In the ordinary course of events, the
imposition of tort liability on a mother for prenatal negligence would provide
neither compensation nor deterrence.  The pressing societal issue at the heart
of this appeal is the lack of financial support currently available for the
care of children with special needs.  The imposition of a legal duty of care on
a pregnant woman towards her foetus or subsequently born child will not solve
this problem.  If anything, attempting to address this social problem in a
litigious setting would merely exacerbate the pain and trauma of a tragic
situation.  It may well be that carefully considered legislation could create a
fund to compensate children with prenatally inflicted injuries.  Alternatively,
amendments to the motor vehicle insurance laws could achieve the same result in
a more limited context.  If, as a society, Canadians believe that children who
sustain damages as a result of maternal prenatal negligence should be
financially compensated, then the solution should be formulated, after careful
study and debate, by the legislature.  2.    Difficulties of
Articulating a Judicial Standard of Conduct for Pregnant Women  49                              
The infant respondent and certain interveners argued that a legal duty
of care should be imposed upon a pregnant woman towards her foetus or born
alive child.  If such a duty of care is imposed upon pregnant women, then a
judicially defined standard of conduct would have to be met.  One intervener
argued that tort liability should be imposed where a woman’s conduct fails to
conform to a “reasonable pregnant woman” standard, which would apply to all
aspects of her behaviour while pregnant.  By contrast, the infant respondent
argued in favour of the test put forward by the Court of Appeal in this case. 
This test draws a distinction between those situations in which a pregnant
woman owes a “general duty of care” and those which relate to “lifestyle
choices peculiar to parenthood”.  In the latter cases, a mother would be immune
from tort liability for prenatal negligence.  Another strand in the
respondent’s argument is that, at the very least, a mother should be held
liable for all damages suffered by her born alive child as a result of prenatal
injuries caused by her allegedly negligent driving.  It was argued that the
existence of a mandatory insurance regime for motor vehicle negligence entitles
the born alive child to compensation in such cases.  50                              
I believe that the courts cannot, and should not, articulate a standard
of conduct for pregnant women.  To do so raises all of the troubling questions
posed by Cunningham J. in Stallman, supra, (at p. 360):  It must be asked.  By what judicially defined standard would a mother
have her every act or omission while pregnant subjected to State scrutiny?  By
what objective standard could a jury be guided in determining whether a
pregnant woman did all that was necessary in order not to breach a legal duty
to not interfere with her fetus’ separate and independent right to be born
whole?  In what way would prejudicial and stereotypical beliefs about the
reproductive abilities of women be kept from interfering with a jury’s
determination of whether a particular woman was negligent at any point during
her pregnancy?  51                              
For the reasons set out later, I am of the view that the various
approaches advocated by the infant respondent and the interveners fail to avoid
the pitfalls of a judicially defined standard of care for pregnant women.  To
adopt the “reasonable pregnant woman” standard involves far-reaching
implications and extensive intrusions into the rights of bodily integrity,
privacy and autonomy of pregnant women.  The test articulated by the Court of
Appeal is, I believe, inconsistent with general principles of tort law and
unworkable in practice.  Finally, if the existence of motor vehicle insurance
is to be relied upon as the basis for imposing a legal duty of care upon
pregnant women, then this solution should be enacted by the legislature.  A
specific and insurance-dependent rule of tort liability cannot, and should not,
be created by the courts.  (a)   Reasonable Pregnant Woman Standard   53                              
In my view, this standard is inappropriate.  It raises the spectre of
judicial scrutiny and potential liability imposed for “lifestyle choices”. 
Thus, it brings into play all of the policy concerns articulated in Winnipeg,
supra.  For instance, it would be open to the trier of fact to determine
that a “reasonable pregnant woman”, who knows or has reason to know of her
condition, should not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol.  Decisions involving
the standard of care in tort law focus upon generally accepted norms, rather
than on the individual woman.  This objective standard would permit triers of
fact to dictate, according to their own notions of proper conduct, the manner
in which an expectant woman should behave throughout her pregnancy. 
Accordingly, a pregnant woman whose lifestyle conduct was under judicial
scrutiny would not benefit from a truly individual standard, which takes into
account her personal situation and acknowledges her autonomy.  54                              
The importance of an individual standard of assessment is emphasized by
the great disparities which exist in the financial situations, education,
access to health services and ethnic backgrounds of pregnant women.  These
disparities would inevitably lead to an unfair application of a uniform legal
standard concerned with the reasonable pregnant woman.  In this regard,
Cunningham J. noted in Stallman, supra, at p. 360:    (b)   Lifestyle Choices Peculiar to
Parenthood  56                              
On behalf of the infant respondent, it was argued that these policy
considerations, although admittedly profound, are not raised in this appeal. 
Rather, it was submitted that this case is only concerned with whether a mother
may be liable to her born alive child for her prenatal negligence in the
operation of a motor vehicle.  This position was adopted by the New Brunswick
Court of Appeal.  Hoyt C.J.N.B. held that, because a pregnant woman who is
driving owes a general duty of care to members of the public, she must owe that
same duty to her subsequently born child.  However, he went on to hold that, if
the activity in question is “peculiar to parenthood” or involves a “lifestyle
choice”, then a child born alive with injuries cannot commence an action in negligence
against his or her mother.  A similar dividing line is described by Professor
Fleming, supra, at p. 168:  More complex is the question whether a child should
have a claim for prenatal injury against a parent.  A distinction is in order
between the general duty to avoid injury which the defendant owes to all others
and those peculiar to parenthood.  An instance of the former is the duty to
drive carefully, which even the mother at the wheel owes to her foetus.  On the
other hand, there is strong aversion against inquisition into alleged parental
indiscretions during pregnancy, like excessive smoking, drinking or taking
drugs.  Thus,
Professor Fleming describes the immunity from tort liability in this context as
relating to all those activities which are “peculiar to parenthood”; that is to
say, those activities that relate uniquely to parenting.  57                              
With respect to those who hold this opinion, I am of the view that this
distinction is unworkable.  It fails to consider the scope of the role of a
parent.  Driving is an integral part of parenting in a great many families. 
For instance, a parent must often drive to pick up children from school or
child care, to take them to the dentist or doctor, or to hockey practice or
swimming lessons.  Indeed, I doubt whether any court can articulate a sound
legal test, which is both theoretically coherent and workable in practice, that
could effectively limit maternal prenatal liability to cases of motor vehicle
negligence.  Ultimately, only the legislature can create such a narrow and
specific basis of tort liability.   59                              
The Court of Appeal also referred to a “general duty of care” in
articulating its test for maternal tort liability.  With respect, there can be
no such duty owed to the public at large.  As a matter of tort law, a duty of
care must always be owed by one person to another.  Negligence cannot exist in
the abstract.  There must be a specific duty owed to a foreseeable plaintiff,
which is breached, in order for negligence to arise.  A “general duty of care”
does not exist.  Accordingly, it cannot be used as a legal test for the
imposition of tort liability in cases of prenatal negligence. Even if it were
possible to identify readily those activities in which a woman owes a “general
duty of care”, this would not limit the extent of external scrutiny and control
over a pregnant woman’s daily life.  To rely on the “general duty of care”
distinction, in order to hold that this appeal does not raise important issues
of social policy, is bound to introduce a significant element of uncertainty
into tort law.    Ironically, in its attempt to shield women from
inquisitions into alleged parental indiscretions such as smoking and drinking,
the Court of Appeal has expanded the liability of pregnant women.  [Emphasis in
original.]     (c)   Motor Vehicle Exception  64                              
In articulating a distinction between lifestyle choices and the general
duty to drive carefully, the Court of Appeal relied on the Congenital
Disabilities (Civil Liability) Act 1976.  However, it must be remembered
that, under this statute, the Parliament of the United Kingdom exempted mothers
from tort liability for injuries caused to their children while in utero,
with the exception of injuries sustained as a result of motor vehicle
accidents.  With respect, the U.K. legislative solution to the issue at bar
cannot be interpreted as support for the test suggested by the Court of
Appeal.  To do so presumes that it is appropriate for courts to resolve an
extremely sensitive and complex issue of public policy and insurance law.  The
Court of Appeal failed to appreciate the significance of  the fact that
maternal liability for motor vehicle negligence is provided for in the United  Kingdom
in legislation rather than the common law.  65                              
Thus, it must be emphasized that the general rule for mothers in the
United Kingdom is one of immunity for prenatal negligence with the limited exception
of injuries caused by negligent driving.  The Act provides that a mother cannot
be held liable for any amount of damages which exceeds the limit fixed by
statute.  This will benefit both the mother and the rest of the family.  The
legislation renders it impossible to argue by analogy that the duty of care
should be extended to other tortious situations.  A judicial finding of
liability in this appeal would not necessarily place pregnant women in Canada
in the same legal position.  If such an action were allowed, even in the narrow
context of negligent driving, it would have to recognize a duty and articulate
a standard of care for the conduct of pregnant women.  As a matter of tort law,
this carries the risk that the duty would be applied in other contexts where it
would impose unreasonable obligations upon pregnant women.    Clause 2 deals with the special case in which the
Law Commission thought that a mother should be liable for negligence causing
injuries to her child.  In this case alone the Law Commission thought that
it would relieve rather than increase the stress naturally imposed on her if
her child could recover damages against her.  Because she is bound
to be insured for liability while driving, there should be no question of
inability to pay the sum awarded, and this provision accords with the general
policy that the blameless victims of road accidents caused by negligence should
recover compensation.  For those reasons motor accidents are treated as a
special case.  From a legal point of view, I understand that there
may be said to be some inconsistency between the provisions of Clauses 1 and 2
[maternal immunity and motor vehicle exception], but I believe that the provisions
are based on common sense and reflect the realities of everyday life. 
[Emphasis added.]   69                              
Once again, the American experience with the partial abrogation of the
parental tort immunity doctrine is instructive in this regard.  In Black v.
Solmitz, 409 A.2d 634 (1979), the Supreme Judicial Court of Maine refused
to carve out a motor vehicle exception for the following reasons at
p. 639:  It seems proper to add, however that we do not intend to limit our
decision to automobile negligence cases in the manner of the Virginia Supreme
Court of Appeals, nor do we intend to follow the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial
Court in abrogating the rule of parental immunity only to the extent of the
parent’s automobile liability insurance.  Those limitations seem to us
objectionable as suggesting that the decision to restrict immunity is based on
expediency rather than on correct legal principles.  In our view such decisions
are difficult to defend against the charge that they effect a result more
appropriately reserved for legislation.  [Emphasis added; citations omitted.]  70                              
It may well be that a legislative exception to maternal tort immunity
can be created for damages, caused to a child upon birth, as a result of the
negligent driving of a pregnant woman.  For example, the statute might specify
that this constituted an exception to the general rule of tort immunity, fix
the limits of liability, and prohibit the recovery of damages above the limit
fixed in the insurance policy.  Legislation of this type could be socially
rewarding for it could benefit the injured child, the mother and the rest of
the family.  Yet, if it were carefully drafted, such legislation would not
constitute an undue intrusion into the privacy and autonomy rights of pregnant
women in Canada.      74                              
Quite simply, the existence of insurance is not an appropriate basis for
the determination of tort liability between litigating parties.  As Viscount
Simonds noted in Lister v. Romford Ice & Cold Storage Co., [1957] 1
All E.R. 125 (H.L.), at p. 133:  “As a general proposition it has not, I
think, been questioned for nearly two hundred years that, in determining the
rights inter se of A and B, the fact that one or other of them is insured is to
be disregarded”.  75                              
Moreover, problems of application are bound to arise with a judicial
exception to maternal tort immunity based on motor vehicle insurance.  For
instance, should liability be confined to the limits of the mother’s insurance
policy?  Contributory negligence as a vehicle passenger may not be covered by insurance. 
In addition, the mother’s action may be barred by a wide range of coverage
defences available to her insurer.  This Court has consistently held that the
existence of insurance is irrelevant to a determination of tortious liability. 
Accordingly, it would be inappropriate to resolve this appeal on that basis.  VI.  Summary   77                              
Biology dictates that only women can become pregnant and bear children. 
In light of this very demanding biological reality, the courts should be
hesitant to impose additional burdens upon pregnant women.  In addition, the
relationship between an expectant woman and her foetus is truly unique. 
Accordingly, there can be no meaningful analogy between a child’s action for
prenatal negligence against a third-party tortfeasor, on the one hand, and
against his or her mother, on the other.    79                              
There is as well a need for judicial restraint in the development of
tort law as it pertains to sensitive and far-reaching issues of public policy. 
The imposition of a legal duty of care upon a pregnant woman towards her foetus
or subsequently born child  cannot be characterized as the simple application
of existing tort rules to meet the requirements of a specific case.  Rather, it
constitutes a severe intrusion into the lives of pregnant women, with
potentially damaging effects on the family unit.  80                              
Moreover, there can be no satisfactory judicial articulation of a
standard of conduct for pregnant women.  A rule based on a “reasonable pregnant
woman” standard raises the spectre of tort liability for lifestyle choices, and
undermines the privacy and autonomy rights of women.  A compromise judicial
solution, based on the murky distinction between “lifestyle choices peculiar to
parenthood” and a “general duty of care” owed to third parties, is simply too
vague to be manageable, and will inevitably lead to inequitable and uncertain
results.  81                              
Finally, a rule based on a strictly defined motor vehicle exception to
delineate the scope of maternal tort liability should not be created by the
judiciary.  To do so would be to sanction a legal solution based solely on access
to insurance.  If this approach were to be adopted, the provincial legislatures
would be required to amend their legislative compensation regimes for motor
vehicle accidents.  Any such amendment might well be required to specify that
it constituted an exception to the general rule of maternal tort immunity for
prenatal negligence, and that the injured child could not recover damages above
the limit established by the insurance scheme.  A carefully tailored solution
could benefit both the injured child and his or her family, without unduly
restricting the privacy and autonomy rights of Canadian women.      VII.  Disposition  82                              
The order of the Court of Appeal and the trial judgment are set aside. 
The appeal is allowed but, under the circumstances, without costs.   The reasons of L’Heureux-Dubé and McLachlin JJ. were delivered by  //McLachlin
J.//  83                              
McLachlin J. – The issue on this appeal is whether the common law should
hold a pregnant woman civilly liable for injury to her foetus when the foetus
is later born alive.  Thus far the courts have not imposed such liability.  I
agree with Cory J. that they should not do so now and unconditionally endorse
his analysis and disposition of this appeal.  I wish merely to add observations
about the constitutional values underpinning the autonomy interest of pregnant
women and the difficulty with using tort principles to restrict that interest.  84                              
In my view, to apply common law liability for negligence generally to
pregnant women in relation to the unborn is to trench unacceptably on the
liberty and equality interests of pregnant women.  The common law must reflect
the values enshrined in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
Liability for foetal injury by pregnant women would run contrary to two of the
most fundamental of these values  – liberty and equality.  85                              
I turn first to liberty.  Virtually every action of a pregnant woman --
down to how much sleep she gets, what she eats and drinks, how much she works
and where she works -- is capable of affecting the health and well-being of her
unborn child, and hence carries the potential for legal action against the
pregnant woman.  Such legal action in turn carries the potential to bring the
whole of the pregnant woman’s conduct under the scrutiny of the law.  This in
turn has the potential to jeopardize the pregnant woman’s fundamental right to
control her body and make decisions in her own interest: R. v. Morgentaler,
[1988] 1 S.C.R. 30, per Wilson J.  86                              
The intrusion upon the pregnant woman’s autonomy worked by the proposed
common law rule would also violate her right to equal treatment.  Canadians
generally enjoy the full right to decide what they will eat or drink, where
they will work and other personal matters.  Pregnant women, however, would not
enjoy that right.  In addition to the usual duties of prudent conduct imposed
on all who engage in life’s various activities, pregnant women would be subject
to a host of additional restrictions.  Any other individual can avoid being a
tortfeasor by isolating himself or herself from other members of society.  The
pregnant woman has no such choice.  She carries her foetus 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.  87                              
To say women choose pregnancy is no answer.  Pregnancy is essentially
related to womanhood.  It is an inexorable and essential fact of human history
that women and only women become pregnant.  Women should not be penalized
because it is their sex that bears children:  Brooks v. Canada Safeway Ltd.,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 1219.  To say that broad legal constraints on the conduct of
pregnant women do not constitute unequal treatment because women choose to
become pregnant is to reinforce inequality by the fiction of deemed consent and
the denial of what it is to be a woman.  88                              
Those who urge intrusion of common law tort liability into the lives of
pregnant women do not, in the main, contest the impermissibility of broad
interference with the rights of women to make decisions about their bodies and
lives.  They seek rather to reduce the intrusion on the autonomy of the
pregnant woman to the point where the infringement on her liberty and equality
interests is acceptable.  89                              
My difficulty is that the common law is unable to achieve this
restrained result without distortion of the very methodology by which it
operates and the introduction of new difficulties.  The first proposal -- the
rule that only children “born alive” can sue -- eliminates liability for
abortion but leaves vast scope for curtailment of the pregnant woman’s
autonomy.  The second proposal -- a rule that liability follows only where the
mother has an insurance policy to cover the damage -- flies in the face of the
maxim that tort liability cannot be predicated on the means of the defendant. 
A third proposal, adopted by the Court of Appeal -- that liability be
restricted to situations where the pregnant woman already owes a duty to other
people “generally” (in this case, a general duty to “drive carefully”) --
violates the precept that a common law duty of care arises from the
relationship of the parties before the court, not from the relationship between
the defendant and a hypothetical plaintiff.  Finally, the variant on the Court
of Appeal’s theory adopted by Major J. -- that the additional duty must be owed
to an actual third party -- still violates the principle that the duty
of care in tort must be founded on the relationship between the actual parties
to the dispute before the court, and makes recovery conditional on the
serendipitous coincidence that another person stood to be injured by the
pregnant woman’s act or omission.  I am not persuaded that the common law can
be narrowed to achieve the result here sought while staying true to its principles.  90                              
The goal of the Court of Appeal and those who advocate liability in this
case is modest.  They simply want children who are born with injuries sustained
before birth due to their mother’s negligence in operating a motor vehicle to
be able to recover under the mother’s liability insurance policy.  That may be
a laudable goal.  The difficulty is that in order to achieve this modest goal
judicially, they cast themselves on the horns of a dilemma:  either they shape
the common law in a way that has the potential to render pregnant women liable
for a broad range of conduct and unjustifiably trammel liberty and rights to
equal treatment; or they accept category-based restrictions antithetical to the
common law method.  Legislative action, the route chosen in England, can
accomplish the limited goal of permitting children like the respondent to
access motor vehicle liability insurance without these negative consequences. 
In these circumstances, the courts should not intervene.   The reasons of Major and Bastarache JJ. were delivered by  //Major J.//  91                              
Major J. (dissenting) --
On March 14, 1993, the appellant Cynthia Dobson was driving a motor vehicle
towards Moncton, New Brunswick, on Route 126.  There were patches of drifted
snow and slush on the road and the weather was unsettled.  At approximately
12:30 p.m., her vehicle collided with that of John Carter.  Cynthia Dobson was
27 weeks pregnant.  The respondent Ryan Dobson was born by Caesarean section
later the same day.  He suffered injuries in the collision resulting in
permanent mental and physical impairment, including cerebral palsy, and alleges
that the collision was caused by his mother’s negligent driving.  92                              
The issue is whether a born alive child has the legal capacity to
commence a tort action against his mother for prenatal injuries sustained as a
result of her alleged negligent driving.  93                              
The trial judge granted the respondent standing to sue.  He reasoned
that since a child has a right to sue his parents in tort (Deziel v. Deziel,
[1953] 1 D.L.R. 651 (Ont. H.C.)), and since a born alive child has a right to
sue third parties in tort for injuries sustained in utero (Montreal
Tramways Co. v. Léveillé, [1933] S.C.R. 456; Duval v. Seguin,
[1972] 2 O.R. 686 (H.C.), aff’d (1973), 1 O.R. (2d) 482 (C.A.), it follows that
a born alive child has a right to sue his mother in tort for injuries sustained
in utero.  94                              
The trial judge held (186 N.B.R. (2d) 81, at p. 88) that his conclusion
followed as a matter of  “reasonable progression”:  But if an action can be sustained by a child
against a parent, and if an action can be sustained against a stranger for
injuries suffered by a child before birth, then it seems to me a reasonable
progression to allow an action by a child against his mother for prenatal
injuries caused by her negligence.  95                              
There are two central objections to the trial judge’s conclusion.  Both
are based on the unique relationship between a pregnant woman and her foetus. 
The first is that the trial judge’s reasons rest on the mistaken assumption
that the relation between a pregnant woman and her foetus can be analogized to the
relation between third parties and the foetus.  A pregnant woman cannot have a
duty of care to her own foetus, which is at law but a part of herself.  Thus,
it is argued that the sui generis nature of the relation between a
pregnant woman and her foetus does not permit the application of the holdings
in Montreal Tramways, supra, and Duval, supra, to
the instant case.  The legal unity of pregnant woman and foetus precludes the
finding of a duty of care.  96                              
The second objection raises the policy implications of the trial judge’s
decision.  A pregnant woman and her foetus are physically one, in the sense
that she carries her foetus within herself.  Virtually every aspect of her
behaviour could foreseeably affect her foetus.  Thus the vindication of a born
alive child’s right to sue his mother in tort would severely constrain a
pregnant woman’s freedom of action.  The physical unity of pregnant woman and
foetus means that the imposition of a duty of care would amount to a profound
compromise of her privacy and autonomy.  Therefore, even if a duty of care
could be said to arise in the instant case, there are determinative policy
considerations, formulated by this Court in Winnipeg Child and Family
Services (Northwest Area) v. G. (D.F.), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 925,
negativing the finding of a duty of care.  The First
Branch of the Kamloops Test  97                              
These two objections correspond to the two-step test in Anns v.
Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.), at pp. 751-52,
which was adopted by this Court in City of Kamloops v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2.  The test was stated by Wilson J. at pp. 10-11:  (1)   is there a sufficiently close relationship
between the parties (the [defendant] and the person who has suffered the
damage) so that, in the reasonable contemplation of the [defendant],
carelessness on its part might cause damage to that person?  If so,  (2)   are there any considerations which ought to
negative or limit (a) the scope of the duty and (b) the class of persons to
whom it is owed or (c) the damages to which a breach of it may give rise?   98                              
The parties to the present action are a mother and her born alive child,
not a pregnant woman and her foetus.  The parties are separate legal entities. 
This distinguishes the appeal from cases dealing with abortion (see R. v.
Morgentaler, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30; Tremblay v. Daigle, [1989] 2 S.C.R.
530) and the autonomy rights of pregnant women (see Winnipeg, supra).  99                              
The well-settled rule that a born alive child has a right to sue third
parties for injuries prenatally sustained (i.e., the “born alive rule”) does
not entail an assertion of foetal rights.  If the rule is applied in the
present case, the duty of care at issue would not be owed by the pregnant woman
to her foetus.  It would be owed to her born alive child.  100                          
The foetus has no cause of action.  There is no doubt that a foetus can
be injured in a car accident.  But this physical injury is not an actionable
harm.  It is not a legal fact.  It is legally meaningless until it arises as
the suffering of a legal person  --  the born alive child.  Had there been no
birth, no legally recognized injury would have taken place.  Birth transforms
the physical injury sustained by the foetus into an actionable harm.  Not the
injury to the foetus but the injury to the born alive child’s mental and
physical functioning is actionable.  101                          
As Lamont J. put it in Montreal Tramways, supra, at p.
463, “[t]he wrongful act of the Company produced its damage on the birth of
the child and the right of action was then complete” (emphasis added). 
There was no legal damage, though there was physical injury, before the birth
of the child.  The actionable damage did not antecede the birth.  What is
actionable in this appeal is not whatever it was that happened to the
respondent as a foetus.  What is actionable in this appeal is what is now
happening to the respondent as a child.  It is the child’s cerebral palsy and
related injuries that are actionable.  102                          
There is no such thing as “liability for prenatal injuries”.  Under
existing Canadian law the foetus does not exist for purposes of state
protection or civil action:  see Winnipeg, supra.  The pregnant
woman has no responsibility for damages or otherwise to the foetus and that is
so whether the harm is accidental, negligent or deliberate.  While most
pregnant women take special care to ensure a healthy foetus, there is no legal requirement
that they do so.  Only damages to a legal person are actionable.  103                          
The law of tort views a born alive child as a person capable of suing
third parties for damages resulting from injuries inflicted on her as a
foetus.  Absent the born alive child, however, foetal injuries are legally
irrelevant.  Thus, while there is no liability for prenatal injuries, there is
liability for post-natal injuries resulting from prenatal events caused
by a third party’s negligence.  104                          
The ability of the child to sue depends on his legal existence.  In this
appeal, the physical injury sustained in utero is irrelevant to the
question of standing.  It has relevance only as a matter of causation.  The
plaintiff must prove, on the balance of probabilities, that his damages were in
fact caused by the defendant’s negligence.  Ryan Dobson must prove that his
damages result from the negligent driving of his mother.  105                          
A pregnant woman cannot owe a duty of care to her foetus any more than
she can owe a duty of care to herself.  The duty of care is owed to the born
alive child.  Whatever may be said as a matter of policy, the trial judge’s
“reasonable progression” is not inconsistent with the legal unity of pregnant
woman and foetus.  It has nothing to do with that unity.  106                          
In Canada, a pregnant woman has an unrestricted legal right to an
abortion from conception to the time of birth, but once the child is born alive
he is a legal person with all the rights that accompany that status.  The right
of the pregnant woman to terminate her pregnancy is unrelated to her possible
responsibility to her child once born alive.  An application of the first
branch of the Kamloops test to the present case would unquestionably
find that the appellant mother while driving her car owed a duty of care to
other users of the highway and to passengers in her car.  In my opinion, the
duty of care owed by the mother to her born alive child is obvious, providing
she knows or ought to know that she is pregnant at the time of the act.  The Second
Branch of the Kamloops Test  107                          
The next question is whether policy reasons as contemplated in Kamloops
deprive the born alive plaintiff Ryan Dobson of his cause of action.  108                          
In para. 31 of his reasons, Cory J. postulates that such policy
considerations do exist.  He states:   109                          
In my opinion, the policy concerns raised in Winnipeg, supra,
relative to the pregnant woman and her foetus do not apply to the mother and
her born alive child.  This action was brought on behalf of a legal person, not
a foetus.  Cory J. suggests that, from the perspective of a pregnant woman, the
important legal distinction between her foetus and her born alive child might
not appear relevant.  In his view, a pregnant woman might conclude that the
behavioural restrictions to which she would be subjected in either case are
identical.  But the compelling point of departure is that, in contrast to Winnipeg,
supra, in this appeal the pregnant woman’s perspective is not the only
legally recognized perspective.  It competes with the recognized perspective of
her born alive child.  110                          
The issue here is twofold.  First, would a finding that Cynthia Dobson owes
the respondent a duty of care result in additional behavioural restrictions on
her while she was pregnant?  If so, are those restrictions of a nature that
would justify a finding that the respondent’s right to commence a tort action
against his mother for prenatal injuries allegedly sustained as a result of her
negligent driving should give way to Cynthia Dobson’s autonomy rights on policy
grounds?  111                          
I respectfully disagree with Cory J. that sufficient policy concerns
have been raised on the facts of this case to negative the child’s right to sue
in tort.  The appellant Cynthia Dobson was already under a legal obligation to
drive carefully.  She owed a duty of care to passengers in her car and to other
users of the highway, such as John Carter, the other motorist involved in the
collision.  If her negligent driving caused the collision, she will be liable
to John Carter.  112                          
In these circumstances, it would be unjustified to hold that the
appellant should not be liable to her born alive child on the grounds that such
liability would restrict her freedom of action.  Her freedom of action in
respect of her driving was already restricted by her duty of care to users of
the highway.  Hence, to acknowledge that the suffering of her born alive child,
Ryan Dobson, was within the reasonably foreseeable ambit of the risk created by
her negligent driving is hardly a limitation of her freedom of action.  The
appellant mother would not have had to take any further precautions, additional
to those she was already legally obliged to take, in order to avoid liability
to her born alive child.  113                          
The appellant’s autonomy interests are not in issue.  She was not
legally free to operate a motor vehicle without due care.  She did not have the
freedom to drive carelessly.  Therefore, it cannot be said that the imposition
of a duty of care to her born alive child would restrict her freedom to drive. 
The respondent child cannot take away from his mother a freedom she did not
have.  114                          
I respectfully disagree with McLachlin J. that the liberty and equality
interests of pregnant women are in issue in this appeal.  The values enshrined
in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  do not grant pregnant
women interests of any kind in negligent driving.  115                          
On the facts of this case, Ryan Dobson’s prima facie right to sue
in tort arises only on the same grounds and in the same way as that of the
driver of the other car.  In these circumstances, the appellant’s freedom of
action is not in issue, and the suggestion that her son’s rights ought to be
negatived so as to protect her freedom of action is misplaced.  116                          
Where a pregnant woman already owes a duty of care to a third party in
respect of the same behaviour for which her born alive child seeks to find her
liable, policy considerations pertinent to the pregnant woman’s freedom of
action cannot operate so as to negative the child’s prima facie right to
sue.  The duty of care imposed on the pregnant woman is not more onerous
because of her potential liability to her born alive child.  117                          
The presence of a duty of care owed to a third party in respect of the
same behaviour for which her born alive child seeks to find her liable
precludes a pregnant woman from arguing successfully that her freedom of action
would be restricted by the imposition of a duty of care to her born alive
child.  A grant of immunity from tort liability rooted in policy considerations
pertinent to a pregnant woman’s freedom of action must necessarily rest on a
showing that such freedom of action would be restricted by the imposition of a
duty of care to the born alive child.  No such showing seems possible where the
pregnant woman’s freedom of action is already restricted in the very same
respect by a duty of care owed to a third party.  118                          
I disagree with McLachlin J. that this view of the matter violates the
principle that the duty of care in tort must be founded on the relationship
between the actual parties to the dispute before the court.  The point is not
that the child’s prima facie right to sue arising from the first branch
of Kamloops is conditional on the “serendipitous coincidence” that a
third party is owed a duty of care.  The point is that, where a duty of care is
owed to a third party, the child’s prima facie right to sue cannot be
negatived under the second branch of Kamloops on policy grounds flowing
from the pregnant woman’s freedom of action.  The point is precisely that where,
as here, a pregnant woman’s freedom of action is not in issue, nothing in the
relationship between the actual parties to the dispute can possibly support the
proposition that the imposition of liability to her born alive child would
infringe her freedom of action.  119                          
But matters are different where the pregnant woman does not owe a
third party a duty of care in respect of the behaviour, as, for instance, in
her lifestyle choices such as smoking, drinking, and dietary and health-care
decisions.  That is also true of various other activities that may place the
pregnant woman in harm’s way.  The examples range from an unhealthy work or
home environment to activities as extreme as bungy jumping.  In such cases, the
second branch of the Kamloops test may prevent the imposition of a duty
of care because her freedom of action is in issue and policy reasons for
immunity can be adduced.  The distinction is plain and is obscured only by
slippery slope and flood-gate types of argument founded in an understandably
emotional response to the question.  120                          
Assume, for example, that another pregnant woman was a passenger in
Cynthia Dobson’s car.  If, as a result of negligent driving, the other pregnant
woman gave birth to an injured child, there is absolutely no doubt that that
born alive child would have a right to sue Cynthia Dobson: see Montreal
Tramways, supra, and Duval, supra.  In those
circumstances, policy reasons flowing from Cynthia Dobson’s freedom of action
capable of negativing Ryan Dobson’s right to sue seem impossible to formulate. 
His mother’s freedom of action in respect of her driving was already restricted
by the duty of care she owed to, inter alia, another born alive child.  121                          
The example confirms that no intrusion into a pregnant woman’s freedom
of action can be demonstrated in cases where a duty of care owed to a third
party in respect of the same behaviour forms part of the factual situation.  In
such cases, the pregnant woman’s freedom of action is not in issue.  122                          
This view of the matter has the advantage of providing a bright-line
test to distinguish situations in which the pregnant woman’s freedom of action
is in issue from situations in which her freedom of action is not in issue.  A
given factual transaction either involves a duty of care to third parties or it
does not.  These matters are not crystal clear.  But the law of tort is
well-equipped to distinguish between situations where duties of care are owed
and situations where duties of care are not owed.  In jurisprudential matters,
few lines could be brighter than those situations where a pregnant woman owes
to third parties a duty of care in respect of the very same behaviour of which
her born alive child complains and situations where she does not owe such duty
to third parties.  123                          
Policy considerations flowing from a pregnant woman’s autonomy interests
are not operative in situations, such as the case before us, where those
interests are not in issue.  These situations are distinguishable from
situations where those interests are indeed in issue.  Therefore, there is no
need to beware that, in deciding this appeal on its own facts, we will have
decided infinitely more difficult cases truly involving lifestyle choices and
autonomy interests of pregnant women.  On the contrary, the very depth,
complexity and importance of such cases demands that they not be decided until
they in fact arise before this Court.  124                          
The determining question is what social policy can justify the
conclusion that, as between the rights of a pregnant woman and those of her
born alive child, the rights of the child should yield.  125                          
The concerns formulated in Winnipeg, supra, are not
sufficient to take into account the additional factor present in the instant
case: the legal personality of the born alive child.  At issue is the
relationship between the rights of a pregnant woman and the rights of her born
alive child.  A one-sided emphasis on either side of this relationship
necessarily misses the subject-matter it is attempting to analyse.  Such an
emphasis simply begs the question.  126                          
That question is what social policy considerations justify the denial of
a born alive child’s right to recover for negligently caused physical damages. 
No compelling evidence, in fact no evidence, was presented that should as a
matter of social policy place the child in a subservient position to that of
the negligent mother. 127                          
The bare assertion of social policy concerns expressly and unilaterally
centred on a pregnant woman’s rights are not a sufficient answer to the
question whether a pregnant woman’s rights should prevail over the equally
recognized rights of her born alive child.  It is no answer to the plaintiff in
this case that unilateral concerns about a pregnant woman’s competing rights
are sufficient to “negative” a negligent violation of his physical integrity. 
His rights, too, are at stake.  128                          
While the law may grant immunity from liability based on policy reasons,
those reasons must be clear and compelling and are conspicuously absent in this
case.  The removal of the child’s cause of action is extreme and it should
follow that the policy reasons for doing so should be obvious and persuasive. 
There was no authority advanced to support the defendant’s claim in this case;
that is, authority that would negate a pregnant woman’s legal responsibility
for negligent acts against her born alive child, where the effects of those
acts are reasonably foreseeable and where they violate the physical integrity
of a legal person.  To recall Lamont J.’s words in Montreal Tramways, supra,
at p. 464, no other plaintiff would “be compelled, without any fault on its
part, to go through life carrying the seal of another’s fault and bearing a
very heavy burden of infirmity and inconvenience without any compensation
therefor”.  129                          
The special relationship between a pregnant woman and her foetus is a
biological fact.  This biological fact is significant for the mother-defendant. 
But it is also deeply significant for the born alive child-plaintiff.  The
legal or social policy implications to be drawn from that biological fact
cannot be ascertained in the absence of equal acknowledgment of the rights of
the child.  130                          
To grant a pregnant woman immunity from the reasonably foreseeable
consequences of her acts for her born alive child would create a  legal
distortion as no other plaintiff carries such a one-sided burden, nor any
defendant such an advantage.  131                          
Aside from a pregnant woman’s autonomy interests, there may be policy
considerations flowing from concerns about the appropriateness of
intra-familial litigation that may be sufficient to negative any child’s right
to sue its parents in tort.  The considerations, however, must apply to all
members of the defined family unit.  The conclusion that such concerns only bar
tort action brought by born alive children who sustained injuries while still
in utero is not justified.  132                          
As no policy concerns sufficient to negative the child’s right to sue
arise on the facts of this case, the born alive respondent has the legal
capacity to commence a tort action against his appellant mother for prenatal
injuries allegedly sustained as a result of her negligent driving.  133                          
Under the direction given by the majority in Winnipeg, supra,
it is my opinion that the removal of Ryan Dobson’s right to sue in tort for
negligent violations of his physical integrity lies within the exclusive
purview of the legislature, subject to the limits imposed by the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  134                          
I would dismiss this appeal.  Appeal allowed, Major
and Bastarache JJ.  dissenting.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Burchell, Hayman, Barnes,
Halifax.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Bingham, Rideout, Brison
and Blair, Moncton.  Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Abortion Rights Action
League:  Eberts, Symes, Street and Corbett, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada: 
Stikeman, Elliott, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the Catholic Group for Health, Justice
and Life:  Barnes, Sammon, Ottawa.    