McKinley v. BC Tel, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 161, 2001 SCC 38  Martin Richard McKinley                                                                               Appellant  v.  BC Tel, British Columbia Telephone Company, BC Telecom Inc., BC Tel Services Inc., BC Tel Systems Support Inc., B.C. Mobile Ltd., BC Tel Properties Inc., Canadian Telephones and Supplies Ltd., and TSI Telecommunications Services International Inc.                                                                          Respondents  Indexed as:  McKinley v. BC Tel  Neutral citation:  2001 SCC 38.  File No.:  27410.  2001:  January 24;
2001:  June 28.   on appeal from the court of appeal for british
columbia  Employment law – Wrongful
dismissal – Dishonest conduct – Whether employee’s dishonesty, in and of
itself, necessarily gives rise to just cause for summary dismissal – Whether
nature and context of such dishonesty must be considered –  Whether trial judge
erred in instructing jury that employee’s dishonesty would merit
termination only if it was of “a degree that was incompatible with the
employment relationship” – Applicable standard
for assessing whether and in what circumstances dishonesty provides just cause.  Employment law – Wrongful
dismissal – Jury’s verdict – Dishonest conduct – Jury finding that just cause
for summary dismissal did not exist – Whether jury’s verdict reasonable.  Damages – Wrongful dismissal –
Extended period of notice – Whether  trial judge erred by putting issue of
extended notice period before jury – Whether jury award for damages
representing extended notice period reasonable.  Damages – Wrongful dismissal –
Aggravated damages – Whether criteria for allowing issue of aggravated damages
to go to jury met.  Damages – Wrongful dismissal –
Punitive damages – Whether issue of punitive damages should have been put to
jury.  The appellant is a chartered accountant who was
employed by the respondents (“BC Tel”).  In 1993,  he began to experience high
blood pressure as a result of hypertension.  By June 1994 his blood pressure
was rising on a daily basis and following his physician’s advice he took a
leave of absence from work.  The appellant had indicated to his employer that
he wished to return to work, but in a position that carried less responsibility. 
He was advised that BC Tel would attempt to find another suitable position for
him within its corporate structure.  On August 31, 1994 BC Tel terminated the
appellant’s employment.  By that time, the appellant had worked for BC Tel for
almost 17 years and was 48 years of age.  The appellant rejected BC Tel’s
severance offer and took the position that his employment was terminated
without just cause and without reasonable notice or pay in lieu of reasonable
notice.  He brought a wrongful dismissal action in the British Columbia Supreme
Court.  B.C. Tel took the position that they had just cause for the appellant’s
summary dismissal, alleging that he had been dishonest about his medical
condition, and the treatments available for it.    Whether an employer is justified in dismissing an
employee on the grounds of dishonesty is a question that requires an assessment
of the context of the alleged misconduct.  More specifically, the test is
whether the employee’s dishonesty gave rise to a breakdown in the employment
relationship.  Just cause for dismissal exists where the dishonesty violates an
essential condition of the employment contract, breaches the faith inherent to
the work relationship, or is fundamentally or directly inconsistent with the
employee’s obligations to his or her employer.  In accordance with this test, a
trial judge must instruct the jury to determine:  (1) whether the evidence
established the employee’s deceitful conduct on a balance of probabilities; and
(2) if so, whether the nature and degree of the dishonesty warranted
dismissal.  The second branch of the test does not blend questions of fact and
law.  Rather, assessing the seriousness of the misconduct requires the facts
established at trial to be carefully considered and balanced.  As such, it is a
factual inquiry for the jury to undertake.  In certain contexts,  the
contextual approach might lead to a strict outcome:  cause for termination
exists where theft, misappropriation or serious fraud is found.  However,
lesser sanctions may be applied for less serious types of misconduct.  An effective
balance must be struck between the severity of an employee’s misconduct and the
sanction imposed.   An appellate court is entitled to set aside a jury’s verdict where it
is found that the evidence did not permit a jury acting judicially to reach the
conclusion that it did.  In the present case, while there may
not have been a full disclosure of all material facts by the appellant
concerning his treatment and medication, an analysis of the record as a whole
leads to the conclusion that the jury could have reasonably and judicially
found that the appellant did not engage in dishonest conduct of a degree
incompatible with his employment relationship.  There is therefore no
basis upon which to interfere with the jury’s verdict that B.C. Tel had not
proven just cause warranting dismissal.  There is also no basis for interfering with the trial
decision on the issue of the extended notice period.  Where a dismissal is
accompanied by bad faith or unfair dealing on the part of the employer, Wallace
establishes that such conduct merits compensation by way of an extension to the
notice period.  This remedy is not triggered by the dismissal itself, but by
the exacerbating factors that, in and of themselves, inflict injury upon the
employee.  The trial judge’s analysis and jury charge adhered to the principles
set out by this Court in Wallace, and the jury could, based on the
evidence, reasonably find that the notice period should be extended. Although
the appellant may have agreed to terminate his employment contract, this did
not necessarily imply a waiver of his right to be treated fairly and in good
faith by his employer, nor did it preclude the protection that Wallace
intended to confer by recognizing an award for extended notice.  The order for aggravated damages must be set aside
since the criteria for allowing the question of aggravated damages to go to the
jury were not met.  The proper threshold for allowing the issue of aggravated
damages to be determined by a jury is whether sufficient evidence exists.  The
standard set out by the trial judge fell short of that test by suggesting, in
effect, that any evidence, even a mere scintilla thereof, would suffice to put
the matter of aggravated damages to the jury for its consideration.  Applying
the correct standard to the present case, there was not sufficient evidence
before the trial judge to allow the jury to deliberate on the question of
aggravated damages.  Finally, the trial judge’s ruling that the question of
punitive damages should be withheld from the jury was sound and should be left
undisturbed.  The evidence did not support a finding of an “independent wrong”,
including discrimination, and B.C. Tel’s conduct was not sufficiently harsh,
vindictive, reprehensible, malicious or extreme in nature to warrant
punishment.  Cases Cited  Statutes and Regulations Cited    Authors Cited  Levitt, Howard A.  The Law of
Dismissal in Canada, 2nd ed. Aurora, Ont.:  Canada Law Book, 1992.     The judgment of the Court was delivered by  Iacobucci J. --  I.  Introduction  1                                  
This appeal arises out of a wrongful dismissal action. It calls upon the
Court to elaborate the circumstances in which an employer would be justified in
summarily dismissing an employee as a result of the latter’s dishonest conduct.
More specifically, the question is whether any dishonesty, in and of
itself, suffices to warrant an employee’s termination, or whether the nature
and context of such dishonesty must be considered in assessing whether just
cause for dismissal exists.  2                                  
The appeal also raises ancillary questions relating to the propriety of
the trial judge’s decision to put to the jury questions related to awards for
an extended notice period, aggravated damages, and punitive damages. In
addition, the parties sought a review of the reasonableness of the jury verdict
on various matters decided at trial. A cross-appeal also has been brought,
wherein the respondents submitted that, if the Court dismissed the appeal, it
ought to dismiss the appellant’s wrongful dismissal action outright rather than
order a new trial.  3                                  
For the reasons that follow, I am of the view that this appeal should be
allowed and that the jury’s verdict should be restored on all questions except
that related to aggravated damages. As I would allow the appeal, the
cross-appeal must per force be dismissed.  II.  Factual
Background  4                                  
The appellant, Martin Richard McKinley, is a chartered accountant who
was employed by the respondents, the BC Tel group of companies (“BC Tel”).
While working for BC Tel, he held various positions, earned promotions, and
received salary increases. In 1991, he became Controller, Treasurer and
Assistant Secretary to certain BC Tel companies. But in 1993, the appellant
began to experience high blood pressure as a result of hypertension. Initially,
this condition was brought under control through medication, and by taking some
time away from work. However, by May of 1994, the appellant’s health took a
turn for the worse. His blood pressure had begun to rise again, and by June of
that year, it was rising on a daily basis. Following his physician’s advice,
the appellant took a leave of absence from work.  5                                  
By July 1994, the appellant’s superior, Ian Mansfield (“Mansfield”),
raised the issue of the appellant’s termination from his employment. During
discussions with his employers, the appellant indicated that he wished to
return to work, but in a position that carried less responsibility. He was
advised that BC Tel would attempt to find another suitable position for him
within its corporate structure. However, alternative employment was never
offered to the appellant. Although at least two positions for which the
appellant qualified opened during the period in question, these were filled by
other employees.  6                                  
While the appellant was still on leave from work owing to his health
condition, Mansfield telephoned him and instructed him to report to the
respondents’ offices on August 31, 1994. The appellant complied, and on that
day, the respondents terminated his employment. By that time, the appellant had
worked for BC Tel for almost 17 years and was 48 years of age.  7                                  
Although the respondents made the appellant a severance offer, this was
rejected. According to the appellant, his employment was terminated without
just cause and without reasonable notice or pay in lieu of reasonable notice.
He thus brought a wrongful dismissal action in the Supreme Court of British
Columbia, arguing that his termination was an arbitrary and wilful breach of
his employment contract, which was conducted in a high-handed and flagrant
manner. The appellant maintained that the respondents’ actions amounted to an
intentional infliction of mental suffering. He alleged that, as a result of the
wrongful dismissal, he lost his employment income and benefits, as well as the
short-term disability benefits he was then receiving. He also argued that the
dismissal prevented him from qualifying for, or receiving, any long-term
disability benefits, and caused him to lose his future pension benefits. As
such, the appellant sought an order for general compensatory damages, special
damages for the expenses incurred in attempting to find new employment,
aggravated damages, and damages for mental distress and the intentional
infliction of mental suffering, as well as punitive damages.   9                                  
The respondents admitted to having terminated the appellant’s employment
on August 31, 1994. However, their initial defence rested on the ground that,
in dismissing the appellant, they offered him a compensation package of salary
and benefits in lieu of reasonable notice. Moreover, the respondents maintained
that throughout the months of July and August 1994, they used their best
efforts, to the appellant’s knowledge, to locate an alternate suitable position
for him within BC Tel. Finally, the respondents denied the appellant’s
allegations with respect to the flagrant nature of the dismissal, and submitted
that the termination actually occurred in a professional manner, and in
consultation with the appellant.  10                              
In a Further Amended Statement of Defence (October 6, 1997), the
respondents maintained that the appellant’s illness “frustrated the object of
the [appellant’s] employment”. They thus claimed that they were justified in
treating the employment contract as at an end, and in terminating it as they
did on August 31, 1994. The respondents submitted that in dismissing the
appellant, they offered him a compensation package in lieu of reasonable
notice.  11                              
However, on November 20, 1997, three days into the trial of this case,
the respondents obtained permission from the court to amend their pleadings
once again. They abandoned the defence of frustration, and instead argued that
just cause for the appellant’s summary dismissal existed. Specifically, the
respondents alleged that the appellant had been dishonest about his medical
condition, and the treatments available for it. This argument was based on the
respondents’ recent discovery of a letter (dated December 12, 1994) written by
the appellant to Dr. Peter Graff, an internal medicine and cardiac specialist,
who was one of the appellant’s attending physicians. In this letter, the
appellant wrote to Dr. Graff acknowledging that, during a previous medical
appointment, Dr. Graff had recommended a certain medication – the “beta
blocker” – as the next method of treatment for the appellant’s hypertension.
Although beta blockers were not prescribed at that time, the letter indicated
that Dr. Graff had advised the appellant that such treatment should begin upon
the latter’s return to work, if his blood pressure remained high.  12                              
The respondents claimed that the appellant deliberately withheld the
truth as to Dr. Graff’s recommendations regarding the use of beta blockers and
their ability to enable him to return to his job without incurring any health
risks. However, the appellant’s evidence at trial revealed that, insofar as he
was concerned, he had not lied to the respondents.  13                              
At trial, the appellant’s wrongful dismissal action was heard before a
judge and jury. Paris J. held that there was sufficient evidence to put the
question of just cause for dismissal to the jury. In instructing the jury on
this point, Paris J. stated that, in order for just cause to exist, it must
find (a) that the appellant’s conduct was dishonest in fact, and (b) that “the
dishonesty was of a degree that was incompatible with the employment
relationship”. Paris J. also held that the jury could consider whether
aggravated damages, as well as damages for bad faith in the conduct or manner
of the dismissal were warranted. On the other hand, he held that there was no
evidence upon which a claim for punitive damages could be based, and thus, this
question was not put to the jury.  14                              
The jury found in favour of the appellant, awarding him the following
amounts: $108,793 in general damages; $1,233 in special damages; $100,000 in
aggravated damages; $6,091 in pension contributions; prejudgment interest; and
costs. Paris J. refused to make an order for special costs, and for increased
costs.  15                              
The Court of Appeal for British Columbia set the jury award aside and
ordered a new trial. The appellant’s cross-appeal on the question of punitive
damages was dismissed. According to the Court of Appeal, dishonesty is always
cause for dismissal. Thus, by instructing jurors that the appellant’s
dishonesty would merit termination only if it was of a degree that was
“incompatible with the employment relationship”, Paris J. committed a
reversible error.  III.  Judicial
History  A.  Supreme
Court of British Columbia (Paris J.), November 27, 1997  16                              
Paris J. made several observations regarding the instructions and
questions he would put to the jury. First, with respect to the question of just
cause for dismissal, he stated that – without making any comments as to its
weight – he was bound to note that there was some evidence of a lack of
frankness by the appellant regarding his ability to return to his previous
position. But, it was to be left to the jury to decide whether the evidence
amounted to proof of “dishonesty of a degree incompatible with the employment
relationship”.  17                              
Paris J. held further that questions regarding damages related to bad
faith in the conduct or manner of dismissal were to be put to the jury. In this
regard, it was to determine whether the evidence revealed that there was bad faith
or unfair conduct by the respondents, as contemplated by this Court in Wallace
v. United Grain Growers Ltd., [1997] 3 S.C.R. 701. If so, it was to
decide by how many months the notice period should be extended beyond that
which would be considered as the “reasonable” period of notice in this case.  18                              
The trial judge also found that the question of aggravated damages
should be decided by the jury. In his view, there was some evidence to support
the appellant’s contention that, within the context of the dismissal, the
respondents engaged in a wilful or deliberate infliction of mental distress
amounting to tortious conduct. Whether the appellant actually suffered such
mental distress, and whether there existed an intention to inflict such
distress was to be inferred from the evidence, and was for the jury to decide.  19                              
However, Paris J. held that there was no evidence upon which the
appellant’s claim for punitive damages could be based. He found that human
rights legislation did not add anything to this dimension of the case, and
there was no evidence of discrimination on the basis of disability. Moreover,
Paris J. stated that there was no proof of harsh, vindictive, and malicious
conduct on the respondents’ part.  20                              
In charging the jury on the issue of dismissal for just cause on the
basis of an employee’s dishonesty, Paris J.’s instructions were as follows:  Now in this case, the defendant puts forward the
defence that it had just cause for dismissal of the plaintiff. If just cause
existed at the time of the dismissal, the defendant had the right to terminate
the employment contract without giving any notice. That is because conduct
amounting to just cause for dismissal constitutes a breach of the contract. Now
the burden of proving just cause is on the defendant. Now what constitutes just
cause for dismissal may vary depending upon the circumstances of the case which
must be assessed by you the jury. Generally speaking, however, examples of just
cause would be an employee’s serious misconduct, habitual neglect of duty,
incompetence, repeated willful [sic] disobedience, or dishonesty of a
degree incompatible with the employment relationship. The conduct must be such
as to undermine or seriously impair the trust and confidence the employer is
entitled to place in the employee in the circumstances of their particular
relationship. Something less than that is not sufficient cause for dismissal
without reasonable notice. Perhaps I should repeat that for you. As to just
cause for dismissal the conduct of the employee must be such as to undermine or
seriously impair the trust and confidence the employer is entitled to place on
the employee in the circumstances of their particular relationship. In the case
of dishonesty it must be of a degree incompatible with the employment
relationship. Something less than that is not sufficient cause for dismissal
without reasonable notice.                                                                      .
. .   Remember that as I have told you to find cause
for dismissal you would have to find not only that the plaintiff was deceitful
as the defendant contends but that the dishonesty was of a degree that was
incompatible with the employment relationship. [Emphasis added.]  The question
put to the jury on this point asked simply:  Have the Defendants proven that (unknown to them at the time), cause
for dismissal existed when they terminated the Plaintiff on August 31, 1994?   The jury
responded to this question in the negative.  B.          
Court of Appeal for British Columbia (Hollinrake J.A. for the
Court) (1999), 67 B.C.L.R. (3d) 337  21                             
On appeal, the respondents argued that the trial judge’s jury
instructions were incorrect in law. They maintained that an employee’s
dishonest conduct, irrespective of its degree, is always cause for dismissal.
In this respect, the respondents relied on McPhillips v. British Columbia
Ferry Corp. (1994), 94 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1 (C.A.); leave to S.C.C. refused,
[1995] 1 S.C.R. ix.  22                             
The Court of Appeal held that the dishonesty asserted by the respondents
was not as clear as in McPhillips, where an employee billed his employer
for unauthorized personal expenses. However, it found that Paris J. invited the
jury to consider the extent of the dishonesty alleged, and to determine whether
this “was of a degree that was incompatible with the employment relationship,”
and thus “sufficient to warrant dismissal”. According to the Court of Appeal,
such instructions were incorrect as a matter of law. In this regard, Hollinrake
J.A. stated at para. 25:  Dishonesty within the contract of employment, as is the case alleged
here, is cause and that cause is not founded on the basis of the “degree” of
the dishonesty.  Considering
the evidence before the jury and the question that had been put to it in regard
to the existence of just cause, Hollinrake J.A. held that it was not possible
to discern the jury’s exact findings. It may have found that, on the basis of
the evidence as a whole, there was no dishonesty. However, the jury also may
have concluded that there was dishonesty related to the employment contract,
but that such dishonesty was not of the requisite “degree” to provide just
cause for dismissal, as articulated by the trial judge. If the second scenario
were true, a miscarriage of justice had resulted in this case.  23                             
In considering the specific nature of the flaw within the jury charge,
Hollinrake J.A. stated at paras. 27 and 28:  In my opinion, this jury should have been instructed
that if it found dishonesty on the evidence as asserted by the [respondents] it
must, as a matter of law, conclude that there existed cause for dismissal. The
only finding of fact for the jury to make was dishonesty or no dishonesty and
if the former was found by the jury the judge would then have been bound as a
matter of law to conclude that there was cause for dismissal. That conclusion
is mandated by the McPhillips case.  I am unable to see any difference in substance from
the charge before us and that in McPhillips. In my opinion, they both
suffer from the identical fatal flaw. That being, it cannot be determined on
appeal whether or not the jury had found there was no dishonesty or there was
dishonesty found but in the collective mind of the jury that dishonesty did not
“justify the firing” (McPhillips) or was not “of a degree incompatible
with the employment relationship” (the instant case).  24                             
The court thus stated that the jury charge in this case – which referred
to the “degree of dishonesty” incompatible with the employment relationship –
put a mixed question of fact and law to the jury. Whether the appellant had
been dishonest with his employers was a question of fact for the jury to
decide. However, the jury should not have been permitted to determine whether
the “degree” of dishonesty sufficed to warrant dismissal, since as a matter of
law, all dishonesty within an employment relationship provides just cause.  25                             
Before the Court of Appeal, the respondents, referring to the case of Vancouver-Fraser
Park District v. Olmstead, [1975] 2 S.C.R. 831, submitted that the
appellant’s wrongful dismissal claim should be dismissed in preference to
ordering a new trial. They argued that it would be impossible for any jury
acting judicially to reach the conclusion that the appellant was honest with
his employers about his ability to return to work. The Court of Appeal declined
to dismiss the action. It held that, given the evidence, there was some measure
of confusion in the mind of the appellant as to the availability of a different
job, the medical advice he received, and what future steps he should take for
his own health and well-being. Thus, while the evidence could allow a jury to
arrive at a finding of dishonesty justifying dismissal without notice, it also
would be open to the trier of fact to conclude that there was no dishonest
conduct on the part of the appellant. As such, the appellant’s action against
his former employers could not be dismissed.  26                             
Accordingly, the appeal was allowed, the order of the British Columbia
Supreme Court set aside, and a new trial was ordered on all issues. The
appellant’s cross-appeal on the issue of whether the trial judge erred by
failing to put the question of punitive damages to the jury was unnecessary to
deal with, given the order for a new trial on all issues. As such, the
cross-appeal was dismissed without reasons.  IV.  Issues  27                             
This appeal raises the following issues:  A.               Did the trial judge err by
instructing the jury that, to find just cause for dismissal, it would have to
find not only that the plaintiff was deceitful, but that the dishonesty was “of
a degree that was incompatible with the employment relationship”?  B.                Based on the evidence before it,
could the jury, acting judicially, have reasonably found that the appellant’s
conduct was not dishonest and thus, that just cause for summary dismissal did
not exist? C.               Was the jury award for damages
representing an extended notice period reasonable?  D.               Should the question of aggravated
damages have been put to the jury in this case?  E.                Should the question of punitive
damages have been put to the jury in this case?  V. Analysis  A.  The
Standard for Dishonest Conduct in the Employment Relationship  28                             
Although this Court has yet to consider the question of whether an
employee’s dishonesty, in and of itself, necessarily gives rise to just cause
for summary dismissal, this issue has been examined by the English courts, as
well as appellate and lower courts in Canada. From an analysis of this
jurisprudence, no clear principle or standard emerges. Rather, while one line
of authority suggests that the nature of the dishonesty and the circumstances
surrounding its occurrence must be considered, another seems to indicate that
dishonest conduct alone – regardless of its degree – creates just cause for
dismissal. A brief review of these two strands of jurisprudence would be useful
before determining which should guide this Court’s analysis in the present
case.  1.    Authority Indicating that Context
Must Be Considered when Assessing Whether Dishonesty Amounts to Just Cause for
Dismissal  29                             
When examining whether an employee’s misconduct – including dishonest
misconduct – justifies his or her dismissal, courts have often considered the
context of the alleged insubordination. Within this analysis, a finding of
misconduct does not, by itself, give rise to just cause. Rather, the question
to be addressed is whether, in the circumstances, the behaviour was such that
the employment relationship could no longer viably subsist.  30                             
The Privy Council’s decision in Clouston & Co. v. Corry,
[1906] A.C. 122, adopted this analytical framework. The question arising in
that case was whether an employee’s public drunkenness and disobedient conduct
warranted his dismissal. The Privy Council’s ruling spoke generally to the
concept of “misconduct” and held that there was no fixed rule of law to define
when termination would be warranted. The question is one of degree. The trial
judge must first determine whether there is any evidence to submit to the jury
in support of the allegation of justifiable dismissal. He or she also may
direct jurors by informing them of the nature of the acts which, as a matter of
law, will justify dismissal. However, the ultimate question of whether just
cause for such dismissal exists is one of fact that the jury must
decide. Thus, the Privy Council indicated that it is not sufficient that the
jury find misconduct alone, since this will not necessarily provide a basis for
dismissal. Rather, the jury must determine that the misconduct is impossible to
reconcile with the employee’s obligations under the employment contract. In
this regard, Lord James of Hereford stated at p. 129:  In the present case the tribunal to try all issues
of fact was a jury. Now the sufficiency of the justification depended upon
the extent of misconduct. There is no fixed rule of law defining the degree
of misconduct which will justify dismissal. Of course there may be misconduct
in a servant which will not justify the determination of the contract of
service by one of the parties to it against the will of the other. On the other
hand, misconduct inconsistent with the fulfilment of the express or implied
conditions of service will justify dismissal. [Emphasis added.]   31                             
A similar analysis was undertaken in subsequent decisions dealing with
this issue. For instance, in Laws v. London Chronicle, Ltd.,
[1959] 2 All E.R. 285, the English Court of Appeal stated the following at p.
287:  [S]ince a contract of service is but an example of contracts in
general, so that the general law of contract will be applicable, it follows
that, if summary dismissal is claimed to be justifiable, the question must
be whether the conduct complained of is such as to show the servant to have
disregarded the essential conditions of the contract of service. [Emphasis
added.]  As such, Lord
Evershed, M.R., held that a single act of disobedience justified dismissal only
if it demonstrated that the servant had repudiated the contract or one of its
essential conditions. In this way, the ruling in Laws indicated that an
analysis of whether an employee’s misconduct warrants dismissal requires an
assessment of its degree and surrounding circumstances.  32                             
This contextual approach also has been adopted in several decisions by
Canadian appellate courts. For example, in R. v. Arthurs, Ex
parte Port Arthur Shipbuilding Co. (1967), 62 D.L.R. (2d) 342, at p. 348,
the Ontario Court of Appeal stated that an employer’s right to summarily
dismiss an employee is triggered by “serious misconduct”, which was recognized
as including habitual neglect of duty, incompetence, wilful disobedience or
“conduct incompatible with his duties, or prejudicial to the employer's
business.”  33                             
More recently, the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal in Blackburn v.
Victory Credit Union Ltd. (1998), 36 C.C.E.L. (2d) 94, adopted a contextual
analysis for assessing whether misconduct – and in particular, dishonest
misconduct – warranted summary dismissal. On this point, Flinn J.A., writing
for the court at p. 110, held:  The difficulty which I have with the position of counsel
for the employer is that, in dealing with this aspect of his first ground of
appeal, he treats the acts of misconduct in isolation.  The courts do not
consider an act of misconduct, in and of itself, to be grounds for dismissal
without notice, unless it is so grievous that it gives rise to the inference
that the employee intends no longer to be bound by the contract of service.  There is no definition which sets out, precisely,
what conduct, or  misconduct, justifies dismissal without notice, and rightly
so.  Each case must be determined on its own facts. . . .  Thus,
according to this reasoning, an employee’s misconduct does not inherently
justify dismissal without notice unless it is “so grievous” that it intimates
the employee’s abandonment of the intention to remain part of the employment
relationship. In drawing this conclusion, the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal
relied on the following passage in H. A. Levitt’s The Law of Dismissal in
Canada (2nd ed. 1992), at p. 124:  What constitutes just cause in a specific situation
is particularly difficult to enumerate because it depends not only on the
category and possible consequences of the misconduct, but also on both the
nature of the employment and the status of the employee . . . .    34                             
The jurisprudence also reveals that an application of a contextual
approach – which examines both the circumstances surrounding the conduct as
well as its nature or degree – leaves the trier of fact with discretion as to
whether a dishonest act gives rise to just cause. For example, in Jewitt
v. Prism Resources Ltd. (1981), 30 B.C.L.R. 43 (C.A.), Taggart
J.A. held that an analysis of the employee’s misconduct “in the circumstances”
of that case did constitute cause for dismissal. Jewitt involved an
employee who allowed a co-director’s signature to be traced on a balance sheet.
In contrast, an examination of the surrounding circumstances in Hill v.
Dow Chemical Canada Inc. (1993), 11 Alta. L.R. (3d) 66 led the Alberta
Court of Queen’s Bench to conclude that the misconduct in question merely
reflected a single incident of “poor judgment”. This finding, along with the
conclusion that the employee lacked an intention to deceive, caused the court
to conclude that the impugned behaviour did not warrant summary dismissal. At
issue in Hill was an employee’s unauthorized donation of bandages and
ice packs owned by his employer to a local hockey team, in breach of company
procedure. Similarly, in MacNaughton v. Sears Canada Inc.
(1997), 186 N.B.R. (2d) 384 (C.A.), Bastarache J.A., as he then was, found that
the impugned conduct of the employee was not sufficiently serious to justify
his dismissal, as it did not repudiate an essential condition of the employment
contract. Although the employee had been subject to prior reprimands, these
reprimands must also be taken in context, and do not eliminate the need for the
misconduct “to be of some importance” (p. 394).  This same court affirmed, in Dougherty
v. Bathurst Golf Association Ltd. (1997), 189 N.B.R. (2d) 230,
that just cause exists where the misconduct in question is “clearly
inconsistent” with the employee’s duties under the employment contract.  35                             
Cases in which courts have explicitly ruled that the issue of just cause
is one of fact to be put to a jury lend further support to an approach that
considers the particular circumstances surrounding the alleged employee
misconduct. Rather than viewing cause for dismissal as a legal conclusion that must
be drawn in any case where disobedience (including dishonesty) is proven, these
cases indicate that just cause can only be determined through an inquiry by the
trier of fact into (a) whether the evidence demonstrated employee misconduct
and (b) whether, in the circumstances, such misconduct sufficed to justify the
employee’s termination without notice.  36                             
This approach was adopted in Butler v. Canadian
National Railways, [1939] 3 W.W.R. 625 (Sask. C.A.), a case in which an
employee was dismissed from his position based on evidence that CNR property
was missing from a department that he was charged with overseeing. In the
appeal from the verdict finding insufficient cause for dismissal, Turgeon
C.J.S., citing Clouston, supra, held that the issue of cause was
unquestionably one of fact to be put to the jury. In a concurring judgment,
Gordon J.A. also cited Clouston to reject the employer’s argument that
the question of whether it had sufficient cause for dismissal was an issue of
law. In this regard, Gordon J.A. made the following comments at p. 631:  I think, therefore, with deference, that the learned
trial Judge was right in submitting the question to the jury. It was only
necessary for the plaintiff to establish that he was employed for an indefinite
time and that he was dismissed without notice. The onus then shifted to the
defendant to prove that such dismissal was justified. . . .  With deference
therefore, I think that the learned trial Judge was right in submitting the
question to the jury. The plaintiff has a statutory right to have the issues in
the action decided by the jury.  A Judge can intervene and say that there
is no evidence to go to a jury so far as the plaintiff is concerned but I know
of no authority which gives the Judge power to say that the defendant had given
sufficient evidence to satisfy the onus thrown upon him and that therefore he
will not submit the case to the jury. [Emphasis added.]  37                             
This reasoning was endorsed by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in Holloway
v. Encor Energy Corp. (1991), 93 Sask. R. 226. Referring explicitly
to Butler and Clouston, Gerwing J.A. held at p. 228 that “[i]t
was not open to the trial judge to reserve to himself the question of just
cause”.  Rather, this issue was considered to be one of fact, to be left for
the jury to decide.  38                             
In addition to the appellate decisions mentioned above, the contextual
approach to assessing employee misconduct also has been followed in several
trial judgments in Canada. See for example: Epoch v. Beaver
Lumber Co. (1997), 45 C.C.E.L. (2d) 135 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)), at p. 143; Thompson
v. Boise Cascade Canada Ltd. (1994), 7 C.C.E.L. (2d) 17 (Ont. Ct.
(Gen. Div.)), at p. 34.  Further in Justason v. Cox Radio
& T.V. Ltd. (1997), 190 N.B.R. (2d) 228 (Q.B.), and McCluskey v.
Lawtons Drug Stores Ltd. (1998), 204 N.B.R. (2d) 137 (Q.B.), aff’d
(1999), 210 N.B.R. (2d) 198 (C.A.), the court examined the nature and extent of
the misconduct, as well as the surrounding circumstances, in order to determine
whether the employment relationship could be sustained.  39                             
To summarize, this first line of case law establishes that the question
whether dishonesty provides just cause for summary dismissal is a matter to be
decided by the trier of fact, and to be addressed through an analysis of the
particular circumstances surrounding the employee’s behaviour. In this respect,
courts have held that factors such as the nature and degree of the misconduct,
and whether it violates the “essential conditions” of the employment contract
or breaches an employer’s faith in an employee, must be considered in drawing
factual conclusions as to the existence of just cause.  40                             
But a second branch of jurisprudence sets out a separate analytical
structure for this issue, and suggests that the only question for a trier of
fact is whether employee dishonesty exists. Once this is established, the
conclusion that must be reached as a matter of law is that the employer
had the right to dismiss its employee. It is to this second line of authority
that I now turn.  2.                Authority Indicating that
Dishonesty In and Of Itself Warrants Dismissal Without Notice  41                             
The broad language used in a second line of decisions indicates that
dishonesty, in and of itself, provides just cause, irrespective of the factors
and circumstances surrounding the conduct, the nature or degree of such
dishonesty, or whether it breached the essential conditions of the employment
relationship.  42                             
This approach was articulated by the English Court of Appeal in Boston
Deep Sea Fishing and Ice Co. v. Ansell (1888), 39 Ch. D. 339.
In that case, an agent had been instructed to arrange for several fishing boats
to be built for his employer. The agent then received a secret commission from
the boat builder, which the company learned of approximately one year later.
The employee’s conduct was found to be fraudulent, and this was held to provide
ample justification for dismissal without notice. In reaching this conclusion,
Bowen L.J. discussed the standard applicable for determining when dishonesty
suffices as cause for terminating the employment relationship. At p. 363 he
stated:  [I]n cases where the character of the isolated act is such as of itself
to be beyond all dispute a violation of the confidential relation, and a breach
of faith towards the master, the rights of the master do not depend on the
caprice of the jury, or of the tribunal which tries the question. Once the
tribunal has found the fact – has found that there is a fraud and breach of
faith – then the rights of the master to determine the contract follow as 
matter of law.  This passage
indicates that once the confidence inherent to the master-servant relationship
is breached, just cause for dismissal – as a matter of law – is
automatically triggered, and must not depend on whether the trier of fact finds
that such cause exists. Although Bowen L.J. spoke primarily to fraud, he also
indicated that “breach of faith” in general may warrant dismissal. Such broad
language suggests that any dishonest conduct which ruptures the trust inherent
to the employer-employee relationship provides just cause.  43                             
A similar view was adopted by the Privy Council in Federal Supply and
Cold Storage Co. of South Africa v. Angehrn & Piel
(1910), 80 L.J.P.C. 1. This case made plain that an employee who engages in a
fraudulent act of a serious nature (in that case, taking a secret commission)
intimates that he or she has forfeited the right to be continued in the
employer’s service. In this respect, it was stated at p. 3:  An agent who takes a secret commission does a dishonest act, and that
act shews he is unfit for a position of trust and confidence. It is the
revelation of character which justifies dismissal. . . .  Although the
dishonest act alone served as a basis for cause, it is also important to note
that the misconduct was fraudulent in character, a point that was emphasized by
the Privy Council. This suggests an awareness and consideration of the “nature”
of the misconduct in rendering judgment.  44                             
In British Columbia, the leading case on the matter in issue – and the
authority that the Court of Appeal relied on in the instant case – is McPhillips,
supra. The judicial history underlying that case is quite similar to
that in the present appeal. In McPhillips, an employee billed
unauthorized personal items ordered from one of his employer’s suppliers to his
employer. Upon discovering this, the employer terminated the employee for just
cause, which was then challenged by the employee before the courts. In a
recharge to the jury, the trial judge provided the following instructions on
the issue of cause (at pp. 5-6):  The defendant must convince you in this case that the plaintiff was
dishonest, that he breached a trust imposed on him.  And as I said whether
there is a cause to dismiss is a finding of fact.  If you are convinced that
the plaintiff was dishonest, you must be convinced that that fact, in all the
circumstances of the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant,
justified the firing. [Emphasis added by Hollinrake J.A.]  In reviewing
this jury charge, the Court of Appeal in McPhillips held that the trial
judge erred by leaving it to the jury to decide whether the employee’s
dishonesty was, “in all the circumstances” of the employment relationship,
sufficient to warrant  dismissal. Rather, relying on Boston Deep Sea Fishing,
supra, the court held at p. 6 that “[d]ishonesty is always cause
for dismissal because it is a breach of the condition of faithful service”
(emphasis added).  45                             
Writing for the Court of Appeal in McPhillips, Hollinrake J.A.
went on to distinguish that case from Clouston by indicating that the
contextual approach for assessing whether misconduct amounts to just cause
could not be extended to cases in which such misconduct was rooted in dishonest
behaviour. He thus concluded that the law on this issue required that the jury
be instructed that, if dishonesty on the part of the employee was found, cause
was thereby established as a matter of law, and thus, the employer was
justified in terminating employment.  46                             
The strict approach reflected in McPhillips resonates in several
other decisions rendered by Canadian courts, which have held that a finding of
dishonesty, in and of itself, creates just cause for summary dismissal. In each
of these cases, however, the courts dealt with forms of dishonesty that, as in McPhillips,
bordered on theft, misappropriation, forgery or a fraudulent sham. In that
connection, the courts drew parallels between dishonesty and fraud, either by
noting their common ingredients (see Real Canadian Superstore (Saskatchewan)
v. United Food and Commercial Workers, Local 1400 (1998), 173
Sask. R. 203 (Q.B.), per Klebuc J.), or by characterizing both as equal
causes for dismissal (see Reade v. Newfoundland Co-Ordinating
Council on Deafness (1987), 63 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 194 (Nfld. S.C.T.D.),
at p. 198, per Wells J.; and Smith v. Dawson Memorial
Hospital and Flood (1978), 29 N.S.R. (2d) 277 (S.C.), per Morrison
J.). In this vein, courts also emphasized that, for dishonesty to amount to
cause, the employer must prove intent on the employee’s part to engage in
deceitful conduct (see Evans v. Sobeys Capital Inc.
(1995), 15 C.C.E.L. (2d) 197 (Nfld. C.A.), per Cameron J.A.).  47                             
This line of jurisprudence seems to indicate that a finding of
dishonesty gives rise to just cause as a matter of law. However, I am struck by
the fact that, in all of the cases considered here, where cause was found to
exist, courts were confronted with very serious forms of employee dishonesty.
This point is instructive for determining the proper analytical approach to be
adopted in the case at bar.  3.    Applicable Standard for Assessing Whether
and in What Circumstances Dishonesty Provides Just Cause  48                             
In light of the foregoing analysis, I am of the view that whether an
employer is justified in dismissing an employee on the grounds of dishonesty is
a question that requires an assessment of the context of the alleged
misconduct. More specifically, the test is whether the employee’s dishonesty
gave rise to a breakdown in the employment relationship. This test can be
expressed in different ways. One could say, for example, that just cause for
dismissal exists where the dishonesty violates an essential condition of the
employment contract, breaches the faith inherent to the work relationship, or
is fundamentally or directly inconsistent with the employee’s obligations to
his or her employer.  49                             
In accordance with this test, a trial judge must instruct the jury to determine:
(1) whether the evidence established the employee’s deceitful conduct on a
balance of probabilities; and (2) if so, whether the nature and degree of the
dishonesty warranted dismissal. In my view, the second branch of this test does
not blend questions of fact and law. Rather, assessing the seriousness of the
misconduct requires the facts established at trial to be carefully considered
and balanced. As such, it is a factual inquiry for the jury to undertake.  50                             
While ample case law supports this position, as discussed above, a
second line of jurisprudence seems to run counter to it, suggesting that
dishonest conduct always, irrespective of its surrounding circumstances,
amounts to cause for dismissal. However, a closer inspection of these cases
reveals that they actually support a contextual approach. As noted, these
judgments involved dishonesty that was symptomatic of an overarching, and very
serious misconduct. In most cases, the courts were faced with allegations to
the effect that an employee had intentionally devised to extract some financial
gain or profit to which he or she was not entitled, at his or her employer’s
expense. Such conduct was frequently tantamount to a serious form of fraud, and
explicitly characterized by the courts as such.  51                             
This being the case, I conclude that a contextual approach to assessing
whether an employee’s dishonesty provides just cause for dismissal emerges from
the case law on point. In certain contexts, applying this approach might lead
to a strict outcome. Where theft, misappropriation or serious fraud is found,
the decisions considered here establish that cause for termination exists. This
is consistent with this Court’s reasoning in Lake Ontario Portland Cement
Co. v. Groner, [1961] S.C.R. 553, where this Court found that cause
for dismissal on the basis of dishonesty exists where an employee acts fraudulently
with respect to his employer. This principle necessarily rests on an
examination of the nature and circumstances of the misconduct. Absent such an
analysis, it would be impossible for a court to conclude that the dishonesty
was severely fraudulent in nature and thus, that it sufficed to justify
dismissal without notice.  52                             
This is not to say that there cannot be lesser sanctions for less
serious types of misconduct. For example, an employer may be justified in
docking an employee’s pay for any loss incurred by a minor misuse of company
property. This is one of several disciplinary measures an employer may take in
these circumstances.  53                             
Underlying the approach I propose is the principle of proportionality.
An effective balance must be struck between the severity of an employee’s
misconduct and the sanction imposed. The importance of this balance is better
understood by considering the sense of identity and self-worth individuals
frequently derive from their employment, a concept that was explored in Reference
Re Public Service Employee Relations Act (Alta.), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 313,
where Dickson C.J. (writing in dissent) stated at p. 368:    This passage
was subsequently cited with approval by this Court in Machtinger v.
HOJ Industries Ltd., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 986, at p. 1002, and in Wallace,
supra, at para. 95.  In Wallace, the majority added to this notion
by stating that not only is work itself fundamental to an individual's
identity, but “the manner in which employment can be terminated is equally
important”.  54                             
Given this recognition of the integral nature of work to the lives and
identities of individuals in our society, care must be taken in fashioning
rules and principles of law which would enable the employment relationship to
be terminated without notice. The importance of this is underscored by the
power imbalance that this Court has recognized as ingrained in most facets of
the employment relationship. In Wallace, both the majority and
dissenting opinions recognized that such relationships are typically
characterized by unequal bargaining power, which places employees in a
vulnerable position vis-à-vis their employers. It was further
acknowledged that such vulnerability remains in place, and becomes especially
acute, at the time of dismissal.  55                             
In light of these considerations, I have serious difficulty with the
absolute, unqualified rule that the Court of Appeal endorsed in this case.
Pursuant to its reasoning, an employer would be entitled to dismiss an employee
for just cause for a single act of dishonesty, however minor.  As a result, the
consequences of dishonesty would remain the same, irrespective of whether the
impugned behaviour was sufficiently egregious to violate or undermine the
obligations and faith inherent to the employment relationship.  56                             
Such an approach could foster results that are both unreasonable and
unjust. Absent an analysis of the surrounding circumstances of the alleged
misconduct, its level of seriousness, and the extent to which it impacted upon
the employment relationship, dismissal on a ground as morally disreputable as
“dishonesty” might well have an overly harsh and far-reaching impact for
employees. In addition, allowing termination for cause wherever an employee’s
conduct can be labelled “dishonest” would further unjustly augment the power
employers wield within the employment relationship.  57                             
Based on the foregoing considerations, I favour an analytical framework
that examines each case on its own particular facts and circumstances, and
considers the nature and seriousness of the dishonesty in order to assess
whether it is reconcilable with sustaining the employment relationship. Such an
approach mitigates the possibility that an employee will be unduly punished by
the strict application of an unequivocal rule that equates all forms of
dishonest behaviour with just cause for dismissal. At the same time, it would
properly emphasize that dishonesty going to the core of the employment
relationship carries the potential to warrant dismissal for just cause.  4.  Application to Paris J.’s Jury Instructions  58                             
Applying the foregoing analysis to this case, unlike the Court of
Appeal, I see no reason to interfere with the trial decision on the basis of
Paris J.’s instructions to the jury. This charge – to the effect that the
appellant’s dishonesty had to be “of a degree incompatible with the employment
relationship” – properly advised jurors to consider the circumstances
surrounding the appellant’s conduct with a view to appreciating whether the
extent of the alleged dishonesty undermined his essential obligations to his
employers. Paris J.’s instructions therefore were entirely consistent with the
contextual approach discussed above, and thus do not serve as a basis for
setting the jury verdict aside.  B.  Reasonableness
of the Jury Verdict  59                             
The respondents maintain that, even if Paris J. did not err in charging
the jury, the jury’s verdict was unreasonable and unjust, and thus should be
overturned. This Court has repeatedly used a test of “reasonableness” when
considering whether to set aside a jury’s verdict. In Vancouver-Fraser Park
District, supra, at p. 839, de Grandpré J. held that while jury
verdicts must be treated with considerable respect and be accorded great
weight, they should not be regarded with awe.  Rather, where it is found that
the evidence “did not permit a jury acting judicially to reach the conclusion”
that it did, an appellate court is entitled to set it aside.  60                             
Similarly, in McCannell v. McLean, [1937] S.C.R.
341, Duff C.J. stated the reasonableness test as follows at p. 343:  [T]he verdict of a jury will not be set aside as against the weight of
evidence unless it is so plainly unreasonable and unjust as to satisfy the
Court that no jury reviewing the evidence as a whole and acting judicially
could have reached it.  In addition,
an appellate court that finds there was “no evidence” supporting a particular
verdict has “the right and the duty” to set aside that verdict (see Gray
Coach Lines Ltd. v. Payne, [1945] S.C.R. 614, at p. 618). Although these
two tests are distinct, in neither case may the appellate court set aside a
verdict on “mere doubts [it] may entertain” or on its “reaching on the reading
of the evidence a conclusion different from that the jury reached” (see Scotland
v. Canadian Cartridge Co. (1919), 59 S.C.R. 471, at p. 477, per Davies
C.J.).  61                             
In the present case, given the variance
in the evidence before the jury, I must conclude that it could have
reasonably and judicially found that the appellant did not engage in dishonest
conduct of a degree incompatible with his employment relationship. Therefore,
the requisite standard for setting aside the verdict was not met, as I now will
discuss.  62                             
The December 12, 1994 letter from the appellant to Dr. Graff, an
internal medicine and cardiac specialist and one of his treating physicians,
provides an instructive starting point for the analysis of this issue. In this
letter, the appellant requested that Dr. Graff clarify his recollection of the
treatment recommended during a medical appointment that had taken place on July
20, 1994. The most relevant passage of this letter for the purposes of the
present appeal states the following:  The only issue that concerns me is that while I
agree that you recommended a “beta blocker” as the next method of treatment on
July 20, 1994, it is my understanding that you did not want me to start
treatment until I returned to work. I remember telling you that BCTEL did not
want me back at work until my blood pressure was fully controlled - a concept
that bothered you at the time. . . .  My recollection is that you said that if
I was not returning to the stressfull [sic] job that causing [sic]
my elevated blood pressure, then I should remain on Adalat until I was in my
new job. If my blood pressure remained elevated in my new job, I was to return
to see you to begin a “beta blocker” treatment. You did not issue me a
prescription or give me any “beta blocker” samples on July 20.  . . . It does not make sense to me that I would refuse to try “beta
blockers” as it also does not make sense that you would prescibe [sic]
medication where the apparent cause or trigger was removed!  According to
the respondents, this letter revealed the appellant’s knowledge of the
availability of a medication, namely, the beta blocker, which one of his
physicians believed could effectively enable him to return to his former
position without any risk to his health. Moreover, the respondents pointed out
that, on cross-examination, the appellant testified that Dr. Graff did not
discuss any of the adverse side effects of this medication with him. The
appellant further testified that Dr. Graff was of the view that, while this
medication should not be prescribed at that time, if the appellant returned to
work in his former position and his blood pressure continued to rise, there
would be a reason to consider administering the beta blockers.  63                             
The respondents also argued that this letter indicated that Dr. Graff
had implied during the July 20, 1994 appointment that the appellant could
return to work, in which case beta blockers might eventually become necessary. 
However, in voice mail messages left for his immediate superior just after that
appointment (on July 20th and 27th, 1994), the appellant stressed that both his
family doctor and Dr. Graff were of the view that “a new job, a new change of
environment” was what he truly needed. While the appellant alluded to the
possibility of trying a “new medication”, he indicated that Dr. Graff was of
the view that it should not be attempted – given its adverse side effects – if
his health could be improved by “a job change in a different kind of
environment”.  64                             
From this evidence, a certain degree of inconsistency can be identified
between what the appellant appears to have been told by Dr. Graff, and the
information he subsequently conveyed to his employers. The evidence suggests
that Dr. Graff believed that the appellant could return to work, even in his
former position as Controller, and, if his hypertension became more acute at
that point, it could be controlled through the use of beta blockers. However,
the voice mail messages of July 20th and July 27th indicate that the appellant
did not put this information forward as fully and clearly as he might have. Rather
than mention the possibility of returning to his former position if beta
blockers were administered, he instead stressed that his physicians were of the
view that a change in jobs would in fact be the most beneficial form of
“treatment”. At trial, however, the appellant admitted on cross-examination
that this advice had not in fact been given by his specialist.  65                             
This contradiction could raise some suspicion in the minds of jurors as
to the trustworthiness of the appellant’s character. But, does the evidence
lead unquestionably and unequivocally to the conclusion that the appellant’s
conduct was sufficiently dishonest to provide just cause for summary dismissal?
A review of the evidence in its entirety leads me to answer this question in
the negative. To my mind, the material in the record provides a sufficient
basis for a jury to conclude that the appellant reasonably and truly believed
that his physicians, including Dr. Graff, were of the view that beta blockers
should be considered only as a “last resort” treatment, and that they were not
yet required at that point in time. The soundness of this interpretation is
reinforced by Dr. Graff’s assessment of the appellant on July 6, 1994, in which
he stated that he “would be reluctant to change the medications [the appellant]
is on at this point in time”, and instead “suggested that he return to work,
and closely monitor his blood pressure at the office and at home”. If the
appellant’s blood pressure continued to rise, Dr. Graff was of the view that
another form of medication (Hytrin) should be used. He indicated that beta
blockers should be considered only if this proved unsuccessful. Given that the
appellant testified to being under the impression that his employers were
seeking out alternate positions for him within BC Tel, a rational and logical
inference to draw from the evidence is that he believed, on his physician’s
advice, that beta blockers would be administered only if he returned to work in
his original job.  66                             
The respondents claimed in oral argument that the appellant’s falsehood
lay in giving Dr. Graff’s imprimatur to the notion that beta blockers carried
adverse side effects. However, a review of the evidence that attested to the
potential risks of this medication suggests that the appellant’s physicians
would have been reluctant to prescribe it unless it was required to bring the
appellant’s hypertension under control. At trial, Dr. Charles R. Brasfield, a
medical doctor and psychiatrist who treated the appellant on an intermittent
basis between 1993 and 1996, testified that the side effects of beta blockers
could include an increase in depression, as well as specific sexual side
effects, congestive heart failure, and respiratory arrest. Moreover, the
evidence suggests the appellant’s awareness of these side effects. In a
document entitled “History of High Blood Pressure and BC Tel Involvement”,
which was introduced as an exhibit at trial, the appellant stated that another
one of his physicians (Dr. Andersen) refused to prescribe beta blockers because
of their “unacceptable side effects”.  67                             
Despite these potential risks, the evidence also suggests that the
appellant would have been willing to accept treatment through beta blockers had
he believed this would be necessary for enabling him to return to work at BC
Tel. In the December 12, 1994 letter, the appellant told Dr. Graff that “[i]t
does not make sense” that he would refuse to try beta blockers. Furthermore,
the appellant testified that he kept his employers aware of his medical issues,
and even explained the potential for beta blockers to be used as treatment.
According to this evidence, the appellant asked his employers whether he should
return to Dr. Graff to try beta blockers; yet, his superior indicated that this
would not be necessary, since he would likely be placed in another, less
stressful position. The appellant’s testimony in regard to his willingness to
attempt beta blockers is corroborated by a note handwritten by BC Tel’s Human
Resources Manager on September 1, 1994, the day following the appellant’s
dismissal. This document indicates that in a telephone conversation that
morning, the appellant told the Human Resource Manager that “if he had known
the only job was his old one the Doctor would have changed his medication and
he could have returned to work”.  68                             
The respondents claimed that this evidence revealed that the appellant
truly did not believe beta blockers to be unsafe. To my mind, however, it
provided a sufficient basis upon which the jury could reasonably conclude that
the appellant was willing, as a “last resort”, to take a risky medication if
this became necessary to return to BC Tel.  69                             
Thus, while there may not have been a full disclosure of all material
facts by the appellant, this was not required of him. Rather, the question is
whether he engaged in dishonesty in a manner that undermined, or was
incompatible with his employment relationship. An analysis of the record as a
whole leads me to conclude that the jury, acting judicially, could have
reasonably found that this was not the case. For this reason, there is no basis
upon which to interfere with the jury’s verdict that the respondents had not
proven just cause warranting dismissal.  C.  Extended
Notice Period  70                             
At the outset, it should be noted that the reasonableness of the
extended notice period, as well as the question of aggravated damages
(discussed below), were not called into question by the appellant, but by the
respondents. Normally, a respondent seeking to raise an issue on appeal must do
so by applying for leave to cross-appeal, pursuant to Rule 29 of the Rules
of the Supreme Court of Canada, SOR/83-74.  However, this was unnecessary
in this case. Rule 29 indicates that “[a] respondent who seeks to set aside or
vary the whole or any part of the disposition of the judgment appealed
from shall apply for leave to cross-appeal within 30 clear days after the
service of the application for leave” (emphasis added). In the present case,
the Court of Appeal for British Columbia allowed the respondents’ appeal and
ordered a new trial on all issues. The respondents do not seek to have any part
of this disposition set aside or varied. Rather, they have raised the issues of
the extended notice period and aggravated damages as alternative arguments,
stating that if the trial judgment is restored, the awards under these heads
should be struck. The respondents never reached these alternative arguments
before the Court of Appeal, since that court accepted their main position that
the trial judgment should be set aside in its entirety. Consequently, the Court
of Appeal never ruled on the propriety of the jury’s awards for an extended
notice period and aggravated damages.  71                             
Before this Court, the respondents again raised these issues in the
alternative. I thus begin by examining the extended notice award, and will
proceed to consider the question of aggravated damages in the discussion that
follows.  72                             
At trial, Paris J., referring to this Court’s decision in Wallace,
supra, ruled that whether damages representing an extended period of notice
should be awarded in this case was a question for the jury to decide. He stated
that it would be for jurors to determine whether such a remedy was warranted,
based on “whether the matters pointed to by counsel in submissions, if proven
by the evidence, constitute such bad faith or unfair conduct as contemplated by
the Wallace case”.  Pursuant to its deliberations, the jury concluded
that a reasonable notice period in this case was 22 months. Having found that
the respondents acted in a manner that was unfair or in bad faith in conducting
the dismissal, the jury extended this notice period by an additional four
months to represent the damage caused by these exacerbating factors.  73                             
In Wallace, this Court recognized that the parties to an
employment contract are subject to obligations of good faith and fair dealing.
These obligations subsist throughout the relationship up until, and including
its termination. In the context of dismissal from employment, the majority in Wallace
described the employer’s duties at para. 98 as follows:  [A]t a minimum, I believe that in the course of dismissal employers
ought to be candid, reasonable, honest and forthright with their employees and
should refrain from engaging in conduct that is unfair or is in bad faith by
being, for example, untruthful, misleading or unduly insensitive.    74                             
Where a dismissal is accompanied by bad faith or unfair dealing on the
part of the employer, Wallace establishes that such conduct merits
compensation by way of an extension to the notice period. This remedy is not
triggered by the dismissal itself, but by the exacerbating factors that, in and
of themselves, inflict injury upon the employee. The nature of this remedy thus
was described in Wallace, at para. 103, as follows:    Wallace
also made clear that the extent by which a notice period should be extended for
bad faith or unfair dealing in the conduct of a dismissal will depend, in each
case, on the degree of injury that an employee sustains. While recognizing that
tactics that affect the employee’s ability to find new employment is
particularly deserving of such a remedy and may merit more compensation, the
majority also ruled that “intangible injuries”, which give rise to emotional
damage, also may suffice to attract an award in the form of an extended notice
period (para. 104).  75                             
In the present case, the respondents argued that Paris J. erred by
putting the question of an extended notice period before the jury. They
maintained that because the appellant agreed to his termination pending an
acceptable severance package, he should not be entitled to complain about the
“manner” of this dismissal once it actually occurred. I respectfully disagree.
Although the appellant may have agreed to terminate his employment contract, it
certainly cannot be said that this necessarily implied a waiver of his right to
be treated fairly and in good faith by his employers, nor that it precluded the
protection that Wallace intended to confer by recognizing an award for
extended notice.  76                             
In putting the question of extended notice to the jury, Paris J.’s
reasoning was entirely consistent with the decision in Wallace. An
examination of his charge to jurors reveals that, in his view, there was
sufficient evidence that the respondents engaged in bad faith or unfair dealing
in dismissing the appellant. In this respect, Paris J. pointed to the fact that
the appellant submitted that he was dismissed while on short-term disability
and suffering from hypertension and depression, and that the respondents took
this route rather than find him another position within the company. The trial
judge further noted the evidence pointed to by the appellant, which related to
the difficulty the appellant experienced in obtaining a copy of his long-term
disability plan from his employers, and the fact that the respondents reduced
their severance offer during negotiations over the appellant’s termination.
Paris J. then properly instructed the jury that it was to decide, based on this
Court’s decision in Wallace, whether, in light of this evidence, bad
faith conduct or unfair dealing on the part of the respondents had been proven.
If so, Paris J. explained that the length of the notice period was to be
extended by “such further period that [was thought to be] reasonable in the
circumstances”.  77                             
Considering that Paris J.’s analysis and jury charge adhered to the
principles set out in Wallace, and because the jury could, based on the
evidence before it, reasonably find that the notice period should be extended
by four months, I see no basis for interfering with the trial decision on this
point.  D.  Aggravated
Damages  78                             
The key principles for establishing the circumstances in which
aggravated damages in wrongful dismissal actions may be awarded were set out by
this Court in Wallace and in Vorvis v. Insurance Corp.
of British Columbia, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1085. In Vorvis, McIntyre J.
(writing for the majority) highlighted that unlike punitive damages, aggravated
damages serve the purpose of compensation for intangible injuries. He
stated that such damages could be awarded where: (1) an employer’s conduct was
“independently actionable”, (2) it amounted to a wrong that was separate from
the breach of contract for failure to give reasonable notice of termination,
and (3) it arises from the dismissal itself, rather than the employer’s conduct
before or after the dismissal (pp. 1103-4).  79                             
These criteria were considered in Wallace, where the majority
also recognized that aggravated damages could be awarded for mental distress
flowing from a wrongful dismissal. However, in Vorvis and Wallace
alike, aggravated damages were denied to the plaintiff.  80                             
In the present case, Paris J. noted that the standard to apply in
assessing the issue of aggravated damages is that set out in Wallace.
While he properly recognized that such damages require “an independent cause of
action”, he then articulated the applicable threshold in the following way:  It seems to me that, speaking at least in a general way, the evidence
pointed to by counsel as the manner of the conduct of dismissal has to be
considered as some evidence of willfull [sic] or deliberate
infliction of mental distress which would be tortious conduct. Whether the
plaintiff suffered such mental distress and whether an intention to inflict any
such mental distress can be inferred from the evidence is for the jury to say. I
cannot say there is no evidence of such things. [Emphasis added.]   On this basis,
Paris J. allowed the jury to consider the issue of aggravated damages. The jury
decided that the appellant was entitled to damages under this head in the
amount of $100,000.  81                             
The respondents disputed the trial decision on this point, stating that
Paris J. employed an incorrect standard in allowing the jury to consider the
question of aggravated damages. I am also of that opinion. According to Wallace,
the proper threshold for allowing this issue to be determined by a jury is
whether or not sufficient evidence exists. It was found on the facts of
that case that there was no basis upon which to interfere with the finding that
“there was insufficient evidence” of a separately actionable wrong
(emphasis added). The standard set out by Paris J. fell short of the Wallace
test by suggesting, in effect, that any evidence, even a mere scintilla
thereof, would suffice to put the matter of aggravated damages to the jury for
its consideration.  82                             
Applying the correct standard to the present case, I would conclude that
there was not sufficient evidence before Paris J. to allow the jury to
deliberate on the question of aggravated damages. More specifically, a fair
reading of the evidence does not, in my view, suggest that the respondents
acted with an intention to harm the appellant either by deliberately inflicting
mental distress or by acting in a discriminatory manner. It is true that, as
the appellant noted, the illness from which he suffered, namely hypertension,
has been considered a disability in human rights jurisprudence (see Horton
v. Niagara (Regional Municipality) (1987), 9 C.H.R.R.
D/4611 (Ont. Bd. Inq.), and Wamboldt v. Department of National
Defence (1983), 4 C.H.R.R. D/1479 (Can. Trib.)). Yet, while the appellant
was never offered an alternate position within BC Tel to accommodate his health
needs, the evidence is far from clear that the respondents did not make a bona
fide effort to find other viable work for him. This is evidence negating
any wilful intention to harm, as was argued by the appellant. In this
connection, the record indicates that the appellant was aware that the
respondents were in the process of downsizing during the time in question, and
it thus would be difficult to find a suitable alternate position. Moreover,
although two positions for which the appellant was qualified did become
available while he was on disability leave, the evidence does not establish
that he was the victim of discrimination, and denied such work on the basis of
his illness. Rather, legitimate explanations were offered to clarify why the
respondents decided that the appellant should not fill these positions.  83                             
Thus, despite the allegations raised by the appellant, the evidence
fails to establish any separate actionable wrong on the respondents’ part. In
this respect, I would emphasize that the conduct of the parties must be
assessed in light of the context in which it was undertaken. Here, the impugned
behaviour occurred during negotiations between the parties over the appellant’s
termination from BC Tel. Within this bargaining relationship, both sides were
entitled to put their strongest case forward. Consequently, in this setting,
clear evidence is required to substantiate a claim that the employer’s conduct
rises to the level of an intentional infliction of harm.  84                             
Having considered all of this, I find that the criteria for allowing the
question of aggravated damages to go to the jury were not met in the instant
case. Therefore, the order for aggravated damages must be set aside.  E.  Punitive
Damages  85                             
As is the case for aggravated damages, the starting point for assessing
the propriety of an award for punitive damages in the context of a wrongful
dismissal action begins with this Court’s decisions in Vorvis and Wallace. 
As alluded to earlier, in Vorvis, McIntyre J. recognized the confusion
that sometimes exists between aggravated and punitive damages, and explained
that these two heads of damages are distinguishable by their different
purposes. While aggravated damages aim to compensate for intangible injury,
punitive damages are penal and exemplary in nature, and may be awarded only
where the conduct giving rise to the complaint is found to merit punishment.  86                             
In Vorvis, the Court sought to determine whether punitive damages
may be awarded in an action for breach of contract based on the wrongful
dismissal of an employee, and if so, whether the circumstances of that case
called for such an award. Pursuant to a review of the relevant common law
authorities on this issue, McIntyre J. held that although punitive damages will
very rarely be appropriate in breach of contract cases, there are some
situations in which such an award would be warranted. More specifically, such damages
may be awarded where the defendant’s conduct constituted a separate, actionable
wrong, independent of the dismissal itself. Furthermore, the conduct must be
deserving of punishment because of its extreme and injurious character. In this
respect, McIntyre J. stated, at pp. 1107-8:   [P]unitive damages may only be awarded in respect of conduct which is
of such nature as to be deserving of punishment because of its harsh,
vindictive, reprehensible and malicious nature. I do not suggest that I have
exhausted the adjectives which could describe the conduct capable of
characterizing a punitive award, but in any case where such an award is made
the conduct must be extreme in its nature and such that by any reasonable
standard it is deserving of full condemnation and punishment.  Within the
particular circumstances of Vorvis, the employer’s conduct, standing
alone, was not considered sufficiently offensive to constitute an actionable
wrong, nor of a nature that would justify the imposition of a punitive damages award.  87                             
This analysis was adopted in Wallace, where it was held that an
award for damages beyond compensation for breach of an employment contract
"must be founded on a separately actionable course of conduct" (para.
73). This criterion applies to both aggravated and punitive damages. However,
punitive damages were distinguished in Wallace, at para. 79, as follows:  Punitive damages are an exception to the general
rule that damages are meant to compensate the plaintiff. The purpose of such an
award is the punishment of the defendant: S. M. Waddams, The Law of
Damages (3rd ed. 1997), at p. 483. The appellant argued that the trial
judge and the Court of Appeal erred in refusing to award punitive damages. I do
not agree. Relying on Vorvis, supra, Lockwood J. found that UGG
did not engage in sufficiently “harsh, vindictive, reprehensible and malicious”
conduct to merit condemnation by such an award. He also noted the absence of an
actionable wrong. The Court of Appeal concurred. Again, there is no reason to
interfere with these findings. Consequently, I agree with the courts below that
there is no foundation for an award of punitive damages.  88                             
In the present appeal, the trial judge held that the appellant had not
adduced evidence upon which to base a viable claim for punitive damages. In his
view, the proof was not indicative of harsh, vindictive and malicious conduct
by the respondents, nor of contempt for the appellant’s rights. Paris J.
further held that human rights legislation did not add anything to this
dimension of the case, as there was no evidence to substantiate an argument
that the appellant suffered discrimination on the basis of disability in the
sense contemplated by such legislation.  The appellant’s cross-appeal from this
holding before the Court of Appeal for British Columbia was dismissed without
reasons.  89                             
Paris J.’s reasoning on this issue was consistent with the principles
and analytical framework set out in Vorvis and Wallace.  First,
as discussed in regard to the propriety of the aggravated damages award, there
is insufficient evidence to establish an actionable wrong, separate and apart
from the dismissal, on the respondents’ part. As discussed, the appellant was
correct to state that his hypertension constituted a disability in law. Thus,
the failure to find him another position may create a prima facie case
of discrimination, given the employer’s duty to accommodate disabled employees
to the point of undue hardship. See British Columbia (Public Service
Employee Relations Commission) v. BCGSEU, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 3,
and British Columbia (Superintendent of Motor Vehicles) v. British
Columbia (Council of Human Rights), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 868. Moreover, this
discrimination may in turn give rise to a punitive damages award. See Collinson
v. William E. Coutts Co., [1995] B.C.J. No. 2766 (S.C.) (QL). But,
for the reasons set out above, I am of the view that there is no basis for
interfering with Paris J.’s conclusion that the evidence did not support a
finding of an “independent wrong”, including discrimination. Furthermore, based
on my review of the evidence, I cannot say that Paris J. erred in concluding
that the respondents’ conduct was not of a character contemplated by McIntyre
J. in Vorvis. In other words, it was not sufficiently harsh, vindictive,
reprehensible, malicious or extreme in nature to warrant punishment. As such,
Paris J.’s ruling that the question of punitive damages should be withheld from
the jury was sound, and should be left undisturbed.  VI. Disposition  90                             
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the
British Columbia Court of Appeal is set aside, and the order of Paris J. is
restored, with the exception of the award for aggravated damages, which is
struck. Having allowed the appeal, it is unnecessary for this Court to deal
with the cross-appeal, which is therefore dismissed. Because of the appellant’s
substantial success, I would grant him costs here and in the courts below.        