Hercules Managements Ltd. v. Ernst & Young, [1997] 2
S.C.R. 165  Hercules Managements Ltd., Guardian Finance of Canada Ltd. and Max Freed                                                             Appellants (Plaintiffs/ Respondents)  and  Friendly Family Farms Ltd., Woodvale Enterprises Ltd., Arlington Management Consultants Ltd., Emarjay Holdings Ltd. and David Korn                                                                                  (Plaintiffs)  v.  Ernst & Young and Alexander Cox                                                  Respondents (Defendants/ Applicants)  and  Max Freed, David Korn and Marshall Freed                                  (Third
Parties)  and  The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants                          Intervener  Indexed as:  Hercules Managements Ltd. v. Ernst & Young  File No.:  24882.  1996:  December 6; 1997:  May 22. Present:  La Forest, Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci
and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for manitoba    In 1984, both NGA and NGH went into
receivership.  The appellants, and a number of other shareholders or
investors in NGA, brought an action against the respondents in 1988 alleging
that the audit reports for the years 1980, 1981 and 1982 were negligently
prepared and that in reliance on these reports, they suffered various financial
losses. They also alleged that a contract existed between themselves and the
respondents in which the respondents explicitly undertook to protect the
shareholders’ individual interests in the audits as distinct from the interests
of the corporations themselves.  The respondents brought a motion for summary judgment
in the Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench seeking to have the plaintiffs’ claims
dismissed.  The grounds for the motion were (a) that there was no contract
between the plaintiffs and the respondents; (b) that the respondents did not
owe the individual plaintiffs any duty of care in tort; and (c) that the claims
asserted by the plaintiffs could only properly be brought by the corporations
themselves and not by the shareholders individually.  The motions judge granted
the motion with respect to four plaintiffs, including the appellants, and
dismissed their actions on the basis that they raised no genuine issues for
trial.  By agreement, the claims of the remaining plaintiffs were adjourned
sine die.  An appeal to the Manitoba Court of Appeal was unanimously
dismissed with costs.  Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.  Four preliminary matters were addressed before the
principal issue.  Firstly, the question to be decided on a motion for summary
judgment under rule 20 of the Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench Rules is
whether there is a genuine issue for trial.  Although a defendant who
seeks dismissal of an action has an initial burden of showing that the case is
one in which the existence of a genuine issue is a proper question for
consideration, it is the plaintiff who must then, according to the rule,
establish his claim as being one with a real chance of success.   Thus, the
appellants (who were the plaintiffs-respondents on the motion) bore the burden
of establishing that their claim had “a real chance of success”.  Secondly, no
contract existed between the appellant shareholders and the respondents and, in
any event, the contract claim was not properly before this Court. 
Consequently, the appellants’ submissions in this regard must fail.  Thirdly,
the independence requirements set out in s. 155 of the Manitoba Corporations
Act do not themselves give rise to a cause of action in negligence. 
Similarly, breach of those independence requirements could not establish a duty
of care in tort.   Finally, it was not necessary to inquire into whether the
appellants actually relied on the audited reports prepared by the respondents
because the finding of an absence of a duty of care rendered the question of
actual reliance inconsequential.     “Proximity” in negligent misrepresentation cases
pertains to some aspect of the relationship of reliance.  It inheres when (a)
the defendant ought reasonably to foresee that the plaintiff will rely on his
or her representation, and (b) reliance by the plaintiff would, in the
particular circumstances of the case, be reasonable.  Looking to whether reliance by the plaintiff would be
reasonable in determining whether a prima facie duty of care exists (as
opposed to looking at reasonable foreseeability alone) is not to abandon the
basic tenets underlying the first branch of the Anns/Kamloops test.  
While specific inquires into the reasonableness of the plaintiff’s expectations
are not normally required in the context of physical damage cases (since the
law has come to recognize implicitly that plaintiffs are reasonable in
expecting that defendants will take reasonable care of their persons and
property), such an inquiry is necessary in the negligent misrepresentation
context.  This is because reliance by a plaintiff on a defendant’s
representation will not always be reasonable.  Only by inquiring into the
reasonableness of the plaintiff’s reliance will the Anns/Kamloops
test be applied consistently in both contexts.    The fundamental policy consideration that must be
addressed in negligent misrepresentation actions centres around the possibility
that the defendant might be exposed to “liability in an indeterminate amount
for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class”.  While the criteria of
reasonable foreseeability and reasonable reliance serve to distinguish cases
where a prima facie duty is owed from those where it is not, these
criteria can,  in certain types of situations, quite easily be satisfied and,
absent some means by which to circumscribe the ambit of the duty, the prospect
of limitless liability will loom.  The general area of auditors’ liability is a
case in point. Here, the problem of indeterminate liability will often arise
because the reasonable foreseeability/reasonable reliance test for ascertaining
a prima facie duty of care may be satisfied in many, even if not all, such
cases.  While policy concerns surrounding indeterminate
liability will serve to negate a prima facie duty of care in many
auditors’ negligence cases, there may be particular situations where such
concerns do not inhere.  The specific factual matrix of a given case may render
it an “exception” to the general class of cases, in that while considerations
of proximity might militate in favour of finding that a duty of care inheres,
the typical policy considerations stemming from indeterminate liability do not
arise.  This concept can be articulated within the framework
of the Anns/Kamloops test.  Under this test, factors such as (1) whether
the defendant knew the identity of the plaintiff (or the class of plaintiff)
and (2) whether the defendant’s statements were used for the specific purpose
or transaction for which they were made ought properly to be considered in the
“policy” branch of the test once the first branch concerning “proximity” has
been found to be satisfied.  The absence of these factors will normally mean
that concerns over indeterminate liability inhere and, therefore, that the prima
facie duty of care will be negated.  Their presence, however, will mean
that worries stemming from indeterminacy should not arise since the scope of
liability is sufficiently delimited. In such cases, policy considerations will
not override a positive finding on the first branch of the Anns/Kamloops
test and a duty of care will quite properly be found to exist.  On the facts of this case, the respondents clearly
owed a prima facie duty of care to the appellants.  Firstly, the
possibility that the appellants would rely on the audited financial statements
in conducting their affairs and that they might suffer harm if the reports were
negligently prepared must have been reasonably foreseeable to the respondents. 
Secondly, reliance on the audited statements by the appellant shareholders
would, on the facts, be reasonable given both the relationship between the
parties and the nature of the statements themselves.  The first branch of the Anns/Kamloops
test is therefore satisfied.  As regards the second branch of this test, it is clear
that the respondents knew the identity of the appellants when they provided the
audit reports.  In determining whether this case is an “exception” to the
generally prevailing policy concerns regarding auditors, the central question
is therefore whether the appellants can be said to have used the  audit reports
for the specific purpose for which they were prepared.  The answer will
determine whether policy considerations surrounding indeterminate liability
ought to negate the prima facie duty of care owed by the respondents.  The respondent auditors’ purpose in preparing the
reports was to assist the collectivity of shareholders of the audited companies
in their task of overseeing management.  The respondents did not prepare the
audit reports in order to assist the appellants in making personal investment
decisions or, indeed, for any purpose other than the standard statutory one. 
The only purpose for which the  reports could have been used so as to give rise
to a duty of care on the part of the respondents, therefore, is as a guide for
the shareholders, as a group, in supervising or overseeing management.  In light of this finding, the specific claims of the
appellants could each be assessed.  Those claims were in respect of:   (1)
moneys injected  into NGA and NGH by Hercules and Freed, and (2) the
devaluation of existing equity caused by the appellants’ alleged inability (a)
to oversee personal investments properly, and  (b) to supervise the management
of the corporations with a view to protecting their personal holdings.  As regards the first claim, the appellants alleged
that they relied on the respondents’ audit reports for the purpose of making
individual investments.  Since this was not a purpose for which the reports
were prepared, policy concerns surrounding indeterminate liability are not
obviated and these claims must fail.  Similarly,  the first branch of the
appellants’ second claim must fail since monitoring existing personal
investments is likewise not a purpose for which the audited statements were
prepared. With respect to the second branch relating to the
devaluation of appellants’ equity, the appellants’ position may at first seem
consistent with the purpose for which the reports were prepared.  In reality,
however, their claim did not involve the purpose of overseeing management per
se.  Rather, it ultimately depended on being able to use the auditors’
reports for the individual purpose of overseeing their own investments.  Thus,
the purpose for which the reports were used was not, in fact, consistent with
the purpose for which they were prepared.  The policy concerns surrounding
indeterminate liability accordingly inhered and the prima facie duty of
care was negated in respect of this claim as well.  The absence of a duty of care with respect to the
appellant’s alleged inability to supervise management in order to monitor their
individual investments is consistent with the rule in Foss v. Harbottle
which provides that individual shareholders have no cause of action for wrongs
done to the corporation.  When, as a collectivity, shareholders oversee the
activities of a corporation through resolutions adopted at shareholder
meetings, they assume what may be seen to be a “managerial” role.  In this
capacity, they cannot properly be understood to be acting simply as individual
holders of equity.  Rather, their collective decisions are made in respect of
the corporation itself.  Any duty owed by auditors in respect of this aspect of
the shareholders’ functions is owed not to shareholders qua individuals,
but rather to all shareholders as a group, acting in the interests of the
corporation.  Since the decisions taken by the collectivity of shareholders are
in respect of the corporation’s affairs, the shareholders’ reliance on
negligently prepared audit reports in taking such decisions will result in a
wrong to the corporation for which the shareholders cannot, as individuals,
recover.  A derivative action would have been the proper method of proceeding
with respect to this claim.  Cases Cited  Considered:  Fidkalo
v. Levin (1992), 76 Man. R. (2d) 267; Caparo Industries plc. v.
Dickman, [1990] 1 All E.R. 568; Anns v. Merton London Borough Council,
[1978] A.C. 728; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021; Hedley
Byrne & Co. v. Heller & Partners Ltd., [1964] A.C. 465; Haig v.
Bamford, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 466; Ultramares Corp. v. Touche, 174
N.E. 441 (1931); Glanzer v. Shepard,  135 N.E. 275 (1922); referred
to:  Foss v. Harbottle (1843), 2 Hare 460, 67 E.R. 189;
Hercules Management Ltd. v. Clarkson Gordon (1994), 91 Man. R. (2d) 216; R.
in right of Canada v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205; Queen
v. Cognos Inc., [1993] 1 S.C.R. 87; Murphy v. Brentwood District
Council, [1991] 1 A.C. 398; Sutherland Shire Council v. Heyman
(1985), 60 A.L.R. 1; B.D.C. Ltd. v. Hofstrand Farms Ltd., [1986] 1
S.C.R. 228; London Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd.,
[1992] 3 S.C.R. 299; Winnipeg Condominium Corporation No. 36 v. Bird
Construction Co., [1995] 1 S.C.R. 85; Edgeworth Construction Ltd. v. N.
D. Lea & Associates Ltd., [1993] 3 S.C.R. 206; Scott Group Ltd. v.
McFarlane, [1978] 1 N.Z.L.R. 553; Donoghue v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C.
562; Candler v. Crane, Christmas & Co., [1951] 2 K.B. 164; H.
Rosenblum (1983), Inc. v. Adler, 461 A.2d 138 (1983); Roman Corp.
Ltd. v. Peat Marwick Thorne (1992), 11 O.R. (3d) 248; Roman Corp.
v. Peat Marwick Thorne (1993), 12 B.L.R. (2d) 10; Prudential Assurance
Co. v. Newman Industries Ltd. (No. 2), [1982] 1 All E.R. 354; Goldex
Mines Ltd. v. Revill (1974), 7 O.R. (2d) 216.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Business Corporations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B.16.  Companies Act 1985 (U.K.), 1985, c. 6.  Corporations Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. C225, ss. 149(1), 155(1), (2), (6),
163(1), 232.  Court of Queen’s Bench Rules, Man. Reg. 553/88, Rule 20.03(1).  Authors Cited  Cheffins, Brian R.  “Auditors’
Liability in the House of Lords:  A Signal Canadian Courts Should Follow”
(1991), 18 C.B.L.J. 118.  Cherniak, Earl A., and Kirk F.
Stevens.  “Two Steps Forward or One Step Back?  Anns at the Crossroads
in Canada” (1992), 20 C.B.L.J. 164.  Feldthusen, Bruce.  Economic
Negligence, 3rd ed.  Scarborough:  Carswell, 1994.  Fleming, J. G.  “The Negligent
Auditor and Shareholders” (1990), 106 L.Q. Rev. 349.   McHugh, M. H. “Neighbourhood,
Proximity and Reliance”.  In P. D. Finn, ed., Essays on Torts. 
Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1989. Sexton, J. Edgar, and John W.
Stevens.  “Accountants’ Legal Responsibilities and Liabilities”.  In Meredith
Memorial Lectures 1983-84, Professional Responsibility in Civil Law and
Common Law.  Faculty of Law, McGill University.  Don Mills, Ont.: Richard
De Boo, 1985, 88.  Stapleton, Jane.  “Duty of Care
and Economic Loss: a Wider Agenda” (1991), 107 L.Q. Rev. 249.  Wiener, Howard B.  “Common Law
Liability of the Certified Public Accountant for Negligent Misrepresentation”
(1983), 20 San Diego L. Rev. 233.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Manitoba Court of Appeal
(1995), 102 Man. R. (2d) 241, 93 W.A.C. 241, 125 D.L.R. (4th) 353, 19 B.L.R.
(2d) 137, 24 C.C.L.T. (2d) 284, dismissing an appeal from judgment by Dureault
J.  Appeal dismissed.  Mark M. Schulman, Q.C.,
and Brian A. Crane, Q.C., for the appellants.  Robert P. Armstrong, Q.C., and Thor J. Hansell, for the respondents.  W. Ian C. Binnie, Q.C.,
and Geoff R. Hall, for the intervener.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  1                                  
La Forest J. -- This
appeal arises by way of motion for summary judgment.  It concerns the issue of
whether and when accountants who perform an audit of a corporation’s financial
statements owe a duty of care in tort to shareholders of the corporation who
claim to have suffered losses in reliance on the audited statements.  It also
raises the question of whether certain types of claims against auditors may
properly be brought by shareholders as individuals or whether they must be
brought by the corporation in the form of a derivative action.  Facts 2                                  
Northguard Acceptance Ltd. (“NGA”) and Northguard Holdings Ltd. (“NGH”)
carried on business lending and investing money on the security of real
property mortgages.  The appellant Guardian Finance of Canada Ltd. (“Guardian”)
was the sole shareholder of NGH and it held non-voting class B shares in NGA. 
The appellants Hercules Managements Ltd. (“Hercules”) and Max Freed were also
shareholders in NGA.  At all relevant times, ownership in the corporations was
separated from management.  The respondent Ernst & Young (formerly known as
Clarkson Gordon) is a firm of chartered accountants that was originally hired
by NGA and NGH in 1971 to perform annual audits of their financial statements
and to provide audit reports to the companies’ shareholders.  The partner in
charge of the audits for the years 1980 and 1981 is the respondent William
Alexander Cox.  Mr. Cox held personal investments in some of the syndicated
mortgages administered by NGA and NGH.  3                                  
In 1984, both NGA and NGH went into receivership.  The appellants, as
well as Friendly Family Farms Ltd. (“F.F. Farms”), Woodvale Enterprises Ltd.
(“Woodvale”), Arlington Management Consultants Ltd. (“Arlington”), Emarjay
Holdings Ltd. (“Emarjay”) and David Korn (all of whom were shareholders or
investors in NGA) brought an action against the respondents in 1988 alleging
that the audit reports for the years 1980, 1981 and 1982 were negligently
prepared and that in reliance on these reports, they suffered various financial
losses.  More specifically, the appellant Hercules sought damages for advances
totalling $600,000 which it made to NGA in January and February of 1983, and
the appellant Freed sought damages for monies he added to an investment account
in NGH in 1982.  All the plaintiffs claimed damages in tort for the losses they
suffered in the value of their existing shareholdings.  In addition to their
tort claims, the plaintiffs also alleged that a contract existed between
themselves and the respondents in which the respondents explicitly undertook,
as of 1978, to protect the shareholders’ individual interests in the audits as
distinct from the interests of the corporations themselves.  4                                  
After a series of amendments to the initial statement of claim, over 40
days of discovery, and numerous pre-trial conferences and case management
sessions, the respondents brought a motion for summary judgment in the Manitoba
Court of Queen’s Bench seeking to have the plaintiffs’ claims dismissed.  The
grounds for the motion were (a) that there was no contract between the
plaintiffs and the respondents; (b) that the respondents did not owe the
individual plaintiffs any duty of care in tort; and (c) that the claims
asserted by the plaintiffs could only properly be brought by the corporations
themselves and not by the shareholders individually.  The motions judge granted
the motion with respect to the plaintiffs Hercules, F.F. Farms, Woodvale,
Guardian and Freed and dismissed their actions on the basis that they raised no
genuine issues for trial.  By agreement, the claims of the remaining plaintiffs
were adjourned sine die.  An appeal to the Manitoba Court of Appeal by
Hercules, Guardian and Freed was unanimously dismissed with costs.  Leave to
appeal to this Court was granted on March 7, 1996 and the appeal was heard on
December 6, 1996.  Judicial
History  Manitoba
Court of Queen’s Bench  5                                  
Dureault J. began his reasons by noting that only the claims of
Hercules, F.F. Farms, Woodvale, Guardian and Freed had to be addressed since,
by agreement, the claims of the other plaintiffs had been adjourned.  He then
proceeded to set out the appropriate test to be applied in summary judgment
motions.  Referring to Rule 20.03(1) of the Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench
Rules, Reg. 553/88, (which governs summary judgment motions) and citing Fidkalo
v. Levin (1992), 76 Man. R. (2d) 267 (C.A.), he explained that while the
defendant bears the initial burden of proving that the case is one where the
question whether there exists a genuine issue for trial can properly be raised,
the plaintiff bears the subsequent burden of establishing that his claim has a
real chance of success.  6                                  
After rejecting the claim of  the plaintiff F.F. Farms on the ground
that it failed from the outset to establish any cause of action, Dureault J.
turned to the more substantive issues in the motion. He began by addressing the
question whether the plaintiffs qua shareholders may properly bring an
action for the devaluation in their shareholdings in NGA and NGH, and held that  . . . shareholders have no cause of action in law for
any wrongs which may have been inflicted upon a corporation.  This principle of
law is often referred to as “the rule in Foss v. Harbottle”.  The
plaintiff shareholders are trying to get around this principle.  At best, if
any wrong was done in the conduct of the defendants’ audits, it was done to
[NGA] and [NGH] and cannot be considered an injury sustained by the
shareholders.  Dureault J.
found on this basis that the claims of Hercules, Guardian, Woodvale and Freed
did not disclose any genuine issue for trial since they ought to have been
brought by the corporations and not by the plaintiffs as individual
shareholders.  7                                  
The motions judge next addressed the question whether any duty of care in
tort was owed by the defendants to the plaintiffs in their capacities as either
shareholders or investors in the audited corporations.  He noted that  [g]enerally speaking, the law requires more than foreseeability and
reliance.  Actual knowledge on the part of the accountant/auditor of the
limited class that will use and rely on the statements, referred to as the
“proximity test”, is also required.  Adopting the
defendants’ submissions on this issue, Dureault J. found that no duty of care
was owed the plaintiffs because the audited statements were not prepared
specifically for the purpose of assisting them in making investment decisions.  8                                  
Finally, Dureault J. addressed the plaintiffs’ claim that their losses
stemmed from a breach of contract by the defendants.  He recognized that the
engagement of the auditors by the corporations is a contractual relationship,
but rejected the contention that this relationship can be extended to include
the shareholders so as to permit them to bring personal actions against the
auditors in the event of breach.  Finding that none of the plaintiffs’ claims
raised a genuine issue for trial, Dureault J. granted the motion with costs.  Manitoba
Court of Appeal (1995), 102 Man. R. (2d) 241 (Philp, Lyon and Helper JJ.A.)  9                                  
An appeal was brought to the Manitoba Court of Appeal by Hercules,
Guardian and Freed.  Helper J.A., writing for the court, began her reasons by finding
that the learned motions judge had correctly applied the Fidkalo test
for summary judgment motion under Rule 20.03(1)  She also distinguished that
test from that applicable on a motion to strike pleadings on the ground that,
unlike the situation on a motion to strike, a Rule 20 motion requires an
examination of the evidence in support of the plaintiff’s claim.  10                              
Turning to the question whether the respondents owed a duty of care in
tort to the appellants, Helper J.A. noted the latter’s two alternative
submissions.  The first (at p. 244) was that  . . . a common law duty of care arose . . .
because the respondents knew or ought to have known:  i) that the appellants
were relying on the audited statements and the services and advice provided by
the respondents; ii) the purpose for which the appellants would rely upon the
respondents’ services and statements; iii) that the appellants did so rely upon
those audited statements for investment and other purposes; and iv) that the
respondents breached their duties to the appellants thereby causing them a
financial loss.  In response to
this claim, Helper J.A. explained, the respondents contended that the appellants
were simply trying to avoid the rule in Foss v. Harbottle (1843),
2 Hare 460, 67 E.R. 189 (H.L.), by asserting their claims as individual
shareholders rather than by way of derivative action.  The respondents also
argued that they had no knowledge that investments would be made on the basis
of the audited statements and that there was no evidence to support the
contention that they ought to have known that their reports would be relied
upon in this manner.  Finally, Helper J.A. noted, the respondents asserted that
there was no evidence demonstrating that the appellants had, in fact, relied on
the audited statements at issue.  11                              
In analysing this first main submission, Helper J.A. undertook a
thorough review of Caparo Industries plc. v. Dickman, [1990] 1
All E.R. 568, where the House of Lords considered the question of the scope of
the duty of care owed by auditors to shareholders and investors.  After
reviewing the Canadian case law on the matter, she concluded, at p. 248, that  [t]he appellants were unable to direct this court to any evidence in
support of their position which was ignored by the motions judge.  Nor am I
persuaded that the order dismissing the appellants’ claims is contrary to the
existing jurisprudence.  The evidence showed that the auditors had prepared
the annual reports to comply with their statutory obligations.  There was a
total absence of evidence to indicate the respondents knew the appellants would
rely upon the reports for any specific purpose or that the appellants did rely
upon the reports before infusing more capital into their companies.  The
appellants were content to allow management to continue running the companies
despite a drop in profitability reflected in the 1982 audited report and
invested more capital in the face of that report.  The evidence filed in
opposition to the motion did not support the appellants’ claim on this issue. In the view of
the Manitoba Court of Appeal, then, the first of the appellants’ submissions
regarding the existence of a duty of care could not succeed.  12                              
The appellants’ second main submission concerning the existence of a
duty of care consisted in an allegation that the respondent auditors
contravened the statutory independence requirements set out in s. 155 of the
Manitoba Corporations Act, R.S.M. 1987, c. C225, and that this in itself
gave rise to a cause of action in the individual shareholders.  The relevant
portions of s. 155 are as follows:  155(1)  Subject to subsection (5), a person is disqualified from
being an auditor of a corporation if he is not independent of the corporation,
all of its affiliates, and the directors or officers of the corporation and its
affiliates.  155(2)  For the purposes of this section,  (a) independence is a question of fact; and  (b) a person is deemed not to be independent if he or his business
partner  (i) is a business partner, a director, an officer or an employee of the
corporation or any of its affiliates, or a business partner of any director,
officer or employee of the corporation or any of its affiliates, or  (ii) beneficially owns or controls, directly or indirectly, a material
interest in the securities of the corporation or any of its affiliates, or  (iii) has been a receiver, receiver-manager, liquidator or trustee in
bankruptcy of the corporation or any of its affiliates within two years of his
proposed appointment as auditor of the corporation.                                                                     . . .  155(6)  The shareholders of a corporation may resolve to appoint
as auditor, a person otherwise disqualified under subsections (1) and (2) if
the resolution is consented to by all the shareholders including shareholders
not otherwise entitled to vote.  Specifically,
the appellants alleged that because s. 155(6) of the Act allows a single
shareholder to exercise a veto power over the appointment of the auditors, each
shareholder also has a right of action against the auditors where damage has
been occasioned by a breach of the independence requirement in s. 155(2). 
Helper J.A. rejected this submission both on the ground that it was unsupported
by authority and on the basis that the wording of s. 155 as a whole does not
suggest the interpretation urged by the appellants.  13                              
Finally, Helper J.A. addressed the appellants’ contractual claim and
held that the respondents’ engagement to audit the financial statements of NGA
and NGH  in accordance with the Act did not give rise to a contractual
relationship between them and the appellants.  Similarly, she found the
appellants could not sue on the contract between the corporations and the
respondent Ernst & Young because of the lack of privity.  Finding no
evidence to support the existence of the requisite contractual relationship,
Helper J.A. rejected the appellants’ claim in this regard.  For all these
reasons, the Court of Appeal unanimously dismissed the appeal with costs.  Issues  14                              
The issues in this case may be stated as follows:  (1) Do the respondents owe the appellants a duty of care with respect
to  (a) the investment losses they incurred allegedly as a result of
reliance on the 1980-82 audit reports; and  (b) the losses in the value of their existing shareholdings they
incurred allegedly as a result of reliance on the 1980-82 audit reports?  (2) Does the rule in Foss v. Harbottle affect the
appellants’ action?  Analysis  Preliminary
Matters  15                              
Four preliminary matters should be addressed before turning to the
principal issues in this appeal.  The first concerns the procedure to be
followed in a motion for summary judgment brought under Rule 20.03(1) of the
Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench Rules.  That rule provides as follows:  20.03(1)  Where the court is satisfied that there is no genuine
issue for trial with respect to a claim or defence, the court shall grant
summary judgment accordingly.  I would agree
with both the Court of Appeal and the motions judge in their endorsement of the
procedure set out in Fidkalo, supra, at p. 267, namely:  The question to be decided on a rule 20 motion is
whether there is a genuine issue for trial.  Although a defendant who seeks
dismissal of an action has an initial burden of showing that the case is one in
which the existence of a genuine issue is a proper question for consideration,
it is the plaintiff who must then, according to the rule, establish his claim
as being one with a real chance of success.  In the instant
case, then, the appellants (who were the plaintiffs-respondents on the motion)
bore the burden of establishing that their claim had “a real chance of
success”.  They bear the same burden in this Court.  16                              
The second preliminary matter concerns the appellants’ claim that as a
result of a meeting in the summer of 1978 between David Korn, Max Freed and the
respondent Cox and in light of an engagement letter sent by the respondents to
NGA and NGH in 1981, a contract was formed between the shareholders of the
audited corporations, on the one hand, and the respondents, on the other.  This
purported contract ostensibly required the respondents to conduct their audits
for the benefit of the shareholders themselves and not merely for the benefit of
the corporations.  I have reviewed the portions of the record upon which the
appellants base this submission and I am unable to find that the requisite
elements of contract formation inhere on the facts.  In any event, as the
respondents pointed out, the appellants’ request to amend their pleadings
before trial to include a claim for breach of contract was denied by Kennedy J.
and no appeal was brought from that decision.  (See:  Hercules Management
Ltd. v. Clarkson Gordon (1994), 91 Man. R. (2d) 216 (Q.B.).)  I would find,
therefore, that the claim in breach of contract is not properly before this
Court and that the appellants’ submissions in this regard must fail.  17                              
Thirdly, the appellants allege that the respondent Cox’s investments in
certain syndicated mortgages administered by NGA and NGH constituted a breach
of the statutory independence requirements set out in s. 155 of the Manitoba Corporations
Act and that such a breach either gives rise to a private law cause of action
or, alternatively, that it provides an independent basis for finding a duty of
care in a tort action.  Assuming without deciding that the respondent Cox was
in breach of the independence requirements set out in that section, I would
agree with Helper J.A. in finding that the section does not, in and of itself,
give rise to a cause of action in negligence; see:  R. in right of Canada v.
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 205.  Similarly, I cannot see how
breach of the independence requirements could establish a duty of care in
tort.  This does not mean, of course, that the statutory audit requirements set
out in the Manitoba Corporations Act are entirely irrelevant to the
appellants’ claim.  Rather, it simply means that a breach of the independence
provisions does not, by itself, give rise either to an independent right of
action or to a duty of care.  18                              
The final preliminary matter concerns whether or not the appellants
actually relied on the 1980-82 audited reports prepared by the respondents.  More
specifically, the appellants allege that the Court of Appeal erred in finding,
at p. 248, that  [t]here was a total absence of evidence to indicate the respondents
knew the appellants would rely upon the reports for any specific purpose or
that the appellants did rely upon the [1980-82] reports before infusing more
capital into their companies.  The appellants were content to allow
management to continue running the companies despite a drop in profitability
reflected in the 1982 audited report and invested capital in the face of that
report.  The evidence filed in opposition to the motion did not support the
appellants’ claim on this issue.  [Emphasis added.]   Issue 1: 
Whether the Respondents owe the Appellants a Duty of Care  (i) Introduction  19                              
It is now well established in Canadian law that the existence of a duty
of care in tort is to be determined through an application of the two-part test
first enunciated by Lord Wilberforce in Anns v. Merton London Borough
Council, [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.), at pp. 751-52:   While the
House of Lords rejected the Anns test in Murphy v. Brentwood District
Council, [1991] 1 A.C. 398, and in Caparo, supra, at p. 574, per
Lord Bridge and at pp. 585-86, per Lord Oliver (citing Brennan J. in Sutherland
Shire Council v. Heyman (1985), 60 A.L.R. 1 (H.C.), at pp. 43-44), the
basic approach that test embodies has repeatedly been accepted and endorsed by
this Court.  (See, e.g.:  Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R.
2; B.D.C. Ltd. v. Hofstrand Farms Ltd., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 228; Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021; London
Drugs Ltd. v. Kuehne & Nagel International Ltd., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 299; Winnipeg
Condominium Corporation No. 36 v. Bird Construction Co., [1995] 1 S.C.R.
85.)  20                              
In Kamloops, supra, at pp. 10-11, Wilson J. restated Lord
Wilberforce’s test in the following terms:  (1)   is there a sufficiently close relationship
between the parties (the [defendant] and the person who has suffered the
damage) so that, in the reasonable contemplation of the [defendant],
carelessness on its part might cause damage to that person?  If so,  (2)   are there any considerations which ought to
negative or limit (a) the  scope of the duty and (b) the class of persons to
whom it is owed or (c) the damages to which a breach of it may give rise? As will be
clear from the cases earlier cited, this two-stage approach has been applied by
this Court in the context of various types of negligence actions, including
actions involving claims for different forms of economic loss.  Indeed, it was
implicitly endorsed in the context of an action in negligent misrepresentation
in Edgeworth Construction Ltd. v. N. D. Lea & Associates Ltd.,
[1993] 3 S.C.R. 206, at pp. 218-19.  The same approach to defining duties of
care in negligent misrepresentation cases has also been taken in other
Commonwealth courts.  In Scott Group Ltd. v. McFarlane, [1978] 1
N.Z.L.R. 553, for example, a case that dealt specifically with auditors’
liability for negligently prepared audit reports, the Anns test was
adopted and applied by a majority of the New Zealand Court of Appeal.  21                              
I see no reason in principle why the same approach should not be taken
in the present case.  Indeed, to create a “pocket” of negligent
misrepresentation cases (to use Professor Stapleton’s term) in which the existence
of a duty of care is determined differently from other negligence cases would,
in my view, be incorrect; see:  Jane Stapleton, “Duty of Care and Economic
Loss: a Wider Agenda” (1991), 107 L.Q. Rev. 249.  This is not to say, of
course, that negligent misrepresentation cases do not involve special
considerations stemming from the fact that recovery is allowed for pure
economic loss as opposed to physical damage.  Rather, it is simply to posit
that the same general framework ought to be used in approaching the duty of
care question in both types of case.  Whether the respondents owe the
appellants a duty of care for their allegedly negligent preparation of the
1980-82 audit reports, then, will depend on (a) whether a prima facie
duty of care is owed, and (b) whether that duty, if it exists, is negatived or
limited by policy considerations.  Before analysing the merits of this case, it
will be useful to set out in greater detail the principles governing this
appeal.  (ii) The Prima Facie Duty of Care  23                              
What constitutes a “relationship of proximity” in the context of
negligent misrepresentation actions?  In approaching this question, I would
begin by reiterating the position I took in Norsk, supra, at pp.
1114-15, that the term “proximity” itself is nothing more than a label
expressing a result, judgment or  conclusion; it does not, in and of itself,
provide a principled basis on which to make a legal determination.  This view
was also explicitly adopted by Stevenson J. in Norsk, supra, at
p. 1178, and McLachlin J. also appears to have accepted it when she wrote, at
p. 1151, of that case that “[p]roximity may usefully be viewed, not so much as
a test in itself, but as a broad concept which is capable of subsuming
different categories of cases involving different factors”; see also:  M. H.
McHugh, “Neighbourhood, Proximity and Reliance”, in P. D. Finn, ed., Essays
on Torts (1989), 5, at pp. 36-37; and John G. Fleming, “The Negligent
Auditor and Shareholders” (1990), 106 L.Q. Rev. 349, at p. 351, where
the author refers to proximity as a “vacuous test”.  While Norsk, supra,
was concerned specifically with whether or not a defendant could be held liable
for “contractual relational economic loss” (as I called it, at p. 1037), I am
of the view that the same observations with respect to the term “proximity” are
applicable in the context of negligent misrepresentation.  In order to render “proximity”
a useful tool in defining when a duty of care exists in negligent
misrepresentation cases, therefore, it is necessary to infuse that term with
some meaning.  In other words, it is necessary to set out the basis upon which
one may properly reach the conclusion that proximity inheres between a
representor and a representee.  24                              
This can be done most clearly as follows.  The label “proximity”, as it
was used by Lord Wilberforce in Anns, supra, was clearly intended
to connote that the circumstances of the relationship inhering between the
plaintiff and the defendant are of such a nature that the defendant may be said
to be under an obligation to be mindful of the plaintiff’s legitimate interests
in conducting his or her affairs.  Indeed, this idea lies at the very heart of
the concept of a “duty of care”, as articulated most memorably by Lord Atkin in
Donoghue v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562, at pp. 580-81.  In cases of
negligent misrepresentation, the relationship between the plaintiff and the
defendant arises through reliance by the plaintiff on the defendant’s words. 
Thus, if “proximity” is meant to distinguish the cases where the defendant has
a responsibility to take reasonable care of the plaintiff from those where he
or she has no such responsibility, then in negligent misrepresentation cases,
it must pertain to some aspect of the relationship of reliance.  To my mind,
proximity can be seen to inhere between a defendant-representor and a
plaintiff-representee when two criteria relating to reliance may be said to
exist on the facts:  (a) the defendant ought reasonably to foresee that the
plaintiff will rely on his or her representation; and (b) reliance by the
plaintiff would, in the particular circumstances of the case, be reasonable. 
To use the term employed by my colleague, Iacobucci J., in Cognos, supra,
at p. 110, the plaintiff and the defendant can be said to be in a “special
relationship” whenever these two factors inhere.  25                              
I should pause here to explain that, in my view, to look to whether or
not reliance by the plaintiff on the defendant’s representation would be
reasonable in determining whether or not a prima facie duty of care
exists in negligent misrepresentation cases as opposed to looking at reasonable
foreseeability alone is not, as might first appear, to abandon the basic tenets
underlying the first branch of the Anns/Kamloops formula.  The purpose
behind the Anns/Kamloops test is simply to ensure that enquiries into
the existence of a duty of care in negligence cases is conducted in two parts: 
The first involves discerning whether, in a given situation, a duty of care
would be imposed by law; the second demands an investigation into whether the
legal duty, if found, ought to be negatived or ousted by policy
considerations.  In the context of actions based on negligence causing physical
damage, determining whether harm to the plaintiff was reasonably foreseeable to
the defendant is alone a sufficient criterion for deciding proximity or
neighbourhood under the first branch of the Anns/Kamloops test because
the law has come to recognize (even if only implicitly) that, absent a
voluntary assumption of risk by him or her, it is always reasonable for a
plaintiff to expect that a defendant will take reasonable care of the
plaintiff’s person and property.  The duty of care inquiry in such cases,
therefore, will always be conducted under the assumption that the plaintiff’s
expectations of the defendant are reasonable.  26                              
In negligent misrepresentation actions, however, the plaintiff’s claim
stems from his or her detrimental reliance on the defendant’s (negligent)
statement, and it is abundantly clear that reliance on the statement or
representation of another will not, in all circumstances, be reasonable.  The
assumption that always inheres in physical damage cases concerning the
reasonableness of the plaintiff’s expectations cannot, therefore, be said to
inhere in reliance cases.  In order to ensure that the same factors are taken
into account in determining the existence of a duty of care in both instances,
then, the reasonableness of the plaintiff’s reliance must be considered in
negligent misrepresentation actions.  Only by doing so will the first branch of
the Kamloops test be applied consistently in both contexts.  27                              
As should be evident from its very terms, the reasonable
foreseeability/reasonable reliance test for determining a prima facie
duty of care is somewhat broader than the tests used both in the cases decided
before Anns, supra, and in those that have rejected the Anns
approach.  Rather than stipulating simply that a duty of care will be found in
any case where reasonable foreseeability and reasonable reliance inhere, those
cases typically require (a) that the defendant know the identity of either the
plaintiff or the class of plaintiffs who will rely on the statement, and (b)
that the reliance losses claimed by the plaintiff stem from the particular
transaction in respect of which the statement at issue was made. This narrower
approach to defining the duty can be seen in a number of the more prominent
English decisions dealing either with auditors’ liability specifically or with
liability for negligent misstatements generally.  (See, e.g.:  Candler v.
Crane, Christmas & Co., [1951] 2 K.B. 164 (C.A.), at pp. 181-82 and p.
184, per Denning L.J. (dissenting); Hedley Byrne & Co. v. Heller
& Partners Ltd., [1964] A.C. 465; Caparo, supra, per
Lord Bridge, at p. 576, and per Lord Oliver, at pp. 589.)  It is also
evident in the approach taken by this Court in Haig v. Bamford, [1977] 1
S.C.R. 466.     (iii) Policy Considerations  31                              
As Cardozo C.J. explained in Ultramares Corp. v. Touche, 174 N.E.
441 (N.Y.C.A. 1931), at p. 444, the fundamental policy consideration that must
be addressed in negligent misrepresentation actions centres around the
possibility that the defendant might be exposed to “liability in an
indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class”. 
This potential problem can be seen quite vividly within the framework of the Anns/Kamloops
test.  Indeed, while the criteria of reasonable foreseeability and reasonable
reliance serve to distinguish cases where a prima facie duty is owed
from those where it is not, it is nevertheless true that in certain types of
situations these criteria can, quite easily, be satisfied and absent some means
by which to circumscribe the ambit of the duty, the prospect of limitless
liability will loom.   The increasing growth and changing role of
corporations in modern society has been attended by a new perception of the
societal role of the profession of accounting.  The day when the accountant
served only the owner-manager of a company and was answerable to him alone has
passed.  The complexities of modern industry combined with the effects of
specialization, the impact of taxation, urbanization, the separation of
ownership from management, the rise of professional corporate managers, and a
host of other factors, have led to marked changes in the role and
responsibilities of the accountant, and in the reliance which the public must
place upon his work.  The financial statements of the corporations upon which
he reports can affect the economic interests of the general public as well as
of shareholders and potential shareholders.  (See also: 
Cherniak and Stevens, supra, at pp. 169-70.)  In light of these
considerations, the reasonable foreseeability/reasonable reliance test for
ascertaining a prima facie duty of care may well be satisfied in many
(even if not all) negligent misstatement suits against auditors and, consequently,
the problem of indeterminate liability will often arise.  33                              
Certain authors have argued that imposing broad duties of care on
auditors would give rise to significant economic and social benefits in so far
as the spectre of tort liability would act as an incentive to auditors to
produce accurate (i.e., non-negligent) reports.  (See, e.g.:  Howard B. Wiener,
“Common Law Liability of the Certified Public Accountant for Negligent
Misrepresentation” (1983), 20 San Diego L. Rev. 233.)  I would agree
that deterrence of negligent conduct is an important policy consideration with
respect to auditors’ liability.  Nevertheless, I am of the view that, in the
final analysis, it is outweighed by the socially undesirable consequences to
which the imposition of indeterminate liability on auditors might lead. 
Indeed, while indeterminate liability is problematic in and of itself inasmuch
as it would mean that successful negligence actions against auditors could, at
least potentially, be limitless, it is also problematic in light of certain
related problems to which it might give rise.  34                              
Some of the more significant of these problems are thus set out in Brian
R. Cheffins,  “Auditors’
Liability in the House of Lords:  A Signal Canadian Courts Should Follow” (1991),
18 C.B.L.J. 118, at pp. 125-27:  In addition to providing only limited benefits,
imposing widely drawn duties of care on auditors would probably generate
substantial costs. . . .  One reason [for this] is that auditors would expend
more resources trying to protect themselves from liability.  For example,
insurance premiums would probably rise since insurers would anticipate more
frequent claims.  Also, auditors would probably incur higher costs since they
would try to rely more heavily on exclusion clauses.  Hiring lawyers to draft
such clauses might be expensive because only the most carefully constructed
provisions would be likely to pass judicial scrutiny. . . .  Finally, auditors’ opportunity costs would increase.  Whenever members
of an accounting firm have to spend time and effort preparing for litigation,
they forego revenue generating accounting activity.  More trials would mean
that this would occur with greater frequency.                                                                     . . .  The higher costs auditors would face as a result of
broad duties of care could have a widespread impact.  For example, the supply
of accounting services would probably be reduced since some marginal firms
would be driven to the wall.  Also, because the market for accounting services
is protected by barriers to entry imposed by the profession, the surviving
firms would pass [sic] at least some of the increased costs to their
clients.  Professor
Ivankovich describes similar sources of concern.  While he acknowledges certain
social benefits to which expansive auditors’ liability might conduce, he also
recognizes the potential difficulties associated therewith (at pp. 520-21):  . . . [expansive auditors’ liability] is also likely to
increase the time expended in the performance of accounting services.  This
will trigger a predictable negative impact on the timeliness of the financial
information generated.  It is equally likely to increase the cost of
professional liability insurance  and reduce its availability, and to increase
the cost of accounting services which, as a result, may become less generally
available.  Additionally, it promotes “free ridership” on the part of reliant
third parties and decreases their incentive to exercise greater vigilance and
care and, as well, presents an increased risk of fraudulent claims.  Even though I
do not share the discomfort apparently felt by Professors Cheffins and
Ivankovich with respect to using an Anns-type test in the context of
negligent misrepresentation actions (See:  Cheffins, supra, at pp.
129-31, and Ivankovich, supra, at p. 530), I nevertheless agree with
their assessment of the possible consequences to both auditors and the public
generally if liability for negligently prepared audit reports were to go
unchecked.  35                              
I should, at this point, explain that I am aware of the arguments put
forth by certain scholars and judges to the effect that concerns over
indeterminate liability have sometimes been overstated. (See, e.g.:  J. Edgar
Sexton and John W. Stevens, “Accountants’ Legal Responsibilities and
Liabilities”, in Professional Responsibility in Civil Law and Common Law
(Meredith Memorial Lectures, McGill University, 1983-84) (1985), 88, at pp.
101-2; and H. Rosenblum (1983), Inc. v. Adler, 461 A.2d 138 (N.J. 1983),
at p. 152, per Schreiber J.)  Arguments to this effect rest essentially
on the premise that actual liability will be limited in so far as a
plaintiff will not be successful unless both negligence and reliance are
established in addition to a duty of care.  While it is true that damages will
not be owing by the defendant unless these other elements of the cause of
action are proved, neither the difficulty of proving negligence nor that of
proving reliance will preclude a disgruntled plaintiff from bringing an action
against an auditor and such actions would, we may assume, be all the more
common were the establishment of a duty of care in any given case to amount to
nothing more than a mere matter of course.  This eventuality could pose serious
problems both for auditors, whose legal costs would inevitably swell, and for
courts, which, no doubt, would feel the pressure of increased litigation. 
Thus, the prospect of burgeoning negligence suits raises serious concerns, even
if we assume that the arguments positing proof of negligence and reliance as a
barrier to liability are correct.  In my view, therefore, it makes more sense
to circumscribe the ambit of the duty of care than to assume that difficulties
in proving negligence and reliance will afford sufficient protection to
auditors, since this approach avoids both “indeterminate liability” and
“indeterminate litigation”.  36                              
As I have thus far attempted to demonstrate, the possible repercussions
of exposing auditors to indeterminate liability are significant.  In applying
the two-stage Anns/Kamloops test to negligent misrepresentation actions
against auditors, therefore, policy considerations reflecting those
repercussions should be taken into account.  In the general run of auditors’
cases, concerns over indeterminate liability will serve to negate a prima
facie duty of care.  But while such concerns may exist in most such cases,
there may be particular situations where they do not.  In other words, the
specific factual matrix of a given case may render it an “exception” to the
general class of cases in that while (as in most auditors’ liability cases)
considerations of proximity under the first branch of the Anns/Kamloops
test might militate in favour of finding that a duty of care inheres, the
typical concerns surrounding indeterminate liability do not arise.  This
needs to be explained.  37                              
As discussed earlier, looking to factors such as “knowledge of the
plaintiff (or an identifiable class of plaintiffs) on the part of the
defendant” and “use of the statements at issue for the precise purpose or
transaction for which they were prepared” really amounts to an attempt to limit
or constrain the scope of the duty of care owed by the defendants.  If the
purpose of the Anns/Kamloops test is to determine (a) whether or not a prima
facie duty of care exists and then (b) whether or not that duty ought to be
negated or limited, then factors such as these ought properly to be considered
in the second branch of the test once the first branch concerning “proximity”
has been found to be satisfied.  To my mind, the presence of such factors in a
given situation will mean that worries stemming from indeterminacy should not
arise, since the scope of potential liability is sufficiently delimited.  In
other words, in cases where the defendant knows the identity of the plaintiff
(or of a class of plaintiffs) and where the defendant’s statements are used for
the specific purpose or transaction for which they were made, policy
considerations surrounding indeterminate liability will not be of any concern
since the scope of liability can readily be circumscribed. Consequently, such
considerations will not override a positive finding on the first branch of the Anns/Kamloops
test and a duty of care may quite properly be found to exist.  38                              
As I see it, this line of reasoning serves to explain the holding of
Cardozo J. (as he then was) in Glanzer v. Shepard, 135 N.E. 275
(N.Y.C.A. 1922) .  There, the New York Court of Appeals held that the defendant
weigher was liable in damages for having negligently prepared a weight
certificate he knew would be given to the plaintiff, who relied upon it for the
specific purpose for which it was issued.  In reaching his decision, Cardozo J.
explicitly noted that the weight certificate was used for the very “end and aim
of the transaction” and not for any collateral or unintended purpose  (Glanzer,
supra, at p. 275).  On the facts of Glanzer, supra, then,
the scope of the defendant’s liability could readily be delimited and
indeterminacy, therefore, was not a concern.  39                              
The same idea serves to explain the rationale underlying the seminal
judgment of the House of Lords in Hedley Byrne, supra.  While
that case did not involve an action against auditors, similar concerns about
indeterminate liability were, nonetheless, clearly relevant.  On the facts of Hedley
Byrne, supra, the defendant bank provided a negligently prepared
credit reference in respect of one of its customers to another bank which, to
the knowledge of the defendants, passed on the information to the plaintiff for
a stipulated purpose.  The plaintiff relied on the credit reference for the
specific purpose for which it was prepared.  The House of Lords found that but
for the presence of a disclaimer, the defendants would have been liable to the
plaintiff in negligence.  While indeterminate liability would have raised some
concern to the Lords had the plaintiff not been known to the defendants or had
the credit reference been used for a purpose or transaction other than that for
which it was actually prepared, no such difficulties about indeterminacy arose
on the particular facts of the case.  40                              
This Court’s decision in Haig, supra, can be seen to rest
on precisely the same basis.  There, the defendant accountants were retained by
a Saskatchewan businessman, one Scholler, to prepare audited financial
statements of Mr. Scholler’s corporation.  At the time they were engaged, the
accountants were informed by Mr. Scholler that the audited statements would be
used for the purpose of attracting a $20,000 investment in the corporation from
a limited number of potential investors.  The audit was conducted negligently
and the plaintiff investor, who was found to have relied on the audited
statements in making his investment, suffered a loss.  While Dickson J. was
clearly cognizant of the potential problem of indeterminacy arising in the
context of auditors’ liability (at p. 476), he nevertheless found that the
defendants owed the plaintiff a duty of care.  In my view, his conclusion was
eminently sound given that the defendants were informed by Mr. Scholler of the
class of persons who would rely on the report and the report was used by the
plaintiff for the specific purpose for which it was prepared.  Dickson J.
himself expressed this idea as follows, at p. 482:  The case before us is closer to Glanzer than
to Ultramares.  The very end and aim of the financial statements
prepared by the accountants in the present case was to secure additional
financing for the company from [a  Saskatchewan government agency] and an
equity investor; the statements were required primarily for these third parties
and only incidentally for use by the company.  On the facts
of Haig, then, the auditors were properly found to owe a duty of care
because concerns over indeterminate liability did not arise.  I would note that
this view of the rationale behind Haig, supra, is shared by
Professor Feldthusen.  (See Feldthusen, supra, at pp. 98-100.)  41                              
The foregoing analysis should render the following points clear.  A prima
facie duty of care will arise on the part of a defendant in a negligent
misrepresentation action when it can be said (a) that the defendant ought
reasonably to have foreseen that the plaintiff would rely on his representation
and (b) that reliance by the plaintiff, in the circumstances, would be
reasonable.  Even though, in the context of auditors’ liability cases, such a
duty will often (even if not always) be found to exist, the problem of
indeterminate liability will frequently result in the duty being negated by the
kinds of policy considerations already discussed.  Where, however,
indeterminate liability can be shown not to be a concern on the facts of a
particular case, a duty of care will be found to exist.  Having set out the law
governing the appellants’ claims, I now propose to apply it to the facts of the
appeal.  (iv) Application to the Facts  42                              
In my view, there can be no question that a prima facie duty of
care was owed to the appellants by the respondents on the facts of this case. 
As regards the criterion of reasonable foreseeability, the possibility that the
appellants would rely on the audited financial statements in conducting their
affairs and that they may suffer harm if the reports were negligently prepared
must have been reasonably foreseeable to the respondents.  This is confirmed
simply by the fact that shareholders generally will often choose to rely on
audited financial statements for a wide variety of purposes. It is further
confirmed by the fact that under ss. 149(1) and 163(1) of the Manitoba Corporations
Act, it is patently clear that audited financial statements are to be
placed before the shareholders at the annual general meeting.  The relevant
portions of those sections read as follows:  149(1)  The directors of a corporation shall place before the
shareholders at every annual meeting                                                                     . . .  (b) the report of the auditor, if any; and                                                                     . . .  163(1)  An auditor of a corporation shall make the examination
that is in his opinion necessary to enable him to report in the prescribed
manner on the financial statements required by this Act to be placed before the
shareholders, except such financial statements or part thereof as relate to the
period referred to in sub-clause 149(1)(a)(ii).  In my view, it
would be untenable to argue in the face of these provisions that some form of
reliance by shareholders on the audited reports would be unforeseeable.  43                              
Similarly, I would find that reliance on the audited statements by the
appellant shareholders would, on the facts of this case, be reasonable. 
Professor Feldthusen (at pp. 62-63) sets out five general indicia of
reasonable reliance; namely:  (1)   The defendant had a direct or indirect
financial interest in the transaction in respect of which the representation
was made.  (2)   The defendant was a professional or someone
who possessed special skill, judgment, or knowledge.  (3)   The advice or information was provided in
the course of the defendant’s business.  (4)   The information or advice was given
deliberately, and not on a social occasion.  (5)   The information or advice was given in
response to a specific enquiry or request.  While these indicia
should not be understood to be a strict “test” of reasonableness, they do help
to distinguish those situations where reliance on a statement is reasonable
from those where it is not.  On the facts here, the first four of these indicia
clearly inhere.  To my mind, then, this aspect of the prima facie duty
is unquestionably satisfied on the facts.  44                              
Having found a prima facie duty to exist, then, the second branch
of the Anns/Kamloops test remains to be considered.  It should be clear
from my comments above that were auditors such as the respondents held to owe a
duty of care to plaintiffs in all cases where the first branch of the Anns/Kamloops
test was satisfied, the problem of indeterminate liability would normally
arise.  It should be equally clear, however, that in certain cases, this
problem does not arise because the scope of potential liability can adequately
be circumscribed on the facts.  An investigation of whether or not
indeterminate liability is truly a concern in the present case is, therefore,
required.  45                              
At first blush, it may seem that no problems of indeterminate liability
are implicated here and that this case can easily be likened to Glanzer,
supra, Hedley Byrne, supra, and Haig, supra. 
After all, the respondents knew the very identity of all the appellant
shareholders who claim to have relied on the audited financial statements
through having acted as NGA’s and NGH’s auditors for nearly 10 years by the
time the first of the audit reports at issue in this appeal was prepared. It
would seem plausible to argue on this basis that because the identity of the
plaintiffs was known to the respondents at the time of preparing the 1980-82
reports, no concerns over indeterminate liability arise.  46                              
To arrive at this conclusion without further analysis, however, would be
to move too quickly.  While knowledge of the plaintiff (or of a limited class
of plaintiffs) is undoubtedly a significant factor serving to obviate concerns
over indeterminate liability, it is not, alone, sufficient to do so.  In my
discussion of Glanzer, supra, Hedley Byrne, supra,
and Haig, supra, I explained that indeterminate liability did not
inhere on the specific facts of those cases not only because the defendant knew
the identity of the plaintiff (or the class of plaintiffs) who would rely on
the statement at issue, but also because the statement itself was used by the
plaintiff for precisely the purpose or transaction for which it was prepared. 
The crucial importance of this additional criterion can clearly be seen when
one considers that even if the specific identity or class of potential
plaintiffs is known to a defendant, use of the defendant’s statement for a
purpose or transaction other than that for which it was prepared could still
lead to indeterminate liability.  47                              
For example, if an audit report which was prepared for a corporate
client for the express purpose of attracting a $10,000 investment in the
corporation from a known class of third parties was instead used as the basis
for attracting a $1,000,000 investment or as the basis for inducing one of the
members of the class to become a director or officer of the corporation or,
again, as the basis for encouraging him or her to enter into some business venture
with the corporation itself, it would appear that the auditors would be exposed
to a form of indeterminate liability, even if they knew precisely the identity
or class of potential plaintiffs to whom their report would be given.  With
respect to the present case, then, the central question is whether or not the
appellants can be said to have used the 1980-82 audit reports for the specific
purpose for which they were prepared.  The answer to this question will
determine whether or not policy considerations surrounding indeterminate
liability ought to negate the prima facie duty of care owed by the
respondents.  48                              
What, then, is the purpose for which the respondents’ audit statements
were prepared?  This issue was eloquently discussed by Lord Oliver in Caparo,
supra, at p.  583:  My Lords, the primary purpose of the statutory
requirement that a company’s accounts shall be audited annually is almost
self-evident. . . .   The management is confided to a board of
directors which operates in a fiduciary capacity and is answerable to and
removable by the shareholders who can act, if they act at all, only
collectively and only through the medium of a general meeting.  Hence the
legislative provisions requiring  the board annually to give an account of its
stewardship to a general meeting of the shareholders.  This is the only
occasion in each year on which the general body of shareholders is given the
opportunity to consider, to criticise and to comment on the conduct by the
board of the company’s affairs, to vote the directors’ recommendation as to
dividends, to approve or disapprove the directors’ remuneration and, if thought
desirable, to remove and replace all or any of the directors.  It is the
auditors’ function to ensure, so far as possible, that the financial
information as to the company’s affairs prepared by the directors accurately
reflects the company’s position in order first, to protect the company itself
from the consequences of undetected errors or, possibly, wrongdoing
. . . and, second, to provide shareholders with reliable intelligence
for the purpose of enabling them to scrutinise the conduct of the company’s
affairs and to exercise their collective powers to reward or control or remove
those to whom that conduct has been confided.  [Emphasis added.]  Similarly,
Farley J. held in Roman Corp. Ltd. v. Peat Marwick Thorne (1992), 11
O.R. (3d) 248 (Gen. Div.), at p. 260 (hereinafter Roman I) that  as a matter of law the only purpose for which shareholders receive an
auditor’s report is to provide the shareholders with information for the
purpose of overseeing the management and affairs of the corporation and not for
the purpose of guiding personal investment decisions or personal speculation
with a view to profit.  (See also:  Roman
Corp. v. Peat Marwick Thorne (1993), 12 B.L.R. (2d) 10 (Ont. Gen. Div.).) 
Lord Oliver was referring to the relevant provisions of the U.K. Companies
Act 1985 (U.K.), 1985, c. 6, in making his pronouncements, and Farley J.
rendered his judgment against the backdrop of the statutory audit requirements
set out in the Ontario Business Corporations Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B.16.  49                              
To my mind, the standard purpose of providing audit reports to the 
shareholders of a corporation should be regarded no differently under the
analogous provisions of the Manitoba Corporations Act.  Thus, the
directors of a corporation are required to place the auditors’ report before
the shareholders at the annual meeting in order to permit the shareholders, as
a body, to make decisions as to the manner in which they want the corporation
to be managed, to assess the performance of the directors and officers, and to
decide whether or not they wish to retain the existing management or to have
them replaced.  On this basis, it may be said that the respondent auditors’
purpose in preparing the reports at issue in this case was, precisely, to
assist the collectivity of shareholders of the audited companies in their task
of overseeing management.  50                              
The appellants, however, submit that, in addition to this statutorily
mandated purpose, the respondents further agreed to perform their audits for
the purpose of providing the appellants with information on the basis of which
they could make personal investment decisions.  They base this claim largely on
a conversation that allegedly took place at the 1978 meeting between Mr. Cox,
Mr. Freed and Mr. Korn, as well as on certain passages of the engagement letter
sent to them by the respondents.  I have read the relevant portions of the record
on this question and I am unable to accept the appellants’ submission.  Indeed,
on examination for discovery, Mr. Freed discussed the engagement letter of the
respondents and stated as follows:  Q    It is this that you say is the document that
says, it will speak for itself, but you interpret it to mean that they [the
respondents] will look after your interests specifically [sic]? . . .  A    I am saying that I took for granted that that
was their duty.  Q    I see.  All right.  Was there ever anything
in writing specifically that says that is your duty, is to look after my
interests, I am away all the time?  A    I am not aware.  Q    Either, from you, or to you in that respect?  A    I am not aware of any.  Q    This letter happens to say, “We are always
prepared upon instruction  to extend our services beyond these required
procedures.”  Did you ever give them any additional instructions?  A    No.  I never saw them.  Q    Nor did you communicate with them in writing,
or otherwise?  Is that right?  A    Not that I recall.  Similarly, the
transcript of Mr. Korn’s examination for discovery reveals the following
exchange:  Q    You emphasized [at the 1978 meeting] you say
to Mr. Cox that because you were no longer in the management stream or chain,
you would be relying more on the audited statements?   Q    Did you consider that to be a change from the
normal kind of audit engagement, or were you just emphasizing something that
was part of the normal audit engagement?  A    I just pointed out the change.  As a matter
of fact, he already knew about the change.                                                                     . . .  Q    But my question was whether you considered
that to be any kind of  alteration from the usual audit engagement process.  A    Well, that’s what happened.  That’s the fact
that I said it to him and those are the words I said, and however he took it,
that’s however he took it.  Q    But I’m asking you if you considered that to
be a change from a normal audit engagement.   Q    I’m entitled to know what you consider to be
the case.  A    Well, I made it clear that he should remember
that he’s the shareholders’ auditor, that Clarkson was the shareholders’
auditor, notwithstanding his personal relationship with Murray Morris.  Q    Auditors are always the shareholders’
auditors, are they not?   Q    And that’s in fact what they are always?  A    Well, that’s good, I’m glad to hear that,
glad to hear you say it.  Q    Do you agree?  A    That the auditors are the shareholders’
auditors?  Q    Yes.  A    I agree precisely.  To my mind,
these passages serve to demonstrate that despite the appellants’ submissions,
the respondents did not, in fact, prepare the audit reports in order to assist
the appellants in making personal investment decisions or, indeed, for any
purpose other than the standard statutory one. This finding accords with that
of Helper J.A. in the Court of Appeal, and nothing in the record before this
Court suggests the contrary.  51                              
It follows from the foregoing discussion that the only purpose  for
which the 1980-82 reports could have been used in such a manner as to give rise
to a duty of care on the part of the respondents is as a guide for the
shareholders, as a group, in supervising or overseeing management.  In assessing
whether this was, in fact, the purpose to which the appellants purport to have
put the audited reports, it will be useful to take each of the appellants’
claims in turn.  First, the appellant Hercules seeks compensation for its
$600,000 injection of capital into NGA over January and February of 1983 and
the appellant Freed seeks damages commensurate with the amount of money he
contributed in 1982 to his investment account in NGH.  Secondly, all the
appellants seek damages for the losses they suffered in the value of their
existing shareholdings.  52                              
The claims of Hercules and Mr. Freed with respect to their 1982-83
investments can be addressed quickly.  The essence of these claims must be that
these two appellants relied on the respondents’ reports in deciding whether or
not to make further investments in the audited corporations.  In other words,
Hercules and Mr. Freed are claiming to have relied on the audited reports for
the purpose of making personal investment decisions.  As I have already discussed,
this is not a purpose for which the respondents in this case can be said to
have prepared their reports.  In light of the dissonance between the purpose
for which the reports were  actually prepared and the purpose for which the
appellants assert they were used, then, the claims of Hercules and Mr. Freed
with respect to their investment losses are not such that the concerns over
indeterminate liability discussed above are obviated; viz., if a duty of
care were owed with respect to these investment transactions, there would seem
to be no logical reason to preclude a duty of care from arising in
circumstances where the statements were used for any other purpose of which the
auditors were equally unaware when they prepared and submitted their report. 
On this basis, therefore, I would find that the prima facie duty that
arises respecting this claim is negated by policy considerations and,
therefore, that no duty of care is owed by the respondents in this regard.  53                              
With respect to the claim concerning the loss in value of their existing
shareholdings, the appellants make two submissions.  First, they claim that
they relied on the 1980-82 reports in monitoring the value of their equity and
that, owing to the (allegedly) negligent preparation of those reports, they
failed to extract it before the financial demise of NGA and NGH.  Secondly, and
somewhat more subtly, the appellants submit that they each relied on the
auditors’ reports in overseeing the management of NGA and NGH and that had
those reports been accurate, the collapse of the corporations and the
consequential loss in the value of their shareholdings could have been avoided.  54                              
To my mind, the first of these submissions suffers from the same
difficulties as those regarding the injection of fresh capital by Hercules and
Mr. Freed.  Whether the reports were relied upon in assessing the prospect of
further investments or in evaluating existing investments, the fact remains
that the purpose to which the respondents’ reports were put, on this claim, concerned
individual or personal investment decisions.  Given that the reports were not
prepared for that purpose, I  find for the same reasons as those earlier set
out that policy considerations regarding indeterminate liability inhere here
and, consequently, that no duty of care is owed in respect of this claim.  55                              
As regards the second aspect of the appellants’ claim concerning the
losses they suffered in the diminution in value of their equity, the analysis
becomes somewhat more intricate.  The essence of the appellants’ submission
here is that the shareholders would have supervised management differently had
they known of the (alleged) inaccuracies in the 1980-82 reports, and that this
difference in management would have averted the demise of the audited
corporations and the consequent losses in existing equity suffered by the
shareholders.  At first glance, it might appear that the appellants’ claim
implicates a use of the audit reports which is commensurate with the purpose
for which the reports were prepared, i.e., overseeing or supervising
management.  One might argue on this basis that a duty of care should be found
to inhere because, in view of this compatibility between actual use and
intended purpose, no indeterminacy arises.  In my view, however, this line of
reasoning suffers from a subtle but fundamental flaw.  56                              
As I have already explained, the purpose for which the audit reports
were prepared in this case was the standard statutory one of allowing
shareholders, as a group, to supervise management and to take decisions
with respect to matters concerning the proper overall administration of the
corporations.  In other words, it was, as Lord Oliver and Farley J. found
in the cases cited above, to permit the shareholders to exercise their role, as
a class, of overseeing the corporations’ affairs at their annual
general meetings.  The purpose of providing the auditors’ reports to the
appellants, then, may ultimately be said to have been a “collective” one; that
is, it was aimed not at protecting the interests of individual shareholders but
rather at enabling the shareholders, acting as a group, to safeguard the
interests of the corporations themselves.  On the appellants’ argument,
however, the purpose to which the 1980-82 reports were ostensibly put was not
that of allowing the shareholders as a class to take decisions in respect of
the overall running of the corporation, but rather to allow them, as individuals,
to monitor management so as to oversee and protect their own personal
investments.  Indeed, the nature of the appellants’ claims (i.e. personal tort
claims) requires that they assert reliance on the auditors’ reports qua
individual shareholders if they are to recover any personal damages.  In so far
as it must concern the interests of each individual shareholder, then, the
appellants’ claim in this regard can really be no different from the other
“investment purposes” discussed above, in respect of which the respondents owe
no duty of care.  57                              
This argument is no different as regards the specific case of the
appellant Guardian, which is the sole shareholder of NGH.  The respondents’
purpose in providing the audited reports in respect of NGH was, we must assume,
to allow Guardian to oversee management for the better administration of the
corporation itself.  If Guardian in fact chose to rely on the reports for the
ultimate purpose of monitoring its own investment it must, for the policy
reasons earlier set out, be found to have done so at its own peril in the same
manner as shareholders in NGA.  Indeed, to treat Guardian any differently
simply because it was a sole shareholder would do violence to the fundamental
principle of corporate personality.  I would find in respect of both Guardian
and the other appellants, therefore, that the prima facie duty of care
owed to them by the respondents is negated by policy considerations in that the
claims are not such as to bring them within the “exceptional” cases discussed
above.  Issue 2: 
The Effect of the Rule in Foss v. Harbottle   59                              
The rule in Foss v. Harbottle provides that individual
shareholders have no cause of action in law for any wrongs done to the
corporation and that if an action is to be brought in respect of such losses,
it must be brought either by the corporation itself (through management) or by
way of a derivative action.  The legal rationale behind the rule was eloquently
set out by the English Court of Appeal in Prudential Assurance Co. v. Newman
Industries Ltd. (No. 2), [1982] 1 All E.R. 354, at p. 367, as follows:  The rule [in Foss v. Harbottle] is the consequence of the fact
that a corporation is a separate legal entity.  Other consequences are limited
liability and limited rights.  The company is liable for its contracts and
torts; the shareholder has no such liability.  The company acquires causes of
action for breaches of contract and for torts which damage the company.  No
cause of action vests in the shareholder.  When the shareholder acquires a
share he accepts the fact that the value of his investment follows the fortunes
of the company and that he can only exercise his influence over the fortunes of
the company by the exercise of his voting rights in general meeting.  The law
confers on him the right to ensure that  the company observes the limitations
of its memorandum of association and the right to ensure that other
shareholders observe the rule, imposed on them by the articles of association. 
If it is right that the law has conferred or should in certain restricted
circumstances confer further rights on a shareholder the scope and consequences
of such further rights require careful consideration.  To these lucid
comments, I would respectfully add that the rule is also sound from a policy
perspective, inasmuch as it avoids the procedural hassle of a multiplicity of
actions.  60                              
The manner in which the rule in Foss v. Harbottle, supra,
operates with respect to the appellants’ claims can thus be demonstrated.  As I
have already explained, the appellants allege that they were prevented from
properly overseeing the management of the audited corporations because the
respondents’ audit reports painted a misleading picture of their financial
state.  They allege further that had they known the true situation, they would
have intervened to avoid the eventuality of the corporations’ going into
receivership and the consequent loss of their equity.  The difficulty with this
submission, I have suggested, is that it fails to recognize that in supervising
management, the shareholders must be seen to be acting as a body in
respect of the corporation’s interests rather than as individuals in respect of
their own ends.  In a manner of speaking, the shareholders assume what may be
seen to be a “managerial role” when, as a collectivity, they oversee the
activities of the directors and officers through resolutions adopted at
shareholder meetings.  In this capacity, they cannot properly be understood to
be acting simply as individual holders of equity.  Rather, their collective
decisions are made in respect of the corporation itself.  Any duty owed by
auditors in respect of this aspect of the shareholders’ functions, then, would
be owed not to shareholders qua individuals, but rather to all
shareholders as a group, acting in the interests of the corporation.  And if
the decisions taken by the collectivity of shareholders are in respect of the
corporation’s affairs, then the shareholders’ reliance on negligently prepared
audit reports in taking such decisions will result in a wrong to the
corporation for which the shareholders cannot, as individuals, recover.  61                              
This line of reasoning finds support in Lord Bridge’s comments in Caparo,
supra, at p. 580:  The shareholders of a company have a collective interest in the
company’s proper management and in so far as a negligent failure of the auditor
to report accurately on the state of the company’s finances deprives the
shareholders of the opportunity to exercise their powers in general meeting to
call the directors to book and to ensure that errors in management are
corrected, the shareholders ought to be entitled to a remedy.  But in
practice no problem arises in this regard since the interest of the
shareholders in the proper management of the company’s affairs is
indistinguishable from the interest of the company itself and any loss suffered
by the shareholders . . . will be recouped by a claim against the
auditor in the name of the company, not by individual shareholders. 
[Emphasis added.]  It is also
reflected in the decision of Farley J. in Roman I, supra, the
facts of which were similar to those of the case at bar. In that case, the
plaintiff shareholders brought an action against the defendant auditors
alleging, inter alia, that the defendant’s audit reports were
negligently prepared.  That negligence, the shareholders contended, prevented
them from properly overseeing management which, in turn, led to the winding up
of the corporation and a loss to the shareholders of their equity therein. 
Farley J. discussed the rule in Foss v. Harbottle and concluded that it
operated so as to preclude the shareholders from bringing personal actions
based on an alleged inability to supervise the conduct of management.  62                              
One final point should be made here.  Referring to the case of Goldex
Mines Ltd. v. Revill (1974), 7 O.R. (2d) 216 (C.A.), the appellants submit
that where a shareholder has been directly and individually harmed, that
shareholder may have a personal cause of action even though the corporation may
also have a separate and distinct cause of action.  Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs
should be understood to detract from this principle.  In finding that claims in
respect of losses stemming from an alleged inability to oversee or supervise
management are really derivative and not personal in nature, I have found only
that shareholders cannot raise individual claims in respect of a wrong done to
the corporation.  Indeed, this is the limit of the rule in Foss v.
Harbottle.  Where, however, a separate and distinct claim (say, in tort)
can be raised with respect to a wrong done to a shareholder qua
individual, a personal action may well lie, assuming that all the requisite
elements of a cause of action can be made out.  63                              
The facts of Haig, supra, provide the basis for an example
of where such a claim might arise. Had the investors in that case been
shareholders of the corporation, and had a similarly negligent report knowingly
been provided to them by the auditors for a specified purpose, a duty of care
separate and distinct from any duty owed to the audited corporation would have
arisen in their favour, just as one arose in favour of Mr. Haig.  While the
corporation would have been entitled to claim damages in respect of any losses
it might have suffered through reliance on the report (assuming, of course,
that the report was also provided for the corporation’s use), the shareholders
in question would also have been able to seek personal compensation for the
losses they suffered qua individuals through their personal reliance and
investment. On the facts of this case, however, no claims of this sort can be
established.  Conclusion  64                              
In light of the foregoing, I would find that even though the respondents
owed the appellants (qua individual claimants) a prima facie duty
of care both with respect to the 1982-83 investments made in NGA and NGH by
Hercules and Mr. Freed and with respect to the losses they incurred through the
devaluation of their existing shareholdings, such prima facie duties are
negated by policy considerations which are not obviated by the facts of the
case.  Indeed, to come to the opposite conclusion on these facts would be to
expose auditors to the possibility of indeterminate liability, since such a
finding would imply that auditors owe a duty of care to any known class of
potential plaintiffs regardless of the purpose to which they put the auditors’
reports.  This would amount to an unacceptably broad expansion of the bounds of
liability drawn by this Court in Haig, supra.  With respect to
the claim regarding the appellants’ inability to oversee management properly, I
would agree with the courts below that it ought to have been brought as a
derivative action.  On the basis of these considerations, I would find under
Rule 20.03(1) of the Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench Rules that the
appellants have failed to establish that their claims as alleged would have “a
real chance of success”.  65                              
I would dismiss the appeal with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Schulman & Schulman, Winnipeg.  Solicitors for the respondents:  Aikins, MacAulay, Thorvaldson,
Winnipeg.  Solicitors for the intervener:  McCarthy, Tétrault, Toronto.    