E.D.G. v. Hammer, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 459, 2003 SCC 52  E.D.G.                                                                                                              Appellant/  v.  Board of School Trustees of School District No. 44 (North Vancouver)                                                                                       Respondent/  and  Attorney General of Canada, Nishnawbe Aski Nation, Patrick Dennis Stewart, F.L.B., R.A.F., R.R.J., M.L.J., M.W., Victor Brown, Benny Ryan Clappis, Danny Louie Daniels, Robert Daniels, Charlotte (Wilson) Guest, Daisy (Wilson) Hayman, Irene (Wilson) Starr, Pearl (Wilson) Stelmacher, Frances Tait, James Wilfrid White, Allan George Wilson, Donna Wilson, John Hugh Wilson, Terry Aleck, Gilbert Spinks, Ernie James and Ernie Michell                                                                    Interveners  Indexed as:  E.D.G. v.
Hammer  Neutral citation:  2003 SCC 52.  File No.:  28613.  2002:  December 5, 6; 2003:  October 2.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier, Iacobucci, Major,
Bastarache, Binnie, Arbour, LeBel and Deschamps JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia       The trial judge’s factual conclusion that 90 percent
of the damage was indivisible and was caused both by the janitor and by the
subsequent tortfeasors cannot be overturned absent palpable and overriding
error, and it is not evident that the trial judge committed such an error in
this case.   Cases Cited  By McLachlin C.J.  Applied:  K.L.B. v.
British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, 2003 SCC 51; referred to:  M.B.
v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 477, 2003 SCC 53; Jacobi v.
Griffiths, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 570; Lewis (Guardian ad litem of) v. British
Columbia, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1145; Lac Minerals Ltd. v. International
Corona Resources Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574; A. (C.) v. C. (J.W.)
(1998), 60 B.C.L.R. (3d) 92; Athey v. Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458.  By Arbour J.  Referred to:  K.L.B.
v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, 2003 SCC
51; M.B. v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 477, 2003 SCC 53; Jacobi
v. Griffiths, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 570.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 333, ss. 4(1), (2)(a).  School Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 375 [now R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 412], ss. 88,
89, 108, 109, 155(1)(e), 178(a).     David Sgayias, Q.C.,
and Kay Young, for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada.  Susan M. Vella and Elizabeth K. P. Grace, for the intervener
the Nishnawbe Aski Nation.  David Paterson and
Diane Soroka, for the interveners Patrick Dennis Stewart
et al.  The judgment of McLachlin C.J. and Gonthier,
Iacobucci, Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel and Deschamps JJ. was delivered by  1                                  
The Chief Justice — This
appeal concerns the potential liability of a School Board for sexual assaults
on a pupil by a school janitor.  It was heard together with K.L.B. v.
British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 403, 2003 SCC 51, and M.B.
v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 477, 2003 SCC 53, and is determined by
the principles established in K.L.B.  2                                  
The appellant claims that the School Board
should be held liable for breach of fiduciary duty and breach of non-delegable
duty.  Both claims were dismissed at trial ((1998), 53 B.C.L.R. (3d) 89), and
by a majority of the Court of Appeal ((2001), 197 D.L.R. (4th) 454, 2001 BCCA
226).  On the basis of the principles established in K.L.B., I would
uphold the result reached in the lower courts, and would dismiss the appeal.  I.    Background  3                                  
The appellant, E.D.G., lived on the Burrard
Indian reserve in British Columbia as a child.  Along with other reserve
children, she was bussed every day to Sherwood Park Elementary School, a public
school in North Vancouver.  The children from the reserve were the only First
Nations children at the school.  They were taught by the Band to respect school
staff, and not to question their directives.  E.D.G. was particularly quiet and
deferential.  4                                  
All of the children at the school were expected to help out in the
classroom, as needed.  When E.D.G. was in Grade 3, in 1978, she was given the
task of cleaning blackboard brushes.  This involved taking the brushes down to
the boiler room and using the brush cleaner that was kept there.  The boiler
room was the domain of the school janitors, who had their own table across from
the brush cleaner.  The school had a day janitor and a night janitor.  The
night janitor worked from 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. each day.  5                                  
The main function of the janitors was to maintain the school building
and to repair school equipment.  In addition, janitors would assist students
and staff with any questions they had concerning the location of equipment
within the school.  Janitors had no direct duties relating to the care or
instruction of students.  Nor did they have direct authority over the students
— not even the authority to discipline them.  If a janitor saw a student
misbehaving, the most he could do was report the behaviour to the principal,
who would then discipline the child herself.  The janitors were not, like the
teaching staff, under the supervision of the principal.  They were supervised
by a Custodial Operations Manager, who was not on site all of the time.  6                                  
Mr. Hammer was the night janitor at Sherwood Park Elementary School from
1978 to 1980.  In the fall of 1978, he began a series of sexual assaults on
E.D.G.  When she came down to the boiler room to clean the brushes, he would
take her into an adjacent storage area, lock the door, and engage in sexual
acts.  The trial judge found that there were at least 20 sexual assaults over
the two-year period.  On most occasions, E.D.G. simply “went numb”, hoping to
dissociate herself from the pain and fear caused by Mr. Hammer’s actions. 
She did not tell anyone what was happening.  Mr. Hammer had told her that if
she did, he would lose his job and his family; and  E.D.G. had been taught by
her elders to show deference toward adults.  She also worried that if she did
try to tell someone at the school, she would be disbelieved because she was
part of the native minority at the school.  7                                  
The trial judge found that “no person employed by the Board had any
reason to suspect he [Mr. Hammer] was engaged or might be likely to engage in
any inappropriate behaviour with the children” (para. 17).  Throughout this
time, Mr. Hammer discharged his custodial duties to the full satisfaction of
the Custodial Operations Manager.  Moreover, he was known by all of the
teachers to be friendly with all of the children.  The school did have a
mechanism in place whereby teachers and other members of the staff could report
negative performances by janitorial staff to the principal, who would inform
the Custodial Operations Manager.  But as it was not suspected that anything
was amiss, this mechanism was never used.  Although E.D.G. once asked her
teacher if she could be taken off brush duty and assigned some other task, she
did not explain why or pursue the matter further when her request was denied. 
So her teacher, not suspecting that anything serious lay behind the request,
did not follow up with further inquiries.  8                                  
Mr. Hammer’s assaults on the appellant ended in 1980, when he was
transferred to another school.  Most unfortunately, the appellant was subjected
to further sexual assaults after this time, by as many as seven uncles and
distant cousins on the reserve.  The assaults ended only when she reached Grade
8.  At this point, partly as a result of a school program in sexual education,
she realized that she could take steps to avoid interacting with her abusers
and to avoid entering into situations that would leave her vulnerable to new
abusers.  9                                  
At trial, E.D.G. successfully recovered damages from Mr. Hammer.  Her
claims against the Board, however, were unsuccessful.  She had initially made claims
against the Board based upon negligence, vicarious liability, breach of
non-delegable duty and breach of fiduciary duty.  She abandoned the claim based
on negligence during the trial.  The trial judge, Vickers J., agreed that it
would not have succeeded.  He found that “[o]n the evidence it would be
impossible to conclude the Board failed to adequately supervise its employees;
failed to protect the students from assault; [or] failed to investigate
credentials and qualifications of persons involved with students” (para. 41). 
Moreover, he noted that E.D.G.’s teacher could not be faulted for failing to
inquire further into her request to be removed from brush duty, because the
teacher had no other grounds for suspecting that E.D.G. was being abused by Mr.
Hammer.  Vickers J. then dismissed the remaining claims.  He held that because
the Board had not abused its authority over E.D.G., it could not be held liable
for breach of fiduciary duty.  He dismissed the claim for breach of
non-delegable duty on the grounds that the Board had not delegated to the
janitor any of the tasks for which it retained ultimate responsibility. 
Finally, he held that it would not be fair to impose vicarious liability on the
Board, because Mr. Hammer’s actions were not sufficiently connected to his
employment to constitute a materialization of risks created by the Board.  All
that the Board did was provide Mr. Hammer with the opportunity to commit the
assaults; it did not entrust him with the type of authority, or the kinds of tasks,
that would significantly increase the risk of abuse.  10                              
E.D.G. did not appeal Vickers J.’s holding on vicarious liability,
because it was  explicitly endorsed by the majority of this Court in Jacobi v. Griffiths, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 570, per Binnie J.  At para. 45, Binnie J. cited
the case as an illustration of the principle that  “creation of opportunity
without job-created power over the victim or other link between the employment
and the tort will seldom constitute the ‘strong connection’ required to attract
vicarious liability”.  The mere fact that an organization provides a person
with the opportunity to commit a tort does not, on its own, render that tort a
manifestation of risks created by the organization.  11                              
E.D.G. did appeal the trial judge’s holdings on the issues of fiduciary duty and
breach of non-delegable duty.  The Court of Appeal held unanimously that the
Board had not breached its fiduciary duty toward the appellant.  In its view, a
breach of fiduciary duty required the exploitation of another person’s trust for one’s own personal advantage.  The court divided, however, on
the question of whether the Board had breached a non-delegable duty.  Prowse
J.A. held that it had.  In her view, the Board was under a non-delegable duty
to see that reasonable care was taken in the operation of the school.  Prowse
J.A. regarded this duty as a duty to ensure that no employee committed a tort. 
Consequently, she held that Mr. Hammer’s tort was sufficient to constitute a
breach of the Board’s duty, even in the absence of negligence on the part of
the Board.  By contrast, Mackenzie J.A. and McEachern C.J.B.C. held that the
doctrine of non-delegable duty did not apply.  In their view, the doctrine
applies only in cases where the tortfeasor is an independent contractor and not
an employee, because its purpose is to supplement vicarious liability in cases
where the tortfeasor is an independent contractor.  II.    Issues  12                              
The appellant appeals to this Court on the
issues of fiduciary duty and non-delegable duty.  The Board has cross-appealed
on the question of whether Vickers J. properly apportioned the damages between
Mr. Hammer and E.D.G.’s subsequent sexual abusers.  13                              
The questions to be dealt with are therefore:  (1)     Is the Board liable for breach of
non-delegable duty?  (2)     Is the Board liable for breach of fiduciary
duty?  (3)     Did the trial judge properly apportion the
damages between Mr. Hammer and  E.D.G.’s subsequent abusers?  III.    Analysis  14                              
The principles governing this appeal have been discussed in the
companion judgment of K.L.B.  Consequently, we need only summarize these
principles briefly in what follows, before applying them to the circumstances
of this case.  1.  Is the
Board Liable for Breach of Non-delegable Duty?  15                              
In the case at bar, as in K.L.B., our focus is on
non-delegable duties generated by statute.  16                              
The starting point for analysis of non-delegable duties arising
from statute is Lewis (Guardian ad litem of) v. British Columbia, [1997]
3 S.C.R. 1145, where the Court held that the applicable statutes placed full
responsibility on the Ministry for ensuring that due care was taken in
maintenance work on the highways.  The duty was “non-delegable” in the sense that the Ministry could not discharge its
responsibility simply by delegating the work to competent contractors and by
taking reasonable care in supervising them.  As I stated in my concurring
judgment, it was no answer for the employer to say “I
was not negligent” (para. 50).  17                              
The issue in the case at bar is whether the School Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 375, places the same sort of duty on school boards that
the statutes in Lewis placed upon the Ministry.  Does it place school
boards under a non-delegable duty to ensure that children are
kept safe while on school premises, such that school boards are liable for
abuse or harm inflicted by school employees upon school children while at
school? Or are the duties it imposes more limited?  18                              
The duties and powers of school boards are laid out in ss. 88-89 of the
Act: see Appendix.  Section 88 lays out the general duties.  They include a
duty to “determine local policy in conformity with this Act” (s. 88(b)); to
“delegate those specific and general administrative duties which require
delegation to one or more employees of the board” (s. 88(c)); to deduct from
teachers’ salaries the membership fees payable to the British Columbia
Teachers’ Federation (s. 88(d)); to prepare reports for meetings of electors
(s. 88(e)); and to “visit a public school in the school district” when
necessary or desirable (s. 88(f)).  19                              
Subsequent sections of the Act place school boards under a number
of specific duties pertaining to student health and safety.  Section 108
states that boards shall “provide each school in the school district with
suitable first aid equipment” and shall ensure that there is at least one
teacher on staff qualified to administer first aid.  Section 109 states
that boards must “ensure that the Health Act and regulations are carried
out in regard to the pupils”.  Section 155(1)(e) requires boards to
close schools temporarily when inclement weather may endanger the health of
pupils or when so ordered by the appointed medical officer.  Finally, s. 178(a)
stipulates that boards must, when necessary, arrange for the repair and
improvement of school buildings.  20                              
These specific duties do not permit the inference that boards are
generally and ultimately responsible for the health and safety of school
children on school premises, in a way as would render them liable for abuse at
the hands of a school employee.  The same is true of the provisions laying out
the general duties of school boards.  None of the general duties gives school
boards full responsibility for students’ welfare while on school premises, in
the way that the statutes in Lewis gave the Ministry full responsibility
for overseeing maintenance projects and for ensuring that workers exercised
reasonable care.  Consequently, the Act does not appear to impose a general
non-delegable duty upon school boards to ensure that children are kept safe
while on school premises, such as would render the Board liable for abuse of a
child by an employee on school premises.  21                              
It follows that the appellant’s claim for breach of non-delegable duty
cannot succeed.   2.  Is the
Board Liable for Breach of Fiduciary Duty?  22                              
The parties agree that the relationship between the Board and the
students was fiduciary in nature.  As the trial judge noted, a school board
“enjoys a position of overriding power and influence over its students.  It is
a power dependent relationship, one characterized by unilateral discretion”
(para. 40).  The parties disagree, however, over the content of the fiduciary
duty that the Board stands under.  The Board claims that the parental fiduciary
duty is to refrain from harmful acts involving disloyalty, bad faith or a
conflict of interest.  The appellant asserts a broader duty, alternately
described as a duty to promote the “best interests” of school children and a
duty to ensure that no employee inflicts injury on a child on school premises.  23                              
For the reasons discussed in K.L.B., supra, the
appellant’s assertion of a broad fiduciary duty to act in the best interests of
the child must be rejected.  The maxim that parents should act
in their child’s best interests may help to justify particular parental
fiduciary duties, but it does not constitute a basis for liability.  The cases
on the parental fiduciary duty focus not on achieving what is in the child’s
best interest, but on specific conduct that causes harm to children in a manner
involving disloyalty, self-interest, or abuse of power — failing to act selflessly in the interests of the child.  This approach
is well grounded in policy and common sense.  Parents may have limited
resources and face many demands, rendering it unrealistic to expect them to act
in each child’s best interests.  Moreover, since it is often unclear what a
child’s “best” interests are, the idea does not provide a justiciable
standard.  Finally, the objective of promoting the best interests of the
child, when stated in such general and absolute terms, overshoots the concerns
that are central to fiduciary law.  These are, as La Forest J. noted in Lac
Minerals Ltd.  v. International Corona Resources Ltd., [1989] 2 S.C.R. 574,
at pp. 646-47: loyalty and  “the avoidance of a
conflict of duty and interest and a duty not to profit at the expense of the
beneficiary”.  24                             
The appellant’s claim that the Board has a fiduciary duty to
ensure that no employee harms school children on school premises regardless of
fault fares no better.  This proposal amounts to an attempt to recast the
appellant’s claim for breach of non-delegable duty into the language of
fiduciary duty and extends fiduciary law beyond its natural boundaries.  Fiduciary obligations are not obligations to
guarantee a certain outcome for
the vulnerable party, regardless of fault.  They do not hold the fiduciary to a
certain type of outcome, exposing the fiduciary to liability whenever the
vulnerable party is harmed by one of the fiduciary’s employees.  Rather, they hold the fiduciary to a
certain type of conduct.  As Ryan J.A. held in A. (C.)
v. C. (J.W.) (1998), 60 B.C.L.R. (3d) 92 (C.A.), at para. 154, “A fiduciary is not a guarantor.”  A fiduciary “does not
breach his or her duties by simply failing to obtain the best result for the
beneficiary”.  25                              
The fact that a breach of fiduciary
duty requires fault is one of the features that distinguishes this type of
claim both from claims based upon statutory non-delegable duties of the sort at
issue in Lewis, supra, and from claims based upon vicarious
liability. The latter two types of claim are no-fault claims.  Breaches
of fiduciary duty, however, require fault.  As the trial judge, Vickers J.,
noted at para. 46:  No fault obligations are imposed in the context of a claim for
vicarious liability.  Breach of fiduciary duty is not a no fault claim.    26                             
In the case at bar, the only fault to which the appellant was
able to point was the fault of the school janitor.  The appellant was unable to
identify any action or omission on the part of the School Board that might itself
amount to a breach of a fiduciary duty.  The fiduciary duty in this case lies
upon the Board.  The object for analysis, then, is not the conduct of the
janitor but the conduct of the fiduciary, the Board.  The trial judge
specifically found that “no person employed by the Board had any reason to
suspect  he [Mr. Hammer] was engaged or might be likely to engage in any
inappropriate behaviour with the children” (para. 17).  27                              
I conclude that none of the
conduct alleged against the School Board involves the type of wrong
traditionally associated with breach of fiduciary duty and that the appellant’s
claim for breach of fiduciary duty fails.  3.      Did the Trial Judge Properly Apportion
the Damages Between Mr. Hammer and E.D.G.’s Subsequent Abusers?  28                              
Since I have concluded that the Board is not liable to E.D.G. for any of
the damage caused by Mr. Hammer, it is not strictly necessary to consider the
issue raised on the Board’s cross-appeal.  However, because the Board rests its
challenge on the claim that Vickers J. misapplied a principle laid out in Athey
v. Leonati, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 458, it will be useful to consider the Board’s
challenge.  29                              
The Board’s challenge concerns that portion of the damages that was, in
the view of Vickers J., caused jointly by Mr. Hammer and the subsequent
abusers. Vickers J. held Mr. Hammer liable for the sum total of these damages,
stating that “[a]s long as he [Mr. Hammer] is a part of the cause of the
injury, even though his acts alone did not create the entire injury, his responsibility
for the [entire] damage that flows from that injury is established” (para.
57).  As an authority for this proposition, Vickers J. cited Major J.’s claim
in Athey, supra, at para. 17, that “[a]s long as a defendant is part
of the cause of an injury, the defendant is liable, even though his act alone
was not enough to create the injury” (emphasis in original).  30                              
In the Board’s submission, Vickers J. was incorrect in applying this
principle to the case at bar.  The principle applies, the Board claims, only where
the other cause is non-tortious and is a precondition of the
injury, not where it is tortious and occurs subsequently.  31                              
In my view, the Board’s reading of the principle articulated in Athey is
overly narrow.  After making the claim cited above, Major J. further expanded
upon his reasoning, stating at para. 19 that:  The law does not excuse a defendant from liability
merely because other causal factors for which he is not responsible also
helped produce the harm . . . .  It is sufficient if the defendant’s
negligence was a cause of the harm . . . . [First
emphasis added; second emphasis in original.]   This principle
is not confined to cases involving non-tortious preconditions.  It applies to
any case in which the injuries caused by a number of factors are indivisible.  32                              
The matter is governed by the Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c.
333, s. 4, which provides that “[i]f damage or loss has been caused by the
fault of 2 or more persons”, then “(a) they are jointly and severally liable to
the person suffering the damage or loss”.  This rule implies that Mr. Hammer is
liable to E.D.G. for the full cost of any injuries that are indivisible and
caused both by Mr. Hammer and by the subsequent tortfeasors.  33                             
The Board’s real disagreement may lie, not with the principles
applied by the trial judge, but with the trial judge’s factual conclusions, in
particular, his conclusion that 90 percent of the damage was indivisible and
was caused both by Mr. Hammer and by the subsequent tortfeasors.  This is,
however, a finding of fact, and cannot be
overturned absent palpable and overriding error.  It is not evident to me that
the trial judge committed such an error in this case.  IV. Conclusion  34                              
For the reasons given above, I would dismiss both the
appeal and the cross-appeal.  The following are the reasons delivered by  35                              
Arbour J. — This appeal
concerns the potential liability of a school board for sexual assaults
inflicted on a pupil by a school janitor.  The appellant claims that the School
Board should be held liable for breach of fiduciary duty and for breach of
non-delegable duty.  As regards these issues, I would dismiss the appeal
substantially for the reasons given by McLachlin C.J.  36                              
I also agree with McLachlin C.J. that vicarious liability cannot be
imposed in this case.  In K.L.B. v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R.
403, 2003 SCC 51, and in M.B. v. British Columbia, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 477,
2003 SCC 53, which were heard at the same time as this case, I disagreed with
the Chief Justice and found that the elements for a vicarious liability claim
were made out. However, in light of the specific reference to this case in Jacobi
v. Griffiths, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 570, in which Binnie J., writing for the
majority, endorsed the trial judge’s view that there was no vicarious liability
in this case, I believe that the appellant was correct not to pursue the matter
either in the Court of Appeal or in this Court.  APPENDIX  Relevant
Legislative Provisions  School Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 375  Board Duties  88.  The board of each school district shall  (a)   abide by this Act and the regulations;  (b)   determine local policy in conformity with
this Act for the effective and efficient operation of schools in the school
district;  (c)   delegate those specific and general
administrative duties which require delegation to one or more employees of the
board;  (d)   deduct from the salary of a teacher the
amount of the regular annual membership fees payable by the teacher to the
British Columbia Teachers’ Federation . . . .  (e)   where one or more annual meetings of
electors is held under this Act in the school district, cause to be prepared
and presented to each meeting a report on the operation of the public schools
in the school district . . . .  (f)    when necessary or desirable, visit a public
school in the school district.  Board powers  89.  The board of a school district may  (a)   make bylaws, not inconsistent with this Act
or the regulations, relative to the organization of meetings of the board and
to any matter over which power or authority is by this Act expressly vested
exclusively in the board . . . .  (b)   provide, with respect to a school in its
district, under rules of the board approved by the council of the municipality
in which the school is situated, a system of school patrols by which pupils may
assist in the control of motor vehicle traffic on highways or elsewhere so far
as the traffic may affect pupils going to or from the school;  (c)   authorize the appointment of employees, in
addition to teachers, considered necessary by the board to secure the efficient
operation of the public schools of the school district, fix wages or
remuneration, and, by lawful process, dismiss a person so appointed;  (d)   become a member of the British Columbia
School Trustees Association . . . .  (e)   make bylaws, not inconsistent with any Act
or regulations, regulating and controlling the use of property owned or
administered by the board.   First aid equipment  108.  Each board of school trustees shall
provide each school in the school district with suitable first aid equipment,
and shall also, so far as practicable, provide that on each school staff there
shall be at least one teacher or other person qualified to administer first
aid.   Health Act to be adhered to  109.  Each board of school trustees shall
ensure that the Health Act and regulations are carried out in regard to
the pupils attending public school in the school district.   Duties of board  155. (1) The board of each school
district shall,                                                                     .
. .  (e)   when so ordered by the medical health
officer appointed under this Act, or when inclemency of weather might endanger
the health of the pupils, close a school temporarily without permission of the
ministry;   Board duties  178.  The board of each school district shall,  (a)   when considered necessary, arrange and
authorize the purchase, erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, renting,
insuring and improvement of school buildings . . . .     Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada:  Deputy
Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa.  Solicitors for the intervener the Nishnawbe Aski Nation:  Goodman
and Carr; Lerner & Associates, Toronto.  Solicitors for the interveners Patrick Dennis Stewart et
al.:  David Paterson Law Corp., Surrey, B.C.; Hutchins, Soroka & Grant,
Vancouver, B.C.    