Marcoux v. Bouchard, [2001] 2 S.C.R.
726, 2001 SCC 50  Murielle Marcoux                                                                                            Appellant  v.  Dr. Jean-Marie Bouchard and Dr. Gérard Leblanc                                  Respondents  Indexed as:  Marcoux v. Bouchard  Neutral citation:  2001 SCC 50.  File No.:  27554.  2001:  May 25;  2001:  September 13.   on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec  Civil responsibility — Physicians and surgeons —
Purpose served by surgical operation — Consent to operation.  In 1977, the appellant underwent surgery in the hope
of relieving pain which had continued since a surgical operation to the
maxilla.  The surgery did not solve the problem and caused anaesthesia dolorosa
in her cheek in addition to the facial neuralgia from which she was already
suffering.  In 1982, the appellant’s pain became more severe and Dr. B
recommended that she have further surgery to relieve the facial neuralgia.  The
appellant agreed but the surgery was unsuccessful.  It also had serious
sequelae.  The operation having been a failure, the appellant brought an action
for damages against Dr. B and Dr. L, contending that the operation had served
no purpose  and that there had been no consent.  With respect to the second
allegation, she asserted that art. 19 C.C.L.C., which guarantees
inviolability of the human person, had been infringed.  She submitted that she
learned of the participation of Dr. L, who performed the most significant part
of the surgery, only after the operation.  She also said that she did not give
enlightened consent to the operation because Dr. B allegedly did not inform her
of Dr. M-N’s report on his 1981 consultation, which advised against any further
surgery.  The Superior Court dismissed the action and the Court of Appeal
affirmed that judgment.  Held: The appeal should
be dismissed.  The facts established do not support the appellant’s arguments
and this Court would not be justified in intervening with respect to the
assessment of the evidence by the trial judge.  Although the operation intended to relieve the
appellant’s facial pain did not produce the intended result, it did not seem,
before it was performed, to serve no purpose and recommending it to the
appellant was not a professional fault in these circumstances.  There
were risks involved in the operation and it was uncertain whether it would
serve any purpose. However, according to the evidence accepted by the Superior
Court and the Court of Appeal, this option was a defensible surgical operation
by medical practice standards.  The assessments of the decision by Dr. B and
Dr. L to recommend and perform this surgery in the judgments under appeal were
consistent with the fundamental principles of medical liability.   Cases Cited  Referred to:  Hôpital général de la région de l’Amiante Inc. v. Perron,
[1979] C.A. 567;  Lapointe v. Hôpital Le Gardeur, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 351.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms,
R.S.Q., c. C-12, s. 1.  Civil Code of Lower Canada,
art. 19.  Civil Code of Québec, S.Q. 1991,
c. 64, art. 10.  Authors Cited Baudouin, Jean-Louis, et Patrice
Deslauriers.  La responsabilité civile, 5e éd.
Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1998.  Kouri, Robert P., et Suzanne
Philips-Nootens.  Le corps humain, l’inviolabilité de la personne et le
consentement aux soins.  Sherbrooke:  Revue de droit de l’Université de
Sherbrooke, 1999.  Potvin, Louise.  L’obligation
de renseignement du médecin:  Étude comparée du droit québécois, français et du
common law canadien.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 1984.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal,
[1999] R.R.A. 447, [1999] Q.J. No. 3055 (QL), affirming a decision of the
Superior Court, [1995] Q.J. No. 2325 (QL).  Appeal dismissed.  Gordon M. Kugler, Martine
L. Tremblay and Annette Lefebvre, for the appellant.  Robert-Jean Chénier and
Chantal Léonard, for the respondents.  English version of the judgment of the Court delivered
by  LeBel J. —  I.  Introduction 1                                  
The main issue in this appeal relates to consent to a complex and
delicate surgical operation performed by the respondents in Québec in 1982 to
relieve the severe and persistent pain suffered by the appellant, Murielle
Marcoux.  The appellant also questions whether any purpose was served by the
operation.  2                                  
The appellant asks that the appeal and action against the respondents
for professional liability, which was dismissed by judgments from which she has
appealed, be allowed.  Although a case of this type is one that may raise
important legal issues, such as protection of the inviolability of an
individual’s person and the requirements in respect of enlightened consent to
surgery, the facts established in this appeal do not support the appellant’s
arguments and this Court would not be justified in intervening with respect to
the assessment of the evidence by the trial judge.  Accordingly, the appeal
must be dismissed for the reasons that follow.  II.  Origin of the Case  3                                  
The appellant’s medical problems have existed for many years.  In 1977,
the respondent, Dr. Leblanc, a neurosurgeon practising in Québec, assisted
by Dr. Bouchard, who was then a neurosurgery resident, performed an
operation at the Hôpital de l’Enfant-Jésus in Québec which consisted of
sectioning the fibres of the trigeminal nerve, in the hope of relieving pain
which had continued since a surgical operation to the maxilla.  The purpose of
this operation was to stop the pain radiating from the jaw.  Unfortunately, the
surgery did not solve the problem, but in fact caused Ms. Marcoux to experience
analgesia dolorosa in her cheek, in addition to the facial neuralgia from which
she was already suffering.  4                                  
In the spring of 1980, the appellant became a patient of Dr. Bouchard. 
For some years, the medical teams at the Hôpital de l’Enfant-Jésus tried a
variety of treatments and medications to relieve the appellant’s pain.  Some of
these were intended to treat her neurological problems, and others to treat the
disorders of her maxillae and maxillary joints.  Her hospital file confirms
that she was there on many occasions for consultations and a variety of
treatments.   6                                  
In 1982, the appellant’s pain became more severe.  Eventually,
Dr. Bouchard recommended to his patient that she undergo a second
operation.  The purpose of that operation was to section the nerves that had
survived the 1977 operation, to relieve the facial neuralgia.  However, he did
not expect that he could relieve the anaesthesia dolorosa. Ms. Marcoux
agreed.  The consent form signed before the operation indicated that
Dr. Bouchard would be the surgeon.  Nevertheless, Dr. Leblanc
participated in the operation and it was he who sectioned the nerves.  The
surgery was unsuccessful and did nothing to relieve the pain.  It also had
serious sequelae.  The cerebellum was damaged, causing balance problems and
tremors in Ms. Marcoux’s right hand, which she is now unable to use.  As a
result, she was forced to give up her job as a teacher with the Commission des
écoles catholiques de Québec, and most of the outside activities that she had
continued despite her health problems.  7                                  
The operation having been a failure, she brought an action for damages
against Dr. Bouchard and Dr. Leblanc.  She contended first that the operation
had served no purpose.  In her opinion, Dr. Bouchard should never have
recommended the operation, which he should have known would serve absolutely no
purpose.  In addition to what was originally the main reason for the action,
there were two arguments based on absence of consent.  8                                  
The appellant began by asserting that art. 19 C.C.L.C.,
which guarantees the inviolability of the human person, had been
infringed :  19.  The human person is
inviolable.  No one may cause harm to the person of another
without his consent or without being authorized by law to do so.  9                                  
The appellant submits that she learned of Dr. Leblanc’s
participation only after the operation.  She alleges that Dr. Bouchard
never informed her that his colleague would perform the most significant part
of the surgery, sectioning the nerves, and that as a result Dr. Leblanc
performed the surgery without her knowledge or consent, which infringes her
right to inviolability of the person, and should be held liable for all the consequences
of an operation that served no purpose and even caused harm.  It is conceded,
however, that the surgical technique itself was beyond reproach.  10                              
Ms. Marcoux also argues that she did not give enlightened consent
to the operation.  Dr. Bouchard allegedly did not inform her that
Dr. Molina-Negro, a Montréal neurologist, had sent him a report on the
consultation which strongly advised against any further surgery.  Had she been
aware of that opinion, she would never have consented to the surgery.  This is
the second ground on which she claims that the respondents are liable for
professional negligence.  11                              
Dr. Bouchard and Dr. Leblanc denied these allegations and strongly
contested the claim.  Their view is that the operation was medically justified,
despite having been a failure.  The statement of defence also submits that the
plaintiff was informed both that Dr. Leblanc would be present and of
Dr. Molina-Negro’s conclusions, before the surgery, and alleges that she
received all the information that she needed in order to give enlightened and
valid consent and protect her right to inviolability of the person, and
accordingly that there was no basis for the action in law.  III.  Judicial History  A.  Superior Court  12                              
The case was heard by Martin J. of the Superior Court who conducted
a detailed review of the evidence and found that the appellant had not
established that the surgery had served no purpose.  The respondents had good
reason to believe that there were some nerve fibres that were continuing to
transmit the pain originating in the right side of the appellant’s face.  In
all probability, if other competent surgeons had had to deal with the same
clinical case they would have adopted a course of action similar to what was
done by the respondents.  He held that the respondents had committed no
professional fault by proposing the surgery performed in December 1982.  13                              
Martin J. considered the parties’ contradictory versions of the
substance of their discussions before the surgery and found that
Dr. Bouchard was generally credible.  He preferred his version of those
events to the appellant’s.  The judge added that although it was
Dr. Leblanc who sectioned the nerves and the trigeminal at the time in
question, Dr. Bouchard had still been responsible for the operation, as
the surgeon.  It was he who proposed the surgery, made the incision and performed
the preparatory work.  As even the plaintiff acknowledged, the surgical
technique seemed to meet the professional standards.  The trial judge was also
of the view that the appellant had in any case been adequately informed that
Dr. Leblanc would be present and what his role would be.  In his opinion,
she had consented to the surgery with full knowledge of the risks, the
relatively poor chance of success and the reservations that Dr. Bouchard
had already expressed.  Dr. Bouchard had given his patient all the information
a competent neurosurgeon was required to provide her with in the circumstances
of the case.  Accordingly, the Superior Court dismissed the action.  B.  Court
of Appeal, [1999] R.R.A. 447   15                              
For the reasons stated by Brossard J.A., the Court of Appeal did
not accept these arguments and unanimously dismissed the appeal.  On the
question of whether any purpose had been served by the operation, the Court of
Appeal relied on the assessment of the medical testimony and the expert
evidence.  Based on that assessment, the appellant had failed to establish that
the operation had served no purpose, and the Court of Appeal had to defer to
the trial judge’s findings of fact. Thus, on the evidence presented by the parties,
although the operation may have proved to be completely ineffective, it was
medically justified and could not be described as having served no purpose.  16                              
In addition, Dr. Leblanc’s participation in the surgery did not
mean that there had been a breach of art. 19 C.C.L.C.  In the
opinion of Brossard J.A., Ms. Marcoux had given her consent to an
operation performed by a team which, to her knowledge, included
Dr. Leblanc.  17                              
However, on the question of Dr. Molina-Negro’s report,
Brossard J.A. stated the opinion that the appellant had not been informed
of his recommendations.  He found that the trial judge had committed a patent
error by disregarding the appellant’s assertions that she was unaware of
Dr. Molina-Negro’s opinion when she consented to the surgery in December
1982.  However, he concluded at p. 471 that this error was not fatal,
since Ms. Marcoux would have consented to the operation in any case,
regardless of the legal standard used to assess her consent:  [translation]  I am of
the opinion, on the record as a whole. . ., that there is no doubt
that [the plaintiff] would have consented, even if she had been aware of the
negative opinion of Dr. Molina-Negro in September 1981.  I am of the
opinion that, both objectively and subjectively, the appellant would inevitably
have consented to the surgery performed in December 1982.  18                              
In objective terms, according to Brossard J.A., the evidence
established that the appellant had been increasingly unable to tolerate her
pain.  Any reasonable person in her situation would therefore have opted for
the destructive surgery, with its inherent risks and chances of success, of
which she was aware and of which she had been adequately informed, rather than
agree to continue living with that kind of pain.   IV.  Relevant Legal Provisions  20                              
Civil Code of Lower Canada  19.  The human person is inviolable.  No one may cause harm to the person of another
without his consent or without being authorized by law to do so.  Civil Code
of Québec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64  10.  Every person is inviolable and is
entitled to the integrity of his person.  Except in cases provided for by law, no one may
interfere with his person without his free and enlightened consent.  V.  Analysis  A.  Argument of the Parties  21                              
The appellant makes the same arguments against the judgments of the
Court of Appeal and the Superior Court as she had made unsuccessfully in the
past.  First, she raises the issue of whether any purpose had been served by
the operation.  In her view, it could not have relieved her pain and should not
have been recommended to her.  Second, she questioned the adequacy and validity
of the consent she gave to the operation.  22                              
The arguments on which the appellant focused in this Court related to
the issue of consent.  The first was that the respondents violated art. 19 C.C.L.C. 
No one may be operated on without consent which must be given not only for the
operation itself, but also in respect of who will perform it.  The patient must
be informed of who the main actors in an operation will be, thus consent with
knowledge that they will be participating.  In the case at bar, the appellant
asserts that she was never informed that Dr. Leblanc would be doing the
nerve section, even though that was the most important and critical part of the
operation.  She therefore submits that Dr. Leblanc’s participation was an
unauthorized act that violated a fundamental obligation to protect the
inviolability and autonomy of the person.  The surgeon should therefore be
liable for all the consequences of this unlawful operation, despite the fact
that there was no fault in the surgical technique properly speaking.  23                              
The second argument on the issue of consent was that the Court of Appeal
erred in its conclusion regarding the information that the appellant was given
about Dr. Molina-Negro’s opinion, and in concluding that she would have
given consent in any event if she had been aware of that opinion at the time. 
Dr. Molina-Negro’s opinion was a key factor in the decision she had to
make.  His strong negative recommendation would have dissuaded her from having
the operation suggested by Dr. Bouchard.  Having failed to obtain the
enlightened consent of his patient, he is liable, jointly and severally with
his colleague Dr. Leblanc, for the injury suffered by the appellant.  24                              
The quantum of damages is not in issue.  On that point, the evidence
clearly establishes that the operation caused the appellant significant harm,
in that she became incapable of working and engaging in numerous activities.  25                              
The respondents took the same positions on the law as they had argued at
trial.  They also stressed the importance of the role of the trial judge in
respect of findings of fact and in asserting that there was no valid reason to
review those findings, particularly with respect to the credibility of the
parties.  26                              
With all this in mind, I will begin by addressing the various arguments
on the question of whether the operation served any purpose.  I will then
examine the problems raised by the appellant’s consent.  B.  Purpose Served by the Operation  27                              
In order to appreciate the argument relating to whether the operation
should have been performed, we need to understand the nature of the operation
and of the appellant’s disorder.  Since the operation was performed in 1977,
the appellant had suffered from severe and continuing pain, arising from two
sources.  First, she experienced anaesthesia dolorosa, which first occurred
after the 1977 surgery and originated in the brain itself.  Moreover, facial
neuralgic pain radiated from the maxilla.  The operation recommended by
Dr. Bouchard in 1982 was not meant for the anaesthesia dolorosa type of
phenomenon.  It was clearly understood that sectioning the remaining nerves
would have no impact on that pain.  The operation was intended to relieve
another type of pain: the respondents’ hypothesis was that the pain was being
transmitted by a number of nerves that the 1977 operation had not succeeded in
sectioning.  There were risks involved in that operation, and it was uncertain
whether it would serve any purpose.  However, according to the evidence
accepted by the Superior Court and the Court of Appeal, this option was a
defensible surgical operation by medical practice standards.    30                              
The operation did not produce the intended result.  From the medical
standpoint, it did not seem, before it was performed, to serve no purpose. 
Recommending it to a patient was not a professional fault in the circumstances
of this case.  The appellant’s first argument therefore fails.  C.  Consent to the Surgery    D.  Presence of Dr. Leblanc  33                              
In his judgment, Martin J. analysed the evidence at length and made
findings of fact, in particular with respect to the credibility of the
parties.  On that point, and with all possible tact in the circumstances, he
pointed to the credibility that he gave, generally, to Dr. Bouchard’s
version of his discussions with Ms. Marcoux before the operation.  Dr.
Bouchard’s statements and explanations coincided to a very large extent with
the notes found in the medical records.  That factor seems to have played an
important role in the judge’s assessment of the parties’ credibility.  Although
in the latter part of his judgment, containing his specific findings of fact,
he did not specifically find that Dr. Bouchard had informed
Ms. Marcoux that Dr. Leblanc would be present, that finding may be
inferred from his analysis as a whole.  Dr. Bouchard clearly stated during
his testimony that he told Ms. Marcoux that Dr. Leblanc, a specialist
in this type of operation at the Hôpital de l’Enfant-Jésus, would participate
in the operation and would section the nerves.  According to Dr. Bouchard,
Ms. Marcoux consented to his colleague being present and participating. 
Given that Martin J. found that Dr. Bouchard was credible overall,
there is no reason to question, in this Court, whether that information was
given.  Indeed, there is circumstantial evidence to support that finding.  The
appellant had been operated on by Dr. Leblanc in the past.  She was
familiar with the organization of the health care teams at the Hôpital de
l’Enfant-Jésus, particularly in the neurosurgery department.  She had been in
ongoing contact, over several years, with the specialists in maxillary surgery
and the neurologists.  She knew that Dr. Bouchard would not be operating
alone, and in fact would have an assistant.  Unless the trial judge’s
assessments of credibility are to be questioned, that not being the normal role
of this Court as the second level of appeal, we must conclude that there is no
basis for this first aspect of the argument regarding the alleged failure to
provide information.  E.  Information Regarding Dr. Molina-Negro’s Opinion  34                              
The second aspect of the argument concerning the lack of information is
based on failure to provide information about the conclusions in the report by
Dr. Molina-Negro, a Montréal neurologist, who subsequently became the
appellant’s expert witness, on the question of whether any purpose would be
served by the operation and what the risks were.  As I indicated earlier,
Ms. Marcoux says that if she had been aware of this expert’s negative opinion
before the operation she would never have consented to it.  35                              
A degree of confusion has made its way into the analysis of the facts
concerning this consultation.  When the events are put back into their proper
sequence, it appears that there is no factual basis for the argument.  As the
trial judge found, the appellant received complete and sufficient information
concerning the nature and risks of the operation.  36                              
First, it must be borne in mind that the operation took place in
December 1982, following consultations and discussions that went on for several
months, because Ms. Marcoux was continuing to experience pain and the pain
had worsened.  In 1981, at the suggestion of certain physicians at the Hôpital
de l’Enfant-Jésus, she went to Montréal for a consultation.  She had contacted
Dr. Molina-Negro directly.  He then prepared a report, and we know that
copies of the report were sent to Dr. Bouchard and another physician at
the Hôpital de l’Enfant-Jésus, Dr. Goodyer.  We still do not know where
the original went.  Ms. Marcoux did not receive a copy of the report at
her interview with Dr. Molina-Negro.  However, the trial judgment found that in
the fall of 1981 Dr. Bouchard had informed the appellant that like
himself, Dr. Molina-Negro did not recommend the operation.  Based on that
finding, we may say that at that point, Ms. Marcoux was already aware that
Dr. Molina-Negro was opposed to a further operation.  Even if we were to
assume that she had not been informed of the detailed content of the report,
she was at least aware that it was negative in terms of the further surgery
suggested.  37                              
In 1982, as we have seen, discussions regarding the possibility of a
further operation resumed.  It was clear that at that time, again according to
the trial judgment, Dr. Bouchard did not specifically refer to
Dr. Molina-Negro’s opinion, which related to the previous condition, a
disorder that was still unstable.  Dr. Bouchard, did, however, remind
Ms. Marcoux during that period, in different words, that his Montréal
colleagues were still opposed to the operation.  In addition, it is conceded
that all the risks of this surgery were explained to her.  The appellant in
fact acknowledges that she was a very curious patient who asked a lot of
questions.  She further admitted that she was given answers to those
questions.  Dr. Molina-Negro’s report, which the appellant had been
informed of a year earlier, was part of the general information already in the
appellant’s possession about her own case.  38                              
In the fall of 1982, according to the evidence accepted by the judge,
the appellant agreed to a risky operation to try to relieve some of the pain
that was making her life unbearable.  The physicians’ obligation to provide her
with information had been properly performed.  VI.  Conclusion  39                              
None of the arguments submitted by the appellant in this appeal can
succeed in law, there being no factual basis for them.  The appeal must
therefore be dismissed with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant:  Kugler Kandestin, Montréal.  Solicitors for the respondents:  McCarthy Tétrault, Montréal.    