Botiuk v. Toronto Free Press
Publications Ltd., [1995] 3 S.C.R. 3  Ihor Bardyn, Bohdan Onyschuk, Bohdan Zarowsky, Q.C., and W. Yurij Danyliw,
Q.C.                                   Appellants  v.  Y. R. Botiuk                                                                                       Respondent  and between  B. I. Maksymec and Maksymec & Associates Ltd.                                                          Appellants  v.  Y. R. Botiuk                                                                                       Respondent  Indexed as:  Botiuk v.
Toronto Free Press Publications Ltd.  File Nos.:  23517, 23519.  1994:  December 8;  1995:  September
21.   on appeal from the court of appeal for
ontario                       In 1971 members of
the Ukrainian community became involved in a confrontation with the police
during a demonstration organized by the Ukrainian-Canadian Committee (UCC). 
The UCC obtained standing as the representative of the Ukrainian community at
the public inquiry that was subsequently held.  It retained counsel, who was
assisted by the respondent, the UCC's legal adviser.  The costs of both lawyers
were reimbursed by the municipality following the inquiry.  The respondent
retained the amount paid to him.  Rumours began to circulate in the Ukrainian community
that he was in breach of his agreement to donate this money to the UCC.  The
issue was raised at a meeting of the UCC executive, where the concerns were
addressed by the respondent and others to the complete satisfaction of those in
attendance.  The UCC published a letter in a community newspaper reiterating
that financial matters connected with the demonstration had already been
reported and were satisfactorily settled.  Just over a year later, however, the
individual appellant M tabled a report at the UCC's general meeting alleging
that the respondent had reneged on his promise to give the money he received to
the UCC.  The UCC drafted a response which was published in a community
newspaper.  M in turn prepared a declaration signed by eight lawyers, four of
whom are appellants here, confirming M's report.  The declaration was
reproduced in a community newspaper and mailed to certain members of the
Ukrainian community.  M also presented a separate reply to the Ontario Council
of the UCC which incorporated the lawyers' declaration.  The respondent sued
the appellants for libel.  The trial judge awarded him $140,000 in compensatory
damages, which included general damages, aggravated damages and the present
value of future pecuniary loss, and special damages of $325,000 for loss of
income.  Prejudgment interest was awarded for a 12½-year period.  The Court of
Appeal held that since special damages were not specifically pleaded, they
could only form a part of the general damage award.  It awarded $200,000 in
compensatory damages.  The court also reduced the term of prejudgment interest
to 10 years.                       Qualified privilege
attaches to the occasion upon which the communication is made, and not to the
communication itself.  Where an occasion is shown to be privileged, the bona
fides of the defendant is presumed and the defendant is free to publish
remarks which may be defamatory and untrue about the plaintiff.  The privilege
is not absolute, however, and may be defeated if the dominant motive for
publishing is actual or express malice.  Qualified privilege may also be
defeated if the limits of the duty or interest have been exceeded.  If the
information communicated was not reasonably appropriate to the legitimate
purposes of the occasion, the qualified privilege will be defeated.  While M
had a duty to discharge arising from his position as a former president of the
UCC, and the UCC's annual general meeting was an appropriate forum at which to
present the report, the limits of the privileged occasion were clearly exceeded
in relation to the report.  Although M may have wished to address the rumours
in order to distance himself from the gossip, in doing so it was unnecessary to
defame the respondent.  Similarly, while the appellants were entitled to
respond to the attack on the report to protect their interest, neither the
declaration nor the reply was a measured response.  The appellants went well
beyond what was reasonably appropriate to the occasion and as a result lost the
protection afforded by the defence of qualified privilege.                     If aggravated
damages are to be awarded, there must be a finding that the defendant was
motivated by malice.  It is clear in this case that M was motivated by express
malice.  Taking into account the appellant lawyers' status and influential
position in the community, and the effect of their concerted action in signing
the declaration, their conduct in signing the document without undertaking a
reasonable investigation as to its correctness was reckless, as was their
failure to place any restriction or qualification upon the use that could be
made of it.  The legal consequence of their recklessness is that their actions
must be found to be malicious.  Since both M and the appellant lawyers were
motivated by malice, they are jointly and severally liable for the compensatory
damages awarded, including that portion which represents aggravated damages. 
For the reasons given in Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, a cap
on damages in defamation cases is neither needed nor desirable.  The loss of
business was sufficiently pleaded to warrant the award of special damages,
which should be restored.  The trial judge's determination that the respondent
was entitled to prejudgment interest for a period of 12½ years should also be
restored.                     Per Major J.:  Cory J.'s
reasons were agreed with, subject to observations on the extent of liability
for defamatory publications where more than one defendant is involved.  Not all
actions in which multiple defendants are sued will result in a finding of joint
and several liability.  Depending on the circumstances of a given case, it may
be necessary to assess each instance of publication as a separate cause of
action.  The question of whether the defendants acted jointly or in concert
should be considered and where there is the absence of common action the
defendants' liability ought to be assessed individually.  It is not clear from
the record in this case that all of the defamatory documents should have been
treated as one libel nor that the necessary concerted action was present for a
finding of joint and several liability.  The trial judge has an advantage over
appellate courts in making findings of fact, however, particularly in matters
of credibility, and it would therefore be inappropriate absent palpable error
to interfere with either the trial judge's findings of fact or the exercise of
his discretion.  Cases Cited  By Cory J.                     Applied:  Hill v. Church of Scientology of
Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130; Borland v. Muttersbach (1985), 53
O.R. (2d) 129; referred to:  Cherneskey v. Armadale Publishers Ltd.,
[1979] 1 S.C.R. 1067; Basse v. Toronto Star Newspapers Ltd. (1983), 44
O.R. (2d) 164; Adam v. Ward, [1917] A.C. 309; McLoughlin v. Kutasy,
[1979] 2 S.C.R. 311; Douglas v. Tucker, [1952] 1 S.C.R. 275; H. L. Bolton
(Engineering) Co. v. T. J. Graham & Sons Ltd., [1957] 1 Q.B.
159; Standard Investments Ltd. v. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce
(1986), 52 O.R. (2d) 473; People ex rel. Karlin v. Culkin, 162 N.E. 487
(1928); Horrocks v. Lowe, [1975] A.C. 135; Lindal v. Lindal,
[1981] 2 S.C.R. 629.  By Major J.                     Referred to:  Barber v. Pigden, [1937] 1
K.B. 664; Hayward v. Thompson, [1982] 1 Q.B. 47; Westbank Indian Bank
v. Tomat (1992), 63 B.C.L.R. (2d) 273.  Statutes and
Regulations Cited  Courts of Justice Act, 1984, S.O. 1984, c. 11, s. 138(2).  Judicature
Act, R.S.O. 1980,
c. 223, s. 36(6).  Rules
of Civil Procedure,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 194, r. 49.10.  Trustee
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
T.23, s. 38.  Authors Cited   Fleming,
John G.  The Law of Torts, 8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.  Fridman,
G. H. L.  The Law of Torts in Canada, vol. 2.  Toronto: 
Carswell, 1990.  Gatley
on Libel and Slander,
8th ed.  By Philip Lewis.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1981.                       J. Edgar Sexton, Q.C., and Mark A. Gelowitz,
for the appellants Ihor Bardyn et al.                     Bryan Finlay, Q.C., and Christopher J.
Tzekas, for the appellants B. I. Maksymec and Maksymec & Associates
Ltd.                     Sheila R.
Block and Jenifer E.
Aitken, for the respondent.                     The judgment of La
Forest, L'Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin and Iacobucci JJ. was
delivered by   I.  Factual
Background  2                 Botiuk is a lawyer who has
practised in the City of Toronto since 1962.  From the time of his emigration
to Canada in 1951, he has been extensively involved in the affairs of the
Ukrainian community and his practice, to a large extent, served the members of
that community.  3                 The appellant B. I. Maksymec is
a professional engineer and principal shareholder and officer of Maksymec &
Associates Ltd.  Mr. Maksymec has also played a prominent role in the
Ukrainian community.  It was he who instituted, augmented and continued the
libellous attacks on the respondent.  4                 The appellants I. Bardyn, B.
Onyschuk, B. Zarowsky, Q.C., and W. Y. Danyliw, Q.C., are lawyers of
Ukrainian descent who have held positions of importance in their community.
They became involved in this case when they agreed to sign a document written
by Maksymec which supported his allegations of misconduct by Botiuk.   6                 In October 1971, the Russian
Premier Alexei Kosygin visited Toronto.  In light of their position that their
homeland was occupied by the Soviet regime, this was an event of great concern
to Toronto's Ukrainian community.  The UCC organized a demonstration to
coincide with a dinner to be held for Mr. Kosygin at the Ontario Science
Centre on October 25, 1971.  During the demonstration, members of the Ukrainian
community became involved in a vigorous confrontation with officers of the
Metropolitan Toronto Police Force.  This led to criminal charges being laid
against some of those members.  7                 At a meeting of the UCC held on
October 28, 1971, while Maksymec was the president of the organization, it was
determined that arrangements should be made to provide legal assistance and
representation to those charged with criminal offences.  As a result of this
decision, the UCC retained the services of a prominent Toronto lawyer, Arthur
Maloney, Q.C.  At the same time, it set out to raise the necessary funds by
seeking donations from members of the community.  In this way, some $21,000 was
gathered for what became known as the "Kosygin Demonstration Fund".  8                 Botiuk, who had been appointed
as legal adviser to the UCC immediately following the demonstration, organized
and coordinated the defence of the demonstrators.  It was known to all that the
money collected from members of the Ukrainian community was not intended to be
used to pay any Ukrainian lawyer for services relating to the criminal
proceedings.  9                 At the October 28 meeting, the
decision was also made to collect evidence as to what transpired at the
demonstration and to use it to lobby the Ontario government to hold a public
inquiry.  The province eventually agreed and appointed Judge Vannini to
preside.  10               The UCC obtained standing as the
representative of the Ukrainian community and retained Robert Carter, Q.C., as
its counsel.  There was some concern as to whether sufficient funds existed to
cover the legal expenses which would be incurred and, as a result, it was decided
that Carter would be assisted by a Ukrainian lawyer throughout the inquiry.   12               Botiuk had little success in
recruiting other Ukrainian lawyers to assist Carter, save for two or three who
contributed very limited time.  Consequently, Botiuk performed much of the work
himself, attending 23 of the 35 days of the inquiry hearing.  As well, he
did a great deal of night work interviewing and preparing witnesses for their
attendance at the inquiry.  13               On June 5, 1972, Judge Vannini
released his decision.  He found that the police were responsible for the
confrontation and in effect vindicated the Ukrainian community.  Thereafter, it
was announced that the costs of counsel representing the Metropolitan Toronto
Police Force at the inquiry would be paid by Metropolitan Toronto.  On behalf
of the UCC, efforts were then made by the appellants Maksymec and Onyschuk and
the respondent Botiuk to obtain funding for its representatives.  The Ontario
government eventually agreed to this request.  14               The proposed reimbursement was
looked upon as an opportunity to replenish the UCC treasury.  To this end, it
was thought by some that Botiuk would submit a single figure which would
encompass the work done by all the lawyers who assisted at the inquiry and that
this amount would be turned over to the UCC.  However, as the trial judge
found, whatever the understanding may have been in this regard, it became
unworkable for a number of reasons.  First, none of the lawyers concerned ever
submitted any information regarding their fees or disbursements.  Further, both
the acting president of the UCC, Dr. Hlibowych, and counsel for Metro
Toronto rejected the suggested approach and insisted that every lawyer prepare
his own account for the UCC.  These accounts would then be submitted for
payment together with a declaration that the amounts were incurred by the UCC
as a legal expense connected with the inquiry.  15               Botiuk submitted two accounts in
this fashion, one in the amount of $12,960 for the payment made to Carter, and
the other in the amount of $10,256.79 to compensate him for his disbursements
and work.  In accordance with the direction, acknowledgement and release
executed on behalf of the UCC by Dr. Hlibowych, Metro Toronto forwarded a
cheque to Botiuk for the total amount of both accounts.  He in turn sent the
UCC a cheque in the amount of $12,960 to cover Carter's account.  Botiuk had
indicated at a meeting of the UCC executive that since he would have to pay
taxes on the fees paid to him, he would retain them.  16               When it received the funds for the
Carter account, the UCC appointed Maksymec, A. Bandera and Botiuk to a special
financial commission to decide where and how to apply this money.  Although the
commission never held a formal meeting, it was decided not long after its
inception that a special immigration fund should be created to assist Ukrainian
immigrants to settle in Canada.  17               On September 7, 1974, the UCC
published a communiqué in the Ukrainian community newspaper the New Pathway. 
Translated into English, it read as follows:                     Thanks
to the relentless efforts of the lawyer Y. R. Botiuk, with the assistance of
Messrs. Frolick, Onyschuk and Kostuk and with support received from Alderman
Bill Boychuk and Ed Negridge and Mr. Archer, and a few others, the
Metropolitan Council approved the repayment of the costs in the amount of
$12,960.00, which our Committee had paid to the lawyer Carter, for his role in
the public enquiry connected with the demonstration against Kosygin.  18               Subsequently, rumours concerning
the Kosygin Demonstration Fund and the money paid by Metro Toronto began to
circulate throughout the Ukrainian community.  At a meeting of the UCC
executive on March 2, 1977, the issue was raised.  The record of that meeting
indicates that the concerns pertaining to the funds were addressed by Botiuk
and others to the complete satisfaction of those in attendance.  In essence, it
became clear to everyone at the meeting that a single account could not be
submitted for all lawyers, and that it was open to each lawyer to submit his
own account and receive payment from the City.  It was emphasized, however,
that nothing was paid by the UCC to any Ukrainian lawyer, including Botiuk. 
Botiuk was then congratulated by Dr. Hlibowych for his generosity and held up
as an example for others to follow.   20               In response, Dr. Sokolsky, then
president of the UCC, sent a letter to the Free Word, dated March 15,
1977, in which he vigorously defended the integrity of the organization.  He
wrote:                     Financial
matters connected with the demonstration are no secret and our branch has
. . .  already . . . reported on them more than once.  It
seems odd to us that almost three years after this matter was concluded, those
asking the questions remembered this (money)....  (A)  The
"Maksymec Report"  21               At the general meeting of the UCC
held just over a year later on May 5, 1978, Maksymec sought to table a
report entitled "Financial Accounting with Respect to the Demonstration
Against Kosygin in Toronto".  Initially, there was relatively forceful
opposition to its presentation.  However, Dr. Sokolsky introduced a motion
which was seconded by Botiuk to include the Report as an item on the agenda. 
Before Maksymec spoke, those present expressed their gratitude for the efforts
made by Botiuk on behalf of the community and emphasized it with "sincere
applause".  22               In his Report, Maksymec put
forward a number of allegations.  First, that there was an agreement or
understanding that the Ukrainian lawyers would not charge for the taking of
affidavits in the aftermath of the demonstration.  Second, that they would
voluntarily assist Carter at the inquiry.  Third, that Botiuk reneged on the
promise he made to members of the UCC executive that he would deliver to the
UCC the $10,256.79 paid to him by Metro Toronto and instead declared that he
would do with it as he saw fit.  This document is the first of three which were
found to have libelled Botiuk.  23               In the May 20, 1978 edition of the
Free Word, an article appeared concerning the May 5 annual meeting of
the UCC and the controversy surrounding the $10,256.79 allegedly withheld by
Botiuk.  The article reproduced the contents of the Maksymec Report together
with editorial comment which indicated that Botiuk's explanation that he was
required to pay income tax on this amount was not convincing since he could
have immediately transferred the amount from the client's account to the
account of the UCC branch.  It called for an impartial investigation into the
matter.    25               The Declaration in its final form,
dated July 1, 1978, was published in the New Pathway.  It stated that
the charges levelled by Maksymec were "groundless and untrue".  It
asserted that the UCC never had any claim to the money which was paid by Metro
Toronto to Botiuk in connection with the inquiry.  This was money, it stated,
which Botiuk had earned and to which he was legally entitled.  The Declaration
again expressed the gratitude and appreciation of the UCC for the great
sacrifices Botiuk had made on behalf of the Ukrainian community.  It further
affirmed that there were no agreements among the Ukrainian lawyers, including
Botiuk, that no one would be remunerated for work done in relation to the
inquiry.  Finally, the Declaration asserted that the statement by Maksymec and
the subsequent article in the Free Word were "harmful to the
community and do an injustice to Mr. Botiuk".  (C)  The
"Lawyers' Declaration"                                                          DECLARATION                     We,
the Ukrainian lawyers of Toronto who assisted in the proceedings connected with
the demonstration against Kosygin, having familiarized ourselves with the
report of the former President of the UCC Toronto Branch on the 5th day of May
of this year, do affirm, that,                                                                     . . .  We
hereby confirm the report of Engineer B. Maksymec about the fact that all of
our efforts and endeavours connected with the court proceedings and the Vannini
Royal Commission were on a voluntary and gratis basis, in accordance with our
(including Mr. Botiuk) agreement with the then President of the UCC Toronto
Branch, Engineer B. Maksymec, and that we never demanded payment for the
services which we, to the extent we were able, contributed to those
proceedings. Our work we dedicated to the Ukrainian Community through the
Toronto Branch of the UCC.  27               Of the original eight lawyers who
signed this document, four remain as appellants in this Court.  Two of the
lawyers, M. Romanick and S. Frolick, had died by the time of trial thus
escaping liability pursuant to the provisions of s. 38 of the Trustee
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. T.23.  Another lawyer, R. Kostuk, had withdrawn
his support for the Declaration soon after signing it.  R. Maksymiw, together
with the late M. Romanick, did not sign the Declaration itself, but only a
qualification at the end of the document which stated that in their
understanding there was an agreement at the time of the Vannini inquiry
to volunteer services.  The Court of Appeal ruled that Maksymiw had
sufficiently qualified his statement to escape liability and this finding was
not challenged.  28               The Declaration was reproduced
with some modifications in the July 22, 1978, edition of the Ukrainian
community newspaper Our Aim.  After the names of the lawyers, Maksymec
gratuitously added descriptions of the positions they held in community
organizations.  This was obviously done to add weight to the document in the eyes
of those who would read it.   30               The trial judge found that the
Lawyers' Declaration was published at the request of and upon payment by
Maksymec.  The newspaper subsequently published an article on September 30,
1978 in which it acknowledged this fact and apologized to Dr. Sokolsky, Dr. Muz
and Botiuk for "any unpleasantness and damages that publishing the
referred to `declaration' may have caused them".   (D)  The
"Maksymec Reply"   33               The Maksymec Reply incorporated
the Lawyers' Declaration and set out a promise alleged to have been made by
Botiuk during a meeting of the executive of the UCC.  It was presented in these
words:  . . .
[Mr. Botiuk] switched off the microphone and assured all those present
that they had no reason to worry about his previous statement [that he would do
whatever he wanted with the money] to the switched on microphone because he had
to say this formally, in order to justify his account in the amount of
$10,256.79.  However, he assured all those present that he considered this
money to be public money and that he would hand it over to the UCC Toronto
Branch.  Mr. Botiuk requested that his last statement should not appear in the
minutes so that it would not fall into undesirable hands.  [Emphasis added.]  34               Maksymec further alleged that the
sum which was earmarked by the special financial commission for a special
immigration fund included the $10,256.79 paid to Botiuk.  He demanded that it
be transferred to the UCC.  35               The Ontario branch of the UCC
refused to deal with Maksymec's complaint, which it considered to be nothing
more than a personal dispute.  II.  Judgments
Below  (A)  Ontario
Court, General Division, [1991] O.J. No. 925 (QL)  36               Carruthers J. stated that the
controversy between the parties "stems solely from the fact that the
[respondent] kept the sum of $10,256.79 and Maksymec has objected to his having
done so because he has thought that the plaintiff should have handed that
amount over to UCC".  37               It was the opinion of the trial
judge that the defamatory sense of the publications was clear.  Namely, that
Botiuk did not live up to an agreement to volunteer his services and did not
fulfil his assurances to return to the UCC the money which he received from
Metro Toronto.  38               The trial judge observed that
counsel for all parties proceeded on the basis that although the contents of
each document could be taken individually as to its defamatory nature, all
three were to be considered together as creating a single act of libel.  He
proceeded on this basis.  39               The trial judge then turned to the
three grounds of defence which were advanced by the appellants: justification,
fair comment and qualified privilege.  With respect to justification, he
emphatically rejected the argument that there was some kind of agreement
between the lawyers that they would volunteer their services.  He set out his
conclusions on this issue in these words:  At
the highest, all that can be said is that each of them, including the [respondent],
understood that was to be the case for the very simple reason that no one [i.e.
the UCC] was available, prepared or able to pay them.  And the [respondent] has
never suggested that the situation was otherwise until the prospect of payment
by Metro arose.  40               He stressed that all the lawyers
were well aware that they could submit an account for their work and receive
payment from Metro Toronto.  It was his opinion that they did not do so, not
because of any agreement, but because they did not wish to make the community
aware of how very little work they had done at the Vannini inquiry.  Their
minimal efforts would suffer by comparison with the very significant
contribution to the work of that inquiry made by Botiuk.  41               The trial judge rejected the
appellants' allegation that during a meeting of the UCC executive in 1974,
Botiuk had switched off the microphone and undertaken to turn over to the UCC
the funds that Metro Toronto had paid to him.  Rather, he accepted Botiuk's
testimony that it was always understood that he would keep those funds for
himself.  42               The trial judge recognized that it
was open to the appellants to have made a fair comment with regard to any concern
they had about the funds which Botiuk received for his participation in the
inquiry.  However, he found that this defence was lost to them because
"the whole story was not told and as a result misstatements of fact about
the [respondent] were published".  43               Finally, with regard to qualified
privilege, the trial judge rejected the submission that Maksymec had a duty to
prepare and publish the Report as a member of the special financial commission
and as past president of the UCC during the relevant times.  The mandate of the
commission, according to the trial judge, was not to recover money from Botiuk
but merely to set out the expenses incurred and to suggest a program for using
both the money collected from donations as well as that received from Metro
Toronto for the account of Carter.  Finally, the trial judge rejected as
unreasonable the explanation provided by Maksymec that he had delayed his
report for four years because he was waiting for Botiuk to change his mind and
hand over the money.  The trial judge noted that by 1978, those present at the
general meeting neither expected the Report nor wanted it.   45               The trial judge concluded that the
Lawyers' Declaration extended and augmented the damaging effect of the Maksymec
Report on Botiuk's reputation.  He added, as well, that the Maksymec Reply
significantly increased the sting of the libel by its incorporation of the
words "public money".  46               Once he had found that the
privileged occasion had been exceeded by all of the appellants and therefore
that the defence was not available to them, the trial judge determined that it
was unnecessary to deal with the question of express malice except in relation
to its effect on the assessment of damages.  47               In his consideration of the
damages that should be awarded, the trial judge observed that the appellant
lawyers failed to make any independent inquiry as to the truth of the
allegations contained in the Lawyers' Declaration.  He noted that none of the
appellant lawyers had apologized to Botiuk, that some had demonstrated
hostility towards him in their testimony and that, contrary to their
assertions, the respondent had actually done the lion's share of the work at
the inquiry.  I would have thought that these findings would have established
express malice in fact and in law.  However, the trial judge concluded that,
while the lawyers were "careless, impulsive or irrational", they had
not exhibited the indifference or recklessness to the truth necessary for a
finding of express malice.  48               With regard to Maksymec, the trial
judge found that express malice was established on the grounds that, first, he
was indifferent to the truth, and second, that he was actuated by an intention
to injure Botiuk.  The trial judge acknowledged that it may have been necessary
for Maksymec to prepare a report to distance himself from the gossip and
rumours which had been circulating.  This he could have done without defaming
Botiuk.  However, he found that Maksymec had threatened Botiuk when he told him
"[i]f you don't turn over the funds I will create a scandal and ruin
you".  The trial judge concluded that this statement alone provided a
sufficient basis for a finding of malice.  It would also explain why in the
course of distancing himself from the rumours Maksymec defamed Botiuk.  This he
did in order to carry out his threat.  49               Turning to the question of
damages, the trial judge ruled that:  . . .
a lawyer whose practice is primarily concerned with a large, long standing,
well established ethnic community, cannot suffer a more significant blow than
to have his reputation for honesty, integrity and reliability publicly attacked
on the basis that he wrongfully kept money which belonged to the members of
that community by prominent lawyers and businessmen from that community.  50               He concluded that Botiuk had
reached a "high pinnacle of success" and that the attack upon his
reputation had severely damaged his health, family relations, practice,
professional and business connections and social life.  The trial judge found
that for many years, Botiuk would be known as "the lawyer who took or kept
$10,000.00 from that community".  51               The trial judge reviewed the
principles governing the assessment of damages and considered the awards made
in earlier libel cases.  He concluded that an appropriate sum for compensatory
damages, which included general damages, aggravated damages and the present
value of future pecuniary loss, was $140,000.  In his view, this was not a case
for punitive damages.   53               The trial judge rejected the
argument of the appellant lawyers that since they were only involved with the
Lawyers' Declaration, the damages assessed against them should be reduced
accordingly.  Rather, he found that all the appellants were joint tortfeasors
with respect to all three documents and that they were jointly and severally
liable to the respondent for all damages.  I agree with this finding.  In my
view, there was a sound evidentiary and legal basis for the trial judge to
reach this conclusion.   (B)  Court
of Appeal, [1993] O.J. No. 239 (QL)  55               On the question of malice, the
court agreed that there was evidence which supported the trial judge's finding
that Maksymec was motivated by spite and acted with an intention to injure
Botiuk.   57               On the question of joint
liability, the court again agreed that the trial judge was correct in holding
that the three documents should be treated as one act of libel and in awarding
a single set of damages in respect of them against all the appellants jointly
and severally.  58               The liability of Maksymec &
Associates Ltd., as found by the trial judge, was affirmed.  It was from this
company's premises that Maksymec had mailed the Maksymec Report, Lawyers'
Declaration and Maksymec Reply in an envelope bearing the company's name and
return address.  The court agreed that since Maksymec was the company's
principal shareholder and officer and its directing mind, it became associated
with his libellous publications.  59               Finally, with respect to the
quantum of damages, the court agreed that there was evidence that the libel had
adversely affected Botiuk's professional practice.  However, it held that since
special damages were not specifically pleaded, they could only form a part of
the general damage award.  In the court's view, a fair sum for compensatory
damages was $200,000.   III.  Analysis  (A)  Did the
Appellants Defame the Respondent  61               The nature and history of the
action for defamation were discussed in Hill v. Church of Scientology of
Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130.   [A
publication] may be defamatory in its plain and ordinary meaning or by virtue
of extrinsic facts or circumstances, known to the listener or reader, which
give it a defamatory meaning by way of innuendo different from that in which it
ordinarily would be understood.  In determining its meaning, the court may take
into consideration all the circumstances of the case, including any reasonable
implications the words may bear, the context in which the words are used, the
audience to whom they were published and the manner in which they were
presented.  63               When the payment was made by Metro
Toronto to Botiuk for his work at the Vannini inquiry, insidious rumours began
to circulate in the Ukrainian community that he was in breach of his agreement
to donate those funds to the Kosygin Demonstration Fund.  The article published
in the Free Word on March 12, 1977 asked why, if there was an
agreement among Ukrainian lawyers to donate their services, the funds were in
the possession of Botiuk.  64               The UCC, the very organization
that was purported to be the beneficiary of the funds, sought to put these
pernicious rumours to rest.  To that end, it published a letter in the
community newspaper on March 15, 1977, reiterating that financial matters
connected with the demonstration had already been reported and were
satisfactorily settled.  A few days earlier, it should be remembered, those
same concerns had been raised during a meeting of the executive of the UCC and
answered to the complete satisfaction of all those in attendance.  Indeed,
Botiuk was publicly thanked for his generosity.  It was, by then, clear that
Botiuk had done nothing wrong.  Rather, he was to be commended for his actions.     68               As well, Maksymec published the
Maksymec Reply and presented it to the Ontario Council of the UCC.  It refused
to deal with his complaint.  Once again, despite the clear and repeated
repudiations of his claims by the UCC, Maksymec continued with his vendetta
against Botiuk.  69               There can be no doubt that the
trial judge was correct in concluding that the combined effect of the three
documents published by Maksymec and the appellant lawyers was clearly
defamatory.  These documents unmistakeably implied that Botiuk was
dishonourable and dishonest.  They cast doubt upon his integrity, the most
important attribute of any lawyer.  70               The devastating effect of the
three publications was confirmed by the testimony of many witnesses.  For
example, Alderman Negridge, a prominent member of the community, spoke with
tears in his eyes about members of the Ukrainian community who had "walked
miles to give their donations of five or ten dollars" to help the cause
and how Botiuk had misappropriated those funds.  71               The publications led some people
to believe, as Negridge obviously did, that Botiuk had received and wrongly
kept money from the Kosygin Demonstration Fund of donations.  This was a false
and mistaken belief.  In fact, only the appellants Onyschuk and Maksymec made
use of Demonstration Fund monies, the former to recoup his disbursements and
the latter to pay for the publication costs of a book by the UCC which he had
personally guaranteed.  72               Unfortunately, even at the time of
the trial, more than 12 years after the libels were published, some people
still believed the rumours concerning Botiuk.  The trial judge was correct in
his assessment that "notwithstanding the result of this action, the
[respondent] will continue for the rest of his time to be considered by some
members of the Ukrainian community as the lawyer who took or kept $10,000.00 from
that community".  There can be no doubt that each of the impugned
documents was libellous.  (B)  Joint
Liability   74               In The Law of Torts (8th
ed. 1992), Fleming discusses the concept of joint concurrent tortfeasors.  He
states this at p. 255:                     A
tort is imputed to several persons as joint tortfeasors in three instances: 
agency, vicarious liability, and concerted action.  The first two will be
considered later.  The critical element of the third is that those
participating in the commission of the tort must have acted in furtherance of a
common design. . . . Broadly speaking, this means a conspiracy with
all participants acting in furtherance of the wrong, though it is probably
not necessary that they should realise they are committing a tort. 
[Emphasis added.]  75               The appellants' actions bring them
within the third category of joint tortfeasors so well described by Fleming. 
In the context in which the text writer has utilized the word conspiracy, it
refers to the design or agreement of persons to participate in acts which are
tortious, even though they did not realize they were committing a tort.  76               As set out in Hill, supra,
"[i]f one person writes a libel, another repeats it, and a third approves
what is written, they all have made the defamatory libel"
(para. 176).  This statement is applicable to the case at bar.  The
Lawyers' Declaration expressly adopted the contents of the Maksymec Report.  It
follows that the appellant lawyers must be jointly responsible with Maksymec
for the publication of the Report.  The appellant lawyers accepted and intended
that Maksymec would use the Declaration extensively and publish it.  They
placed no restrictions on the use to which it might be put.  The Declaration
and Report are by their terms inextricably interrelated.  By their actions, the
appellants became joint tortfeasors.  Further, they, as lawyers, signed the
Declaration without undertaking any investigation.  For lawyers to act in this
way constituted reckless behaviour.  Therefore, they must be as responsible as
Maksymec, not only for its publication but also for its subsequent
republication.   (C)  Qualified
Privilege  78               Qualified privilege attaches to
the occasion upon which the communication is made, and not to the communication
itself.  It was explained in this way by Lord Atkinson in Adam v. Ward,
[1917] A.C. 309 (H.L.), at p. 334:  . . .
a privileged occasion is . . . an occasion where the person who makes
a communication has an interest or a duty, legal, social or moral, to make it
to the person to whom it is made, and the person to whom it is so made has a
corresponding interest or duty to receive it.  This reciprocity is essential.  See also McLoughlin v. Kutasy,
[1979] 2 S.C.R. 311, at p. 321.  79               Where an occasion is shown to be
privileged, the bona fides of the defendant is presumed and the
defendant is free to publish remarks which may be defamatory and untrue about
the plaintiff.  However, the privilege is not absolute.  It may be defeated in
two ways.  The first arises if the dominant motive for publishing is actual or
express malice.  Malice is commonly understood as ill will toward someone, but
it also relates to any indirect motive which conflicts with the sense of duty
created by the occasion.  Malice may be established by showing that the
defendant either knew that he was not telling the truth, or was reckless in
that regard.  80               Second, qualified privilege may be
defeated if the limits of the duty or interest have been exceeded.  In other
words, if the information communicated was not reasonably appropriate to the
legitimate purposes of the occasion, the qualified privilege will be defeated. 
This was discussed at some length in Hill, supra, and there is no
need to repeat it in these reasons.                      (1)  Qualified
Privilege in Relation to the Report  82               Maksymec argues that the special
financial commission had been specifically established to make proposals as to
how the UCC should use the costs paid by Metro Toronto and to present an
accounting of the expenses incurred by the UCC in connection with the proceedings. 
I agree with the trial judge that by 1978, no duty, however widely it might be
defined, remained to be discharged by Maksymec.  The commission had long since
ceased to exist.  It had fulfilled its assigned function shortly after its
creation by suggesting that a special immigration fund be established.  The
recovery of funds was never a part of its mandate.  83               Further, the UCC had no interest
in receiving the Maksymec Report four years after the events.  The evidence
adduced indicated that those in attendance at the annual general meeting
neither expected it nor wanted it to be introduced.   85               This said, I am satisfied that the
limits of the privileged occasion were clearly exceeded.  As the trial judge
stated, Maksymec may have wanted to address the rumours in order to distance
himself from the gossip, but in doing so it was unnecessary to defame Botiuk. 
The libellous references to Botiuk contained in the Maksymec Report exceeded
the qualified privilege that attached to the occasion.                     (2)Qualified Privilege in
Relation to the Lawyers' Declaration and the Maksymec Reply     (D)  Liability of
Maksymec & Associates Ltd.  89               On behalf of the company, it is
argued that a corporation can only be held liable for the acts of its agents if
they are acting pursuant to the corporation's express authorization, or in
direct obedience of its orders, or within the authority and power conferred on
them by the corporation.  It is submitted that there was no evidence that
either Maksymec or his secretary were acting with the authority of the corporation
when they stamped the company's name and return address on the envelopes used
to send the libellous documents to selected members of the Ukrainian community.  90               The Court of Appeal upheld the
trial judge's finding of liability on the part of Maksymec & Associates
Ltd.  It found that, by his action and in his capacity as the principal
shareholder and officer of the company and its directing mind, Maksymec clearly
associated the company with the defamatory statements.  I agree with this
conclusion.  As Lord Denning states in H. L. Bolton (Engineering) Co. v. T.
J. Graham & Sons Ltd., [1957] 1 Q.B. 159 (C.A.), at p. 173,
"the intention of the company can be derived from the intention of its
officers and agents".  See also Standard Investments Ltd. v. Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce (1986), 52 O.R. (2d) 473 (C.A.).  (E)  Damages  91               In Hill, supra, the
importance of the reputation of the individual was discussed.  These words
appear at para. 107:  A
good reputation is closely related to the innate worthiness and dignity of the
individual.  It is an attribute that must, just as much as freedom of
expression, be protected by society's laws.  92               It was observed in Hill
that this is particularly true of lawyers.  A reputation for integrity and
trustworthiness is the cornerstone of their professional life.  Injury done to
reputation can only with the greatest difficulty be repaired.  As Cardozo J.
put it in People ex rel. Karlin v. Culkin, 162 N.E. 487 (N.Y. 1928), at
p. 492, "[r]eputation in such a calling is a plant of tender growth
and its blossom, once lost, is not easily restored".  It should be
recognized that these observations will be equally applicable to other professions
and callings.  It is simply that this case is concerned with a lawyer.  I would
add that for a lawyer whose practice stems in large part from a tightly knit,
ethnic community, a charge of dishonesty would undoubtedly cause a crushing
injury.                      (1)  Malice  94               The figure of $140,000 arrived at
by the trial judge included an award for aggravated damages.  In my reasons in Hill,
supra, the following appears at para. 190:   95               The trial judge had no difficulty
finding that Maksymec was motivated by express malice.  I agree.  Overwhelming
evidence was presented upon which he could base this conclusion.  Of a little
greater complexity is the question of whether the appellant lawyers were also
motivated by malice.    97               The author then puts forward the
reasons of Lord Diplock in Horrocks v. Lowe, [1975] A.C. 135 (H.L.), as
representative (though not definitively) of the Canadian position.  In that
case Lord Diplock wrote at p. 150:  . . .
what is required on the part of the defamer to entitle him to the protection of
the privilege is positive belief in the truth of what he published or, as it is
generally though tautologously termed, "honest belief".  If he
publishes untrue defamatory matter recklessly, without considering or
caring whether it be true or not, he is in this, as in other branches of the
law, treated as if he knew it to be false.  But indifference to the truth of
what he publishes is not to be equated with carelessness, impulsiveness
or irrationality in arriving at a positive belief that it is
true. . . But despite the imperfection of the mental process by which
the belief is arrived at it may still be "honest", that is, a
positive belief that the conclusions they have reached are true.  The law
demands no more.  [Emphasis added.]  98               This proposition does indeed seem
to be generally representative of the Canadian position on the matter. 
However, when the defendants are lawyers who must be presumed to be reasonably
familiar with both the law of libel and the legal consequences flowing from the
signing of a document, their actions will be more closely scrutinized than
would those of a lay person.  That is to say, actions which might be
characterized as careless behaviour in a lay person could well become reckless
behaviour in a lawyer with all the resulting legal consequences of reckless
behaviour.  That is the very situation presented in this case.  99               The appellant lawyers signed a
Lawyers' Declaration which stated that they had "familiarized"
themselves with the Report and that it "correctly and accurately"
reflected the state of affairs during and after the Kosygin demonstration. 
Yet, several of them had not even read it.  Most of them did not know anything
about the preparation of Botiuk's account.  Some neither talked to Botiuk
before signing the Lawyers' Declaration nor discussed it with the others.  As
lawyers, they should have known how significant the impact of the Lawyers'
Declaration would be on Botiuk.  They were duty-bound to take reasonable steps
to investigate and ensure that the document was correct.  100             In the Maksymec Reply, Maksymec
referred to the Lawyers' Declaration as the basis for the statement that the
various lawyers, including the appellants, gave generously of their time and
assistance before and during the Vannini inquiry and that they had agreed not
to charge for their work.  Although the appellants knew that in reality they
had contributed very little and that there could not have been any such
agreement, they did nothing to correct the inaccurate impression left by the
Maksymec Reply and raised no objection to Maksymec's subsequent use of the
Lawyers' Declaration.  101             Although it is not determinative,
the conduct of the appellant lawyers prior to and during the trial can properly
be taken into consideration as an indication of their general attitude toward
Botiuk.  None of them apologized to him or retracted what was written in the
Lawyers' Declaration.  Rather, as the trial progressed and the true situation
was revealed, each continued to maintain that the plaintiff was wrong.  As the
trial judge found, the appellants Zarowsky and Bardyn manifested hostility
towards the plaintiff during their testimony, particularly in relation to the
extent of Botiuk's participation at the inquiry.  Despite the overwhelming
evidence on this point, most of the lawyers were reluctant to acknowledge how
little each of them had done and, conversely, how much Botiuk had given of his
time and energy.  102             The appellants must have, or at the
very least should have, realized that the endorsement of eight prominent
lawyers would have a devastating effect on Botiuk's reputation.  The evidence
indicates that after the publication of the Lawyers' Declaration, public opinion
in the community swung decisively against Botiuk.  Witnesses testified that
they became convinced that the rumours might actually be true after they had
read the document.  103             Taking into account the appellants'
status as lawyers and influential persons in the community, and the effect of
their concerted action in signing the Lawyers' Declaration, I am satisfied that
their conduct in signing the document without undertaking a reasonable
investigation as to the correctness of the document, which they were duty-bound
to do, was reckless.  This same conclusion can be reached from their failure to
place any restriction or qualification upon the use that could be made of it. 
The legal consequence of their recklessness is that their actions must be found
to be malicious.  Since both Maksymec and the appellant lawyers were motivated
by malice, they are, therefore, jointly and severally liable for the $140,000
award, including that portion which represents aggravated damages, as well as for
the $325,000 special damages award, which I will discuss later.  (F)  Assessment
of Damages  104             A number of the issues raised in
this appeal pertaining to damages have been discussed and determined in Hill,
supra.  As a result, they can be dealt with in a relatively summary
manner in these reasons.                     (1)  Comparison
With Awards Made in Other Libel Cases  105             In Hill it was emphasized
that each libel case is unique and little can be gained from a detailed
comparison of awards made in other cases.  It was explained in these words (at
para. 187):  The
assessment of damages in a libel case flows from a particular confluence of the
following elements:  the nature and circumstances of the publication of the
libel, the nature and position of the victim of the libel, the possible effects
of the libel statement upon the life of the plaintiff, and the actions and
motivations of the defendants.                     (2)  Should
a Cap Be Imposed on Damages in Defamation Cases  106             For the reasons expressed in Hill
a cap on damages in defamation cases is neither needed nor desirable.                     (3)Appellate Review of
Assessments of Damages in Defamation Cases  107             Perhaps the cautionary note
expressed in Hill bears repeating.  Namely, that appellate courts
should, for the reasons expressed in Hill, proceed with restraint and
caution before making any variation in assessments of damages in libel cases.                     (4)  Special
Damages  108             It will be remembered that the trial
judge awarded Botiuk special damages for the loss of income from his practice
occasioned by the libellous publications.  However, the Court of Appeal held
that since Botiuk had not specifically claimed special damages, they should not
have been awarded.  A portion of the special damages was then added to the
award as an element of the general damages.  With the greatest respect, I
cannot agree with that position.    110             In my view, the loss of business was
sufficiently pleaded to warrant the award of special damages.  In his amended
fresh statement of claim, Botiuk pleaded that, by reason of the defamatory
statements made against him, he suffered, among other things, a "loss in
his practice of his profession as a barrister and solicitor" and
"suffered injury to his career".  A lump sum for damages was claimed
to compensate for these injuries.   112             This is one of those rare cases in
which it was possible to adduce the necessary evidence to prove actual
pecuniary loss.  There was ample evidence presented upon which the trial judge
could properly base his decision to award and arrive at his assessment of the
special damages.  It follows that neither the finding that all of the
appellants are jointly and severally liable for the compensatory damages, nor
the assessment of special damages, should have been disturbed by the Court of
Appeal.  I would, therefore, restore the special damages award made by the
trial judge.                     (5)  Prejudgment
Interest  113             The trial judge made two decisions
with respect to the award of prejudgment interest.  First, he excluded that
portion of the compensatory damage award attributed to the present value of
future pecuniary loss.  Second, he determined that the period of entitlement to
prejudgment interest was governed by s. 138(2) of the Courts of Justice
Act, 1984, S.O. 1984, c. 11, and amounted to 12½ years.  114             The Court of Appeal reduced the
period for which prejudgment interest would be computed from 12½ to
10 years.  It was said that this reduction was necessitated by the failure
of successive counsel of record for Botiuk to pursue the action.  The interest
rate of 13 percent was not disputed.  115             The appellants contend that in
fixing Botiuk's general damages, the trial judge explicitly and the Court of
Appeal implicitly took into account the effects of inflation.  It is argued
that the addition of the prejudgment rate of 13 percent amounts to a
double recovery.  The appellants contend that Borland v. Muttersbach
(1985), 53 O.R. (2d) 129 (C.A.), was wrongly applied or alternatively, that it
was wrongly decided.    118             The trial judge in Borland
had observed that the award adjusted for inflation buys no more that the original
figure did in 1978.  He went on to determine that whatever the award, the
statute gives the plaintiff the prima facie right to receive prejudgment
interest on it at the prevailing prime rate.  In the absence of such a
guarantee, there would be no incentive for defendants to make advance payments,
thereby foregoing investment income.  He concluded that the fact of inflation
is not a proper ground for depriving plaintiffs of their prima facie
right to receive prejudgment interest.  119             In my view, the decision in Borland
is correct and the reasoning should be applied to the award made to Botiuk. 
This is what the trial judge did and, with great respect, the Court of Appeal
erred in varying his decision pertaining to the award of interest.  The trial
judge considered the delays occasioned by Botiuk's counsel and rightly
concluded that they had been taken into account in the Court of Appeal's
disposition of the 1990 motion to dismiss the action.  In the result, I would
restore the trial judge's determination that Botiuk was entitled to prejudgment
interest for a period of 12½ years.  IV.  Costs  120             The award of costs made by the trial
judge should be upheld.  Botiuk successfully met the burden of establishing
that the judgment he obtained was more favourable than the terms of the offer
to settle submitted by him.  V.  Disposition                      The following are
the reasons delivered by  122             Major
J. -- I agree with the reasons of Justice Cory, but have some observations
on the extent of liability for defamatory publications where more than one
defendant is involved.  123             It is not clear how the trial judge
concluded that he would treat all the defamatory publications as one libel.  It
was open to him to consider each act of publication as a separate cause of
action.  However, the trial judge had a discretion to combine the several
closely related publications and to make a single award of damages in relation
to those publications (e.g. Barber v. Pigden, [1937] 1 K.B. 664, Hayward
v. Thompson, [1982] 1 Q.B. 47 (C.A.)).  The various defamatory publications
in these appeals were closely intertwined and no basis has been shown that
would warrant interfering with that discretion.  124             The trial judge found that the
appellant Maksymec and the appellants I. Bardyn, B. Onyschuk, B. Zarowsky,
Q.C., and W. Y. Danyliw, Q.C., were joint tortfeasors.  He must have concluded
that all the appellants acted in concert with one another and that the
defamatory statements were published in furtherance of a common design.  In
order to hold that all the appellants are joint tortfeasors, it is necessary to
find concerted action towards a common end (G. H. L. Fridman, The Law of
Torts in Canada (1990), vol. 2, at pp. 347-48).  It is not evident from the
record why the trial judge concluded that all of the appellants had a common
intention to defame the respondent Botiuk and consequently were joint
tortfeasors.  125             I am not certain from the record
that all of the defamatory documents should have been treated as one libel nor
that the necessary concerted action was present for a finding of joint and
several liability.  However, I recognize that the trial judge has an advantage
over appellate courts in making findings of fact, particularly in matters of
credibility.  It would, therefore, be inappropriate absent palpable error to
interfere with either the trial judge's findings of fact or the exercise of his
discretion.  126             Nevertheless, it is important to
note that not all actions in which multiple defendants are sued will result in
a finding of joint and several liability.  In some cases, it will be more
appropriate to consider each defendant's participation separately from that of
the others, and to assess liability on an individual basis.  In Westbank
Indian Bank v. Tomat (1992), 63 B.C.L.R. (2d) 273 (C.A.), the British
Columbia Court of Appeal found that liability with respect to each defendant
had to be considered separately because the defendants did not act as a formal
group, nor did they act pursuant to a civil conspiracy such that the acts of
one defendant will be imputed to all the defendants.  The degree of each
defendant's involvement in the commission of the tort had to be considered and
assessed separately.  127             Depending on the circumstances of a
given case, it may be necessary to assess each instance of publication as a
separate cause of action.  The question of whether the defendants acted jointly
or in concert should be considered and where there is the absence of common
action the defendants' liability ought to be assessed individually.                      Solicitors for the
appellants Ihor Bardyn et al.:  Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
appellants B. I. Maksymec and Maksymec & Associates Ltd.:  Weir
& Foulds, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
respondent:  Tory Tory DesLauriers & Binnington, Toronto.  