                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Kirkbi AG v.
  Ritvik Holdings Inc., [2005] 3 S.C.R. 302, 2005 SCC 65  Date:  20051117 Docket:  29956 Between: Kirkbi
AG and Lego Canada Inc. Appellants and Ritvik
Holdings Inc./Gestions Ritvik Inc. (now operating as
Mega Bloks Inc.) Respondent Attorney
General of Canada and Attorney General of Quebec Interveners  Coram:
McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache, Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella
and Charron JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 70)   LeBel J. (McLachlin C.J. and
  Major, Bastarache, Binnie, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.
  concurring)   ______________________________ Kirkbi AG v. Ritvik Holdings Inc., [2005] 3 S.C.R.
302, 2005 SCC 65  Kirkbi AG and Lego Canada Inc.                                                                  Appellants  v.  Ritvik Holdings Inc./Gestions Ritvik Inc. (now operating as Mega Bloks Inc.)                                                                                      Respondent  and  Attorney General of Canada and Attorney General of Quebec                 Interveners  Indexed as:  Kirkbi AG v. Ritvik Holdings Inc.  Neutral citation:  2005 SCC 65.  File No.:  29956.  2005:  March 16; 2005:  November 17.  Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Major, Bastarache,
Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella and Charron JJ.  on appeal from the federal court of appeal    Torts — Passing off — Conditions to establish
liability.   Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.     Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited  Constitution Act, 1867, ss. 91(2) , (22) , (23) , 92(13) .    Unfair Competition Act, 1932, S.C. 1932, c. 38, s. 2(d).  Authors Cited  Bently, Lionel, and Brad Sherman. 
Intellectual Property Law, 2nd ed.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press,
2004.  Cornish, William Rodolph.  Intellectual
Property:  Omnipresent, Distracting, Irrelevant?  Oxford:  Oxford
University Press, 2004.  Cornish, William Rodolph, and
David Llewelyn.  Intellectual Property:  Patents, Copyright, Trade Marks and
Allied Rights, 5th ed.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 2003.  Gill, A. Kelly, and R. Scott
Jolliffe.  Fox on Canadian Law of Trade-marks and Unfair Competition,
4th ed.  Toronto:  Carswell, 2002 (loose-leaf).  Jolliffe, R. Scott.  “The
Common Law Doctrine of Passing Off”, in Gordon F. Henderson, ed., Trade-Marks
Law of Canada.  Scarborough, Ont.:  Carswell, 1993, 197.   Vivant, Michel.  “La fantastique
explosion de la propriété intellectuelle:  Une rationalité sous le big bang?”,
dans Mélanges Victor Nabhan.  Cowansville, Qué.:  Yvon Blais, 2004, 393.  International Documents  European Communities.  First
Council Directive 89/104/EEC of 21 December 1988 to Approximate Laws Relating
to Trade Marks, [1989] O.J. L. 40/1, art. 3(1)(e).  APPEAL from a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal
(Rothstein, Sexton and Pelletier JJ.A.), [2004] 2 F.C.R. 241, 228 D.L.R.
(4th) 297, 26 C.P.R. (4th) 1, 308 N.R. 1, [2003] F.C.J. No. 1112 (QL), 2003 FCA
297, upholding a decision of Gibson J. (2002), 220 F.T.R. 161, 20 C.P.R. (4th)
224, [2002] F.C.J. No. 793 (QL), 2002 FCT 585.  Appeal dismissed.  Robert H. C. MacFarlane, Michael E. Charles, Peter W. Hogg, Q.C.,
Christine Pallotta and Catherine Beagan Flood, for the appellants.  Ronald E. Dimock, Bruce
Ryder, Bruce W. Stratton and Henry Lue, for the
respondent.  Peter Southey, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Canada.  Alain Gingras, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.  The judgment of the Court was delivered by  LeBel J. — I.  Introduction  1                               
For many years, Kirkbi AG (“Kirkbi”) has been a well-known and
successful manufacturer of construction sets for children, and at times, for
their parents too.  The construction sets consist of standardized small plastic
bricks, held together by a pattern of interlocking studs and tubes.  Patent
protection of this locking system has now expired in Canada and in several
other countries.  Kirkbi now attempts to protect its market share and goodwill
against the inroads of competitors by invoking other forms of intellectual
property rights.  In particular, it is engaged in a long-running dispute with
the respondent Mega Bloks Inc., formerly Ritvik Holdings Inc./Gestions Ritvik
Inc. (“Ritvik”), a Canadian toy manufacturer.  After the expiry of the last
LEGO patents in Canada, the respondent began manufacturing and selling similar
bricks, using the same locking method.   3                               
Although I hold that s. 7 (b) is a valid exercise of the federal
power over trade and commerce, I agree that the action should be dismissed and
that the majority judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal should be upheld.  A
purely functional design may not be the basis of a trade-mark, registered or
unregistered.  The tort of passing off is not made out.  The law of passing off
and of trade-marks may not be used to perpetuate monopoly rights enjoyed under
now-expired patents.  The market for these products is now open, free and
competitive.  II.  Background  4                               
The LEGO toy business was founded in 1932.  In 1949, Kirkbi produced its
first toy building blocks.  Those blocks were derived from a British product,
the Kiddicraft blocks, which used a system of interlocking blocks.  Kirkbi
bought the patents covering the Kiddicraft system a few years later.  Kirkbi
then introduced significant improvements to the blocks.  It added tubes
underneath the blocks which coupled with the studs on top.  This clever locking
system increased the friction between the bricks and enhanced their “clutch power”,
although children could still easily disassemble them.  The current LEGO block
was thus designed and marketed some 50 years ago.  The same pattern of studs on
the top of the block with tubes underneath remains in use.  The only change was
the addition of the mark “LEGO” on the top of each stud in tiny script.  Kirkbi
managed to keep patent protection of its technology in place for many years. 
But, in Canada, as elsewhere, patent protection came to an end.  In Canada, the
last patent expired in 1988.  By that time, the quality and originality of its
products had earned LEGO bricks a well-deserved reputation amongst parents and
children.  LEGO toys acquired generations of devoted clients and users in
Canada as in many other countries.  5                               
After the expiry of Kirkbi’s patents, clouds gathered on the horizon. 
New competitors appeared and attempted to market similar if not identical
products.  The most aggressive was the respondent, a Montreal toy manufacturer
now known as Ritvik.  Ritvik had begun manufacturing toys in the 1960s.  Later,
in the 1980s, it developed and marketed a line of large-size building blocks. 
Finally, after the expiry of the last LEGO patents in Canada, it decided to use
the traditional LEGO technology. It brought to market a line of small blocks,
identical in size to LEGO blocks, which used the same geometrical pattern of
stubs on top coupled with tubes underneath.  They were sold under the name
“MICRO MEGA BLOKS”.  Ritvik sold its new line in Canada and exported them to
several other countries.  Over the last 10 years, it has become a significant
global competitor to Kirkbi.  6                               
Facing new competition and now deprived of patent protection, Kirkbi
attempted to protect its market position, employing a highly creative and aggressive
use of the law of intellectual property and unfair competition, in several
different legal systems throughout the world.  This ongoing effort led to a
substantial amount of litigation in several countries.  For example, at times,
Kirkbi tried to register its pattern of studs as a trade-mark or a design. 
Those attempts generally failed.  In Canada, after the Registrar of Trade-marks
rejected an application to register the pattern as a trade-mark, the appellant
resorted to a more subtle and creative use of the resources of the law of
intellectual property.  This attempt led directly to the present litigation.  7                               
Kirkbi asserted unregistered trade-mark rights in respect of its use of
the “LEGO indicia”.  This mark consists of its distinctive orthogonal pattern
of raised studs distributed on the top of each toy-building brick.  These LEGO
indicia are thus the upper surface of the block, with eight studs distributed
in a regular geometric pattern (see Sexton J.A., [2004] 2 F.C.R. 241, 2003 FCA 297,
at para. 11).  It alleged that the marketing by Ritvik of its MICRO and MINI
lines of small bricks using the same pattern caused confusion with its
unregistered trade-mark.  It claimed relief under s. 7 (b) of the Trade-marks
Act  and under the common law doctrine of passing off.  In a statement of
claim filed in the Federal Court, Trial Division, it claimed ownership of this
unregistered mark and sought a declaration that it had been infringed.  It
requested a permanent injunction to prevent the marketing of the MICRO and MINI
lines of MEGA BLOKS and damages.  8                               
Ritvik mounted a strong defence.  It denied that s. 7 (b) of
the Trade-marks Act  had been breached and that the tort of passing off
had been made out.  In counterclaim, it sought a declaration that it was
entitled to continue selling its MICRO and MINI lines of bricks.  At that
stage, it did not raise the issue of the constitutionality of s. 7 (b) of
the Trade-marks Act .  III.  Judicial
History  A.  Federal
Court, Trial Division (2002), 220 F.T.R. 161, 2002 FCT 585  9                               
Gibson J. dismissed Kirkbi’s claim.  He accepted the key argument raised
by Ritvik that purely functional features, such as the LEGO indicia, could not
become the basis of a trade-mark and affirmed that this principle was still a
part of Canadian trade-mark law.  The rule of functionality applied both to
registered and unregistered marks.  Although he observed that this conclusion
was dispositive of the claim, he went on to consider the issue of passing off.
Gibson J. noted that the subject matter at issue had been claimed and disclosed
in expired patents.  In his view, Kirkbi was indirectly attempting to extend
its patent protection, contrary to the principles of the patent system.  The
trial judge then reviewed the elements of the tort of passing off at common
law.  He recognized that, given the history of the marketing of its product,
Kirkbi had acquired goodwill in the particular configuration of its bricks.  He
then found that it had to be shown that this goodwill was put in peril by
confusion amounting to a deception of the public due to a misrepresentation. 
He was satisfied that Kirkbi had established a likelihood of confusion or even
actual confusion, between the LEGO bricks and the Ritvik blocks, based on the
LEGO indicia.  But Gibson J. held that the claimant needed to prove that the
confusion had arisen from an intentional  misrepresentation by Ritvik, and he
concluded that in this case Kirkbi had failed to do so. On that basis, he would
have dismissed the claim of passing off, although he acknowledged that Ritvik’s
entry into the market had caused damages to the appellant.  Kirkbi appealed
this judgment to the Federal Court of Appeal.  B.  Federal
Court of Appeal, [2004] 2 F.C.R. 241, 2003 FCA 297  10                           
Writing for the majority, Sexton J.A. dismissed the appeal.  In his
view, the doctrine of functionality applied to all trade-marks, registered or
unregistered, and had remained a fundamental principle of the law of
trade-marks.  The distinguishing guise solely consisting of the so-called “LEGO
indicia” was purely functional.  For this reason, it was invalid and could not
form the basis of an infringement action under s. 7 (b) of the Trade-marks
Act .  Kirkbi was attempting to extend the life and application of
its expired patents through an improper use of trade-mark law.  Given his
conclusion on the issue of functionality and the validity of the mark, Sexton
J.A. did not comment on the questions of confusion and the elements of the tort
of passing off.  11                           
Pelletier J.A. disagreed and would have allowed the appeal and the
action.  In dissent, he held that, although the LEGO mark was primarily
functional, it could be the basis of a passing-off claim under s. 7 (b). 
An unregistered trade-mark did not confer any exclusivity but its owner had the
right to prevent competitors from causing confusion in the marketing of
competing products.  LEGO was entitled to protection against the confusing use
of its unregistered mark.  In addition, Pelletier J.A. stated that the doctrine
of functionality was no longer part of the law of trade-marks in Canada in
respect of unregistered marks, by reason of the changes brought about by the
adoption of the present Trade-marks Act .  He also found that the
elements of passing off had been made out.  In particular, even though no
deliberate strategy to deceive had been established, confusion in the market
between Kirkbi and Ritvik products had been proved.  IV.    Analysis  A.     The Issues  12                           
The scope of the issues at stake substantially changed after our Court
granted leave to appeal.  The respondent then raised the constitutionality of
s. 7 (b) of the Trade-marks Act .  Ritvik submitted that the
provision exceeded the legislative authority of the Parliament of Canada.  The
Chief Justice stated the following question:   13                           
I will address the constitutional question first.  I will then turn to
the issues raised by the infringement action under s. 7 (b).  I will
consider the application of the doctrine of functionality.  Does it apply to
unregistered trade-marks or to registered trade-marks only?  May an
unregistered functional mark form the basis of an action claiming passing off
under s. 7 (b) of the Trade-marks Act ?  Last, given the
uncertainty in the courts below, I will review and discuss some aspects of the
tort of passing off at common law.  B.  The
Constitutionality of Section 7 (b) of the Trade-marks Act   (1) Trade and Commerce  15                           
The grant of legislative authority to the Parliament of Canada listed in
s. 91  of the Constitution Act, 1867  does not specify that trade-marks
are a component of the federal government’s power to legislate.  Patents and
copyrights are explicitly allocated to federal legislative power (s. 91(22)  and
(23) ).  Pursuant to s. 91(2) , the federal government has exclusive jurisdiction
in relation to trade and commerce. In Citizens Insurance Co. of Canada v.
Parsons (1881), 7 App. Cas. 96, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
distinguished two branches of federal power under s. 91(2) : (1) the power over
international and interprovincial trade and commerce, and (2) the power over
general trade and commerce affecting Canada as a whole (“general trade and
commerce”).  This interpretation of s. 91(2) , which limits the scope of the
federal trade and commerce power to these two branches, is intended to ensure a
proper constitutional balance between the otherwise overlapping federal power
over trade and commerce (s. 91(2) ) and the provincial power over property and
civil rights in the province (s. 92(13) ): see A. K. Gill and R. S.
Jolliffe, Fox on Canadian Law of Trade-marks and Unfair Competition (4th
ed. (loose-leaf)), at p. 2-4.  16                           
The “general trade and commerce” category requires an assessment of the
relative importance of an activity to the national economy as well as an
inquiry into whether an activity should be regulated by Parliament as opposed
to the provinces.  To determine whether a particular issue requires national
rather than local regulation, this Court has set out five criteria to be
considered.  These criteria are integrated into an assessment of whether
federal legislation can be supported on the basis of Parliament’s authority
over general trade and commerce.  They reflect principles which help
distinguish  the federal trade and commerce power from the provincial property
and civil rights power.  In two comprehensive decisions dealing with the second
branch of s. 91(2)  (Attorney General of Canada v. Canadian National
Transportation, Ltd., [1983] 2 S.C.R. 206; General Motors of Canada Ltd.
v. City National Leasing, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 641),  Dickson C.J. adopted and
extended the three indicia initially set out by Laskin C.J. in MacDonald v.
Vapor Canada Ltd., [1977] 2 S.C.R. 134.  These requirements “serve
to ensure that federal legislation does not upset the balance of power between
federal and provincial governments” (City National Leasing, at p. 662).  17                           
The jurisprudence of our Court now recognizes that the following factors
are hallmarks of a valid exercise of Parliament’s general trade and commerce
power: (i) the impugned legislation must be part of a regulatory scheme; (ii)
the scheme must be monitored by the continuing oversight of a regulatory agency;
(iii) the legislation must be concerned with trade as a whole rather than with
a particular industry; (iv) the legislation should be of a nature that
provinces jointly or severally would be constitutionally incapable of enacting;
and (v) the failure to include one or more provinces or localities in a
legislative scheme would jeopardize the successful operation of the scheme in
other parts of the country (City National Leasing, at pp. 662-63). 
These factors are not exhaustive and, to be valid, it is not necessary for
federal legislation to satisfy all five criteria:   In total, the five factors provide a preliminary check-list of
characteristics, the presence of which in legislation is an indication of
validity under the trade and commerce power. These indicia do not,
however, represent an exhaustive list of traits that will tend to characterize
general trade and commerce legislation. Nor is the presence or absence of any
of these five criteria necessarily determinative. As noted in Canadian National
Transportation, supra, at p. 268:  The above does not purport to be an exhaustive list,
nor is the presence of any or all of these indicia necessarily decisive.
The proper approach to the characterization is still the one suggested in Parsons,
a careful case by case assessment. Nevertheless, the presence of such factors
does at least make it far more probable that
what is being addressed in a federal enactment is genuinely a national economic
concern and not just a collection of local ones.  On any occasion where the general trade and commerce power is advanced
as a ground of constitutional validity, a careful case by case analysis remains
appropriate. The five factors articulated in Canadian National
Transportation merely represent a principled way to begin the difficult
task of distinguishing between matters relating to trade and commerce and those
of a more local nature.  (City National Leasing, at pp. 662-63)   18                           
The federal government’s power to legislate with respect to trade-marks
has never been the target of  a direct constitutional challenge.  The issue was
raised in the Privy Council in a 1937 decision examining the constitutionality
of federal trade-mark legislation.  The Privy Council judgment relies, albeit
implicitly, on the second branch of the trade and commerce powers under s.
91(2)  to confirm Parliament’s jurisdiction to enact trade-mark legislation:  Attorney-General
for Ontario v. Attorney-General for Canada, [1937] A.C. 405.  Lord Atkin
for the Privy Council commented as follows (at p. 417):  No one has challenged the competence of the Dominion to pass such
legislation. If challenged one obvious source of authority would appear to be
the class of subjects enumerated in s. 91(2) , the Regulation of trade and
commerce, referred to by the Chief Justice. There could hardly be a more
appropriate form of the exercise of this power than the creation and regulation
of a uniform law of trade marks.   See also Good
Humor Corp. of America v. Good Humor Food Products Ltd., [1937] Ex. C.R.
61, at pp. 75-76.  More recently in Royal Doulton Tableware Ltd. v.
Cassidy’s Ltd., [1986] 1 F.C. 357, the Federal Court, Trial Division stated
in obiter that “[t]he jurisdiction of Parliament with respect to trade
marks has long since been recognized . . . . [I]t may well be that the
jurisdiction of Parliament over trade marks, depending as it does on federal
authority over ‘the regulation of trade and commerce’ (see Attorney-General
for Ontario v. Attorney-General for Canada, supra) is intrinsically
broader than is Parliament’s jurisdiction over ‘patents of invention and
discovery’” (pp. 374-75).  19                           
The constitutionality of specific provisions of the Trade-marks Act  has
been challenged but the validity of the Act as a whole has never been
conclusively determined.  The courts have implicitly recognized the validity of
this federal legislation in several decisions: see, e.g., Vapor Canada; City
National Leasing; Asbjorn Horgard A/S v. Gibbs/Nortac Industries Ltd. (1986),
8 C.I.P.R. 232 (F.C.T.D.), rev’d in part [1987] 3 F.C. 544 (C.A.).  The
constitutionality of the Trade-marks Act  as a whole is not challenged on
this appeal.  I will return to the issue of the constitutional foundation for
federal trade-mark legislation and will consider the five criteria outlined by
Dickson C.J. further below.  (2)     Determining the Constitutionality of
Section 7 (b): The Test to be Applied   20                           
In City National Leasing, Dickson C.J. set out the proper
framework for analysis to determine the characterization of an impugned
provision for constitutional purposes.  He stressed that the mere fact that a
provision codifies a civil cause of action does not necessarily make it ultra
vires the federal government.  Although the creation of civil causes of
action is generally a matter of property or civil rights in the province, a
finding that a provision standing alone, in its pith and substance, intrudes on
provincial powers does not determine its ultimate constitutional validity.  At
the same time, a provision will not be valid merely because the main provisions
of an Act are valid. It is necessary to consider both the impugned provision
and the Act as a whole when undertaking constitutional analysis.  The nature of
the relationship between a provision and the statute determines the extent to
which the provision is integrated into otherwise valid legislation.  If the
legislation is valid and the provision is sufficiently integrated within the
scheme, it can be upheld by virtue of that relationship:  a provision may take
on a valid constitutional cast by the context and association in which it is
fixed as complementary provision serving to reinforce other admittedly valid
provisions (Vapor Canada, at pp. 158-59, per Laskin C.J.).  21                           
The three-part test for determining whether the impugned provision is
within the constitutional powers of the enacting legislature was restated by
this Court in Kitkatla Band v. British Columbia (Minister of Small Business,
Tourism and Culture), [2002] 2 S.C.R. 146, 2002 SCC 31, at para. 58,
here paraphrased to reflect the facts of this case:  1.      Does the impugned provision intrude into a
provincial head of power, and to what extent?  2.      If the impugned provision intrudes into a
provincial head of power, is it nevertheless part of a valid federal
legislative scheme?  3.      If the impugned provision is part of a
valid federal scheme, is it sufficiently integrated with that scheme?  (3) Application to the Facts of This Case 22                           
For ease of reference, I reproduce here s. 7  of the Trade-marks Act :  7.  No person shall  (a) make a false or misleading statement tending to discredit
the business, wares or services of a competitor;  (b) direct public attention to his wares, services or business
in such a way as to cause or be likely to cause confusion in Canada, at the
time he commenced so to direct attention to them, between his wares, services
or business and the wares, services or business of another;  (c) pass off other wares or services as and for those ordered or
requested;  (d) make use, in association with wares or services, of any
description that is false in a material respect and likely to mislead the
public as to  (i) the character, quality, quantity or composition,  (ii) the geographical origin, or  (iii) the mode of the manufacture, production or performance  of the wares or services; or  (e) do any other act or adopt any other business practice
contrary to honest industrial or commercial usage in Canada.   In this
section I will apply the analytical framework set out above to determine the
constitutional validity of s. 7 (b).  (a)  Characterization of the Impugned Provision:
Does Section 7(b) Encroach on Provincial Powers?   23                           
The first stage of the analysis requires a characterization of the
impugned provision in isolation from the rest of the statute.  We look to its
purpose and its effect to determine whether the provision encroaches on
provincial powers, and if so, to what extent: City National Leasing, at
p. 674; Kitkatla, at para. 59.  Section 7(b) creates a
civil cause of action that essentially codifies the common law tort of passing
off: Vapor Canada, at p. 147; Asbjorn Horgard A/S (F.C.T.D.), at
p. 241.  Standing alone it appears to encroach on provincial power, namely
property and civil rights in the province (s. 92(13) ).  As Dickson C.J.
noted in City National Leasing: “This provincial power over civil rights
is a significant power and one that is not lightly encroached upon”
(pp. 672-73).  As explained above, if s. 7(b) is sufficiently
integrated into the scheme of the Trade-marks Act  as a whole, then it
will nonetheless be intra vires Parliament.  24                           
In City National Leasing, this Court found that the
intrusion of s. 31.1 of the Combines Investigation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c.
C-23, into provincial jurisdiction was minimal.  In coming to this conclusion
Dickson C.J. highlighted the following three factors:  (i) the provision was
remedial and was not in itself a substantive part of the Act; the provision did
not create a general cause of action; (ii) its application was limited by the
provisions of the Act; and (iii) Parliament was not constitutionally precluded
from creating rights of civil action where such measures are shown to be
warranted (p. 673).  25                           
These factors apply equally to s. 7 (b) of the Trade-marks Act . 
First, s. 7(b) is remedial; its purpose is to enforce the substantive
aspects of the Trade-marks Act  relating to unregistered trade-marks:  The tort of passing off is in many respects the equivalent cause of
action for unregistered trade-marks as infringement [s. 20 of the Act] is to
registered trade-marks. The overall legislative scheme of the Trade-marks
Act  is the protection, identification, and registration of trade-marks,
whether registered or unregistered.  (Gill and Jolliffe, at p. 2-22)   26                           
Second, the passing-off action protects unregistered trade-marks and
goodwill enjoyed by the trade-marks.  Section 7(b) is therefore limited
by the provisions of the Trade-marks Act : it does not expand the federal
jurisdiction in relation to trade-marks and trade-names but merely rounds out
an otherwise incomplete trade-mark scheme (Asbjorn Horgard A/S
(F.C.T.D.), at p. 237).  Unlike s. 7(e), which was found to be ultra
vires Parliament because it did not have any connection with the
enforcement of trade-marks or trade-names (Asbjorn Horgard A/S
(F.C.T.D.), at p. 242) and was significantly broader in application, the
creation of a statutory action for passing off in s. 7 (b) is limited in
its application.  27                           
Finally, as regards federal statutory civil actions, Dickson C.J.
reminds us in City National Leasing that “[i]t is also important to
recognize that while the Court in Vapor Canada, supra, struck
down one civil cause of action, the Court did not preclude other federally
created private actions from being sustained under federal heads of power” (p.
693).  Not only has this Court sustained federally created civil causes of
action in a number of cases, but the test developed by this Court in City
National Leasing and in Kitkatla (outlined above) makes clear that
civil causes of action are intra vires Parliament if sufficiently
integrated into valid federal legislation.  In sum, although the impugned
provision encroaches on an important provincial power, the intrusion is
minimal.  We must now determine whether the Trade-marks Act  is valid
and, if so, ascertain whether s. 7 (b) is sufficiently integrated into
the federal scheme of regulation to be sustained as an exercise of Parliament’s
general trade and commerce power.  (b) The Validity of the Federal Trade-marks Act  28                           
In the second stage of the analysis, the Court must determine whether
the Trade-marks Act  is a valid exercise of Parliament’s general trade
and commerce power.  The analysis is guided by the five indicia of validity set
out above.  In Asbjorn Horgard A/S, MacGuigan J.A. of the Federal Court
of Appeal noted that:  All of the criteria of Chief Justice Dickson are
verified in the Act: a national regulatory scheme, the oversight of the
Registrar of Trade Marks, a concern with trade in general rather than with an
aspect of a particular business, the incapability of the provinces to establish
such a scheme, and the necessity for national coverage. [p. 559]    The parties do
not dispute Parliament’s constitutional power to regulate registered
trade-marks.  Rather, it is Parliament’s right to create a civil remedy in
relation to an unregistered trade-mark that is in issue.  The
respondent’s position is that the only regulatory scheme in the Trade-marks
Act  is the scheme governing registered trade-marks.  In my view this is an
incorrect characterization of the Act.  The Trade-marks Act  establishes
a regulatory scheme for both registered and unregistered trade-marks.  29                           
The protection of unregistered trade-marks is integral to the
legitimacy, legal standards and efficacy of registered trade-marks.  The Trade-marks
Act  is clearly concerned with trade as a whole, as opposed to within a
particular industry.  There is no question that trade-marks apply across and
between industries in different provinces.  Divided provincial and federal
jurisdiction could mean that the provincial law could be changed by each
provincial legislature.  This could result in unregistered trade-marks that
were more strongly protected than registered trade-marks, undermining the
efficacy and integrity of the federal Parliament’s Trade-marks Act .  The
lack of a civil remedy integrated into the scheme of the Act, applicable to all
marks, registered or unregistered, might also lead to duplicative or
conflicting and hence inefficient enforcement procedures.  30                           
The Trade-marks Act  includes numerous provisions relating to
unregistered trade-marks: “Parliament by sections 1  to 11  of the Trade Marks
Act  has prescribed a regime concerning what constitutes a trade mark and
the adoption thereof, whether registered or not” (Royal Doulton, at p.
374).  The primary difference between registered and unregistered trade-marks
under the Act is that the rights of a holder of a registered trade-mark are
more extensive:  At common law the right to a trade mark thus arose
through the use of a mark by a business to identify its products to the public.
There was no need for the business to register its mark in order to protect its
right to use the trade mark and prevent the misuse of its trade mark by other
businesses. The passing off action was the enforcement mechanism available for
the protection of trade mark rights. Without the passing off action, common law
trade mark rights would have little value.   (Asbjorn Horgard A/S (F.C.A.), at pp. 560-61)   Registration
of a trade-mark gives the registrant the exclusive right to the use throughout
Canada of the trade-mark and a right of action to remedy any infringement of
that right: ss. 19-20.  In addition, in order to exercise those rights, the
existence of the mark itself does not have to be established.  Registration is
evidence enough. Nonetheless, marks remain marks, whether registered or
unregistered, because their legal characteristics are the same.  31                           
There is no reason to believe that the registration regime under the Trade-marks
Act  was intended to create two separate enforcement regimes.  The
scheme set out in the Trade-marks Act  regulates both registered and
unregistered trade-marks.  It regulates the adoption, use, transfer, and enforcement
of rights in respect of all trade-marks.  If trade-marks are intended to
protect the goodwill or reputation associated with a particular business and to
prevent confusion in the marketplace, then a comprehensive scheme dealing with
both registered and unregistered trade-marks is necessary to ensure adequate
protection.  The inclusion of unregistered trade-marks in the regulatory scheme
is necessary to ensure the protection of all trade-marks.  The Trade-marks
Act  is more than simply a system of registration.  (c) The Extent of Integration  32                           
The final step in the analysis is to determine whether the provision is
sufficiently integrated into the otherwise valid statute.  The inquiry has two
parts.  First, it is necessary to determine the appropriate test of “fit”,
namely “how well the provision is integrated into the scheme of the legislation
and how important it is for the efficacy of the legislation” (City National
Leasing, at p. 668).  Once the correct standard is determined, the test is
applied on a case-by-case basis.  If the provision passes this integration
test, it is intra vires Parliament as an exercise of the general trade
and commerce power.  If the provision is not sufficiently integrated into the
scheme of regulation, it cannot be sustained under the second branch of s.
91(2) .  To determine the degree of integration required, it is necessary to
consider the extent to which the provision encroaches on provincial powers:
“The degree of relationship that is required is a function of the extent of the
provision’s intrusion into provincial powers” (City National Leasing, at
p. 683).  If the encroachment is minimal, then a “functional relationship” is
sufficient to sustain the constitutionality of the provision (p. 669).  If
the provision is highly intrusive, a stricter test is applied: the provision
must be “truly necessary” or “integral” to the federal scheme (pp. 669 and
683).  Consideration of the seriousness of the encroachment on provincial
powers and of the proper standard for the relationship between a legislative
provision and a valid federal scheme ensures that the balance of constitutional
powers is maintained and focuses the analysis on the “pith and substance” of
the provision.  33                           
As outlined above, s. 7(b) of the Act only minimally intrudes
into provincial jurisdiction over property and civil rights.  It is a remedial
provision limited to trade-marks as defined in the Act (ss. 2 and 6).  As this
Court observed in Vapor Canada and the Federal Court of Appeal held in Asbjorn
Hogard A/S, s. 7(b) “rounds out” the federal trade-marks scheme.  In
this regard s. 7(b) is, in its pith and substance, directly connected to
the enforcement of trade-marks and trade-names in Canada because it is directed
to avoiding confusion through use of trade-marks.  34                           
In Vapor Canada, this Court struck down s. 7 (e) of
the Trade-marks Act  on the ground that it was unrelated to trade or to
trade-marks, or other forms of intellectual property subject to federal
legislative authority.  Laskin C.J. concluded that s. 7 (e) “is not
directed to trade but to the ethical conduct of persons engaged in trade or in
business, and . . . such a detached provision cannot survive alone unconnected
to a general regulatory scheme” (p. 165).  Although the majority found that,
standing alone, s. 7  was not valid federal legislation, Laskin C.J., who wrote
for the majority, wrote the following:  Section 7  is, however, nourished for federal legislative purposes in so
far as it may be said to round out regulatory schemes prescribed by Parliament
in the exercise of its legislative power in relation to patents, copyrights,
trade marks and trade names.  The subparagraphs of s. 7 , if limited in this
way, would be sustainable, and, certainly, if s. 7 (e) whose validity is
alone in question here, could be so limited, I would be prepared to uphold it
to that extent. [p. 172]   Section 7 (e)
could not be sustained on this basis because its subject matter was not related
to or connected with the enforcement of trade-marks or trade-names.  This
connection was found to exist, however, in relation to s. 7 (a), (b),
and (d).  The Court suggested that these subparagraphs did relate to and
give effect to valid federal legislative subjects, namely trade-marks, patents
and copyrights (p. 157).   36                           
Unlike breach of confidence and appropriation of confidential
information (s. 7 (e)), the passing-off action plays a clear role in the
federal scheme.  Without this provision there would be a gap in the legislative
protection of trade-marks.  This would create inconsistencies in the protection
of registered and unregistered trade-marks and lead to uncertainty.  Section 7 (b)
is sufficiently integrated into the federal scheme and, in this respect, is
significantly different from s. 7 (e).  I conclude that s. 7 (b)
lies within the federal government’s legislative competence.  I will now turn
to the issues of interpretation and application of the Act raised by the
present appeal.  C.  The
Trade-Mark and Passing-off Issues  (1) Patents and Trade-Marks  37                           
The vast and expanding domain of the law of intellectual property is
going through a period of major and rapid changes.  The pressures of
globalization and technological change challenge its institutions, its
classifications and sometimes settled doctrines (see M. Vivant, “La fantastique
explosion de la propriété intellectuelle:  Une rationalité sous le big bang?”,
in Mélanges Victor Nabhan (2004), 393; see also W. R. Cornish, Intellectual
Property: Omnipresent, Distracting, Irrelevant? (2004), at pp. 110-14). 
Jurisprudence attempts to address — sometimes with difficulty — the
consequences of these broad social and economic trends.  The state of patent
law is evidence enough of the stresses on the process of jurisprudential
development in a world where statute law itself struggles to catch up with the
life of laboratories and markets (see, for example, Harvard College v.
Canada (Commissioner of Patents), [2002] 4 S.C.R. 45, 2002 SCC 76; Monsanto
Canada Inc. v. Schmeiser, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 902, 2004 SCC 34).  The economic
value of intellectual property rights arouses the imagination and litigiousness
of rights holders in their search for continuing protection of what they view
as their rightful property.  Such a search carries with it the risk of
discarding basic and necessary distinctions between different forms of
intellectual property and their legal and economic functions.  The present
appeal is a case in point.  It involves the distinction between patents and
trade-marks. In order to understand the role and relevance of the doctrine of
functionality in the law of trade-marks, some comments on the nature and
function of patents and trade-marks will be useful.  38                           
Patents protect new products and processes.  In consideration of
disclosure of the invention, patent law grants a time-limited monopoly to the
patentee on the use and marketing of the subject matter of the patent:  Patent protection rests on a concept of a bargain
between the inventor and the public.  In return for disclosure of the invention
to the public, the inventor acquires for a limited time the exclusive right to
exploit it.  (Free World Trust v. Électro Santé Inc., [2000] 2 S.C.R. 1024,
2000 SCC 66, at para. 13, per Binnie J.; see also Whirlpool
Corp. v. Camco Inc., [2000] 2 S.C.R. 1067, 2000 SCC 67, at para. 37, per
Binnie J.)   Patent rights
focus on the patented product or process.  The patent holder enjoys temporary
exclusivity and is protected against the unauthorized use of the subject matter
of the patent, as long as the patent is in force.  39                           
In the case of trade-marks, the focus shifts from the product itself to
the distinctiveness of its marketing.  Trade-marks seek to indicate the source
of a particular product, process or service in a distinctive manner, so that,
ideally, consumers know what they are buying and from whom.  The definition of
trade-marks in s. 2  of the Trade-marks Act  confirms this focus on
distinctiveness in the market and in the public:  “trade-mark” means  (a)    a mark that is used by a person for the purpose of
distinguishing or so as to distinguish wares or services manufactured, sold,
leased, hired or performed by him from those manufactured, sold, leased, hired
or performed by others,  (b)     a certification mark,  (c)     a distinguishing guise, or  (d)     a proposed trade-mark;  At this point,
we must then ask, can the mark be the product itself?  Would this be consistent
with the nature of marks and the underlying policies which structure
intellectual property law?  These issues are raised in Kirkbi’s claims.  The
foundation of a trade-mark is distinctiveness because only a distinctive mark
will allow the consumer to identify the source of the goods (see D. Vaver, Intellectual
Property Law: Copyright, Patents, Trade-marks (1997), at p. 190; Gill and
Jolliffe, at p. 3-19).  Although trade-marks do not protect the product as
such, they may have huge economic value and rights arising out of marks may
have immense importance to their holders.  The operation of the market relies
extensively on brands.  The goodwill associated with them is considered to be a
most valuable form of property.  However, despite its connection with a
product, a mark must not be confused with the product — it is something else, a
symbol of a connection between a source of a product and the product itself. 
We will now briefly return to the facts relating to the mark claimed by Kirkbi.  (2) The Nature of the Claimed LEGO Mark  40                           
The nature of the claim advanced by Kirkbi must be well understood.  One
must start from the problem the appellant faced when its patents expired.  As
mentioned above, the very cleverness and flexibility of LEGO technology, of the
combination of studs on top of the brick and tubes under it, had almost turned
“LEGO” into a household word.  Source and product became identified.  LEGO
bricks, for many, came to designate these small colourful building blocks, with
their clever locking system.  But when the patents expired, the LEGO technology
fell into the public domain.  The LEGO name, whether on the product, on its
packaging or in its advertising, remained protected, but the monopoly on the
wares themselves was over. The monopoly had been the key to the building up and
preservation of LEGO’s market share, and so Kirkbi employed a number of
different means to protect it, one of which was the assertion of a trade-mark.  41                           
The peculiarity of the claimed mark was that it did not consist of a
name, drawing or particular get-up of the product.  The so-called
“distinguishing guise” consisted solely of the technical or functional
characteristics, formerly protected by Kirkbi’s patents. Kirkbi applied in vain
in Canada for registration of such a trade-mark under the Trade-marks Act . 
But its second amended statement of claim, which relied on an unregistered
mark, attributed the  particular look of its product to the disposition and
characteristics of the studs on the top of each brick:  9.      LEGO Components have a distinctive “look”,
which makes them immediately identifiable to purchasers and users, and which
exclusively identifies LEGO Goods as made by or under the authority of a single
source.  This distinctive “look” is attributable to, and defined by:  a rectilinear array of uniform, smooth-sided, flat-topped,
cylindrical, co-planar protuberances, the proportions of height, diameter and
center-to-center spacing of which are approximately 2 : 5 : 8.  Where there is
more than one row of protuberances, they are arranged in mutually orthogonal
rows and columns.  10.    These features collectively are hereinafter
referred to as “the LEGO Indicia trade mark”. . . . [Emphasis in original.]   On the facts,
the trial judge found that the LEGO indicia and the asserted unregistered mark
were purely functional.  The mark was the product (see Gibson J., at para.
61).  Those findings were accepted by the Federal Court of Appeal and were not
challenged in our Court.  These findings raised the issue of the application of
the doctrine of functionality, which barred the claim of infringement under s.
7 (b) of the Trade-marks Act , in the view of the trial judge and
of the majority of the Court of Appeal.  (3) The Doctrine of Functionality in Trade-marks Law  42                           
The doctrine of functionality appears to be a logical principle of
trade-marks law.  It reflects the purpose of a trade-mark, which is the
protection of the distinctiveness of the product, not of a monopoly on the
product.  The Trade-marks Act  explicitly adopts that doctrine, when it
provides, at s. 13(2) , that the registration of a mark will not interfere with
the use of the utilitarian features it may incorporate:  13. . . . (2) No registration of a distinguishing guise
interferes with the use of any utilitarian feature embodied in the
distinguishing guise.  43                           
In these few words, the Act clearly recognizes that it does not protect
the utilitarian features of a distinguishing guise.  In this manner, it
acknowledges the existence and relevance of a doctrine of long standing in the
law of trade-marks.  This doctrine recognizes that trade-marks law is not
intended to prevent the competitive use of utilitarian features of products,
but that it fulfills a source-distinguishing function. This doctrine of
functionality goes to the essence of what is a trade-mark.  44                           
In Canada, as in several other countries or regions of the world, this
doctrine is a well-settled part of the law of trade-marks.  In the law of
intellectual property, it prevents abuses of monopoly positions in respect of
products and processes.  Once, for example, patents have expired, it
discourages attempts to bring them back in another guise.  45                           
The doctrine of functionality is a well-established principle of the
Canadian law of trade-marks.  Indeed, our Court characterized it in 1964 as a
“well-settled” principle of law:  The law appears to be well settled that if what is
sought to be registered as a trade mark has a functional use or characteristic,
it cannot be the subject of a trade mark.  (Parke, Davis & Co. v. Empire Laboratories Ltd., [1964]
S.C.R. 351, at p. 354, per Hall J.)   46                           
The Federal Court of Canada has consistently applied this doctrine.  As
in the present case, it has held time and again that no mark could consist of
utilitarian features.  Otherwise, it would make the wares a part of the mark
and grant a monopoly on their functional features.  For example, it is worth
quoting MacGuigan J.A., in a discussion of the validity of a mark consisting of
the particular shape of a razor head:  The distinguishing guise in the case at bar is in my
opinion invalid as extending to the functional aspects of the Philip shaver.  A
mark which goes beyond distinguishing the wares of its owner to the functional
structure of the wares themselves is transgressing the legitimate bounds of a
trade mark.  (Remington Rand Corp. v. Philips Electronics N.V. (1995), 64
C.P.R. (3d) 467 (F.C.A.), at p. 478; see also Pizza Pizza Ltd. v. Canada
(Registrar of Trade Marks), [1989] 3 F.C. 379 (C.A.), at p. 381, per
Pratte J.A.; Thomas & Betts, Ltd. v. Panduit Corp., [2000] 3
F.C. 3 (C.A.), at para. 25.)   This
jurisprudence echoes earlier decisions of the Exchequer Court of Canada which
applied the doctrine of functionality in respect of trade-marks, under an
earlier statute.  A combination of elements primarily designed to perform a
function may not be the subject matter of a trade-mark (Imperial Tobacco Co.
of Canada v. Registrar of Trade Marks, [1939] Ex. C.R. 141, at p. 145; Elgin
Handles Ltd. v. Welland Vale Manufacturing Co. (1964), 43 C.P.R. 20, at p.
24).  47                           
The Canadian jurisprudence is consistent with legislative and
jurisprudential developments in other countries.  Some of these jurisprudential
developments arose out of the ongoing campaign of Kirkbi to protect its market
position in many countries, by other legal means after the expiry of its patents.  48                           
In the United States, Congress recently incorporated the doctrine of
functionality into the law of trade-marks.  It is now a part of the Lanham
Trade-Mark Act: see 15 U.S.C.A. § 1052(e)(5).  The Supreme Court of the
United States has also held that purely functional features may not become the
basis of trade-marks (see, for example, TrafFix Devices, Inc. v.
Marketing Displays, Inc., 532 U.S. 23 (2001), at p. 34; Wal-Mart
Stores, Inc. v. Samara Bros., Inc., 529 U.S. 205 (2000), at p. 211).   50                           
The European Court of Justice reached the same conclusion as had been
reached in Canada.  On the basis of the EEC directive and of the functionality
principle, it found that the triangular shape of the Philips razor could not be
registered as a trade-mark.  It commented that the directive precluded the
registration of shapes  whose essential characteristics perform a technical function, with the
result that the exclusivity inherent in the trade mark right would limit the
possibility of competitors supplying a product incorporating such a function or
at least limit their freedom of choice in regard to the technical solution they
wish to adopt . . . .  (Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV v. Remington Consumer Products
Ltd., C-299/99, [2002] E.C.R. I-5475, at para. 79)   51                           
Kirkbi had registered its indicia as a community trade-mark, under
European law.  Seized of an application for cancellation by Ritvik, the
Cancellation Division of the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market
(Trade-marks and Designs) applied the principles set out in Philips
Electronics, and voided the mark (63 C 107029/1 “LEGO brick” (3D),
July 30, 2004).  It found that it had a purely technical function and that the
EEC directive barred its registration.  52                           
At the root of the functionality principle in European law, as in
Canadian intellectual property law, lies a concern to avoid overextending
monopoly rights on the products themselves and impeding competition, in respect
of wares sharing the same technical characteristics.  It is interesting to
observe that, within two different legal systems, a judge of the English High
Court and a French Court of Appeal raised the same concerns and came to similar
conclusions, when they had to pass judgment on attempts by Kirkbi to protect
its indicia by relying on trade-mark law, the tort of passing off or the delict
of unfair competition in French law.  In this manner, their judgments confirm
the validity and broad relevance of the functionality principle as well as the
doggedness of Kirkbi in its efforts to retain its market share by any means.  53                           
In the English case, INTERLEGO AG’s Trade Mark Applications,
[1998] R.P.C. 69 (Ch. Div.), INTERLEGO appealed the Registrar of Trade
Marks’s refusal to register the LEGO indicia as marks under British trade-mark
law to the High Court.  Neuberger J. dismissed the appeal on this issue.
In his opinion, the functional features of the brick could not be a
trade-mark.  Granting rights under trade-mark law would be tantamount to
perpetuating a monopoly on the product itself:  In all the circumstances, it seems to me that Mr. Pumfrey was right to
contend, that Interlego are not so much seeking to protect a mark on an item of
commerce, but are attempting to protect the item of commerce as such. In other
words, they are not so much seeking a permanent monopoly in their mark, but
more a permanent monopoly in their bricks.  This is, at least in general, contrary
to principle and objectionable in practice.  A trade mark is, after all, the
mark which enables the public to identify the source or origin of the article
so marked.  The function of the trade mark legislation is not to enable the
manufacturer of the article to have a monopoly in the article itself.  In the
present case there is no special reason to conclude that the general approach
should not apply.  On the contrary, the functional aspect of the knobs and
tubes, and the extent of the monopoly in the field of toy building bricks when
Interlego might establish if their appeal succeeded, are strong factors
supporting the registrar’s decision. [p. 110]    54                           
During the same period, the appellant had also engaged in a variety of
legal proceedings to ward off Ritvik’s entry into the French market.  It relied
on various grounds, but, in the end, it appears that its efforts foundered on
the same grounds as in Great Britain, namely that, in a free market,
trade-marks should not be used to prolong monopolies on technical
characteristics of products.  Competition between products using the same
technical processes or solutions, once patent rights are out of the way, is not
unfair competition.  It is simply the way the economy and the market are supposed
to work in modern liberal societies.  55                           
The French Cour de Cassation quashed an earlier judgment of lower courts
which found for Kirkbi, on the basis of a delict of “concurrence déloyale ou
parasitaire” (unfair competition or passing off), although it acknowledged
that the LEGO indicia could be registered as a trade-mark.  The matter was
referred by the Cour de Cassation to the Cour d’appel de Paris, sitting as a “cour
de renvoi” in accordance with the French law of civil procedure.  It
dismissed all the Kirkbi claims holding that Ritvik was entitled to use the
processes which had been formerly patented by its competitor:  [translation] But whereas
the simple fact of copying the product of the efforts of another does not as
such constitute wrongful competition, the principle being that a product of the
efforts of another to which no rights of intellectual property apply or to
which such rights have ceased to apply may be freely reproduced; whereas the
person who so reuses the product of the efforts of another necessarily makes
savings that cannot in themselves be considered wrongful without draining of
all substance the principle referred to above (which is itself closely linked
to the fundamental principle of freedom of competition) . . . .  (Paris, October 18, 2000, D. 2001.Jur.850 (note J.
Passa), at p. 851)   (4)     The Applicability of
the Doctrine of Functionality to Unregistered Trade-Marks   56                           
Kirkbi does not challenge the application of the functionality doctrine
to registered marks in this Court.  It raises a different argument. It submits
that the doctrine does not apply to unregistered marks.  In its view, such a
mark does not grant its holder monopoly rights, but solely the right to be
protected against confusion as to the source of the product.  Moreover, it
argues that legislative changes which occurred at the adoption of the present Trade-marks
Act  changed the previous law and limited the application of the
functionality principle to registered trade-marks.  57                           
The first prong of the appellant’s argument concerns the nature of the
rights granted by an unregistered trade-mark. In substance, the appellant
advances the submission that unregistered trade-marks do not create exclusive
property rights, but give rise to a right to be protected against confusion in
the market.  The appellant says that this right could be enforced against
competitors causing confusion in the market place under s. 7 (b) of the Trade-marks
Act  and by the tort of passing off.  58                           
As Sexton J.A. found for the majority in the Court of Appeal, this
argument has no basis in law.  Registration does not change the nature of the
mark; it grants more effective rights against third parties.  Nevertheless,
registered or not, marks share common legal attributes.  They grant exclusive
rights to the use of a distinctive designation or guise (Ciba-Geigy Canada
Ltd. v. Apotex Inc., [1992] 3 S.C.R. 120, at p. 134; Gill and Jolliffe, at
pp. 4-13 and 4-14).  Indeed, the Trade-marks Act , by allowing for the
assignment of unregistered trade-marks, recognizes the existence of goodwill
created by these marks as well as the property interests in them. Registration
just facilitates proof of title (Sexton J.A., at paras. 76, 77 and 81).  Sexton
J.A. rightly pointed out that the argument of Kirkbi appears to rest on a
misreading of a 19th century judgment of the House of Lords, Singer
Manufacturing Co. v. Loog (1882), 8 App. Cas. 15, aff’g (1880), 18 Ch.
D. 395 (C.A.).  This judgment stands only for the proposition that an unregistered
trade-mark could be mentioned by competitors in comparative advertising, not
that it failed to create exclusive rights to the name for the purpose of
distinguishing the products.  The functionality doctrine remains relevant, as
the legal nature of the marks remains the same.  59                           
The second part of the argument raised by the appellant, which is based
on changes to the statute, also fails. Kirkbi first asserts that The Unfair
Competition Act, 1932, S.C. 1932, c. 38, included a definition at s.
2 (d) which expressly mentioned functionality:  (d) “Distinguishing guise” means a mode of shaping, moulding,
wrapping or packing wares entering into trade or commerce which, by reason only
of the sensory impression thereby given and independently of any element of
utility or convenience it may have, is adapted to distinguish the wares so
treated from other similar wares and is used by some person in association with
his wares in such a way as to indicate to dealers in and/or users of similar
wares that the wares so treated have been manufactured or sold by him;   Kirkbi then
submits that the present definition of a distinguishing guise no longer
includes any reference to functionality:  “distinguishing guise” means  (a) a shaping of wares or their containers, or  (b) a mode of wrapping or packaging wares  the appearance of which is used by a person for the purpose of
distinguishing or so as to distinguish wares or services manufactured, sold,
leased, hired or performed by him from those manufactured, sold, leased, hired
or performed by others;   Kirkbi argues
that the present law limits the application of the doctrine to registered marks
only, under s. 13(2). 60                           
This interpretation of the legislative changes is clearly wrong.  The
changes in the drafting of the statute did not signal any intention to remove a
doctrine of long standing, with the strange result that unregistered marks
might have been granted broader protection than marks registered under the Trade-marks
Act .  The purpose of s. 13(2)  was rather to make sure that the
public or competitors might keep on using utilitarian features of an otherwise
distinguishing guise, as Sexton J.A. found:  Indeed, in my view, subsection 13(2) reinforces the
concept that the doctrine of functionality invalidates a mark which is
primarily functional. It makes clear that the public is not constrained from
using any utilitarian features of a distinguishing guise. It follows that if a
distinguishing guise is wholly or primarily functional, then the public is not
constrained from using the distinguishing guise in its entirety. Thus a
distinguishing guise which is primarily functional provides no rights to
exclusive use and hence no trade-mark protection. In other words the fact that
the distinguishing guise is primarily functional means that it cannot be a trade-mark.
The appellants have simply misconstrued subsection 13(2). [para. 59]   61                           
In the end, the appellant seems to complain about the existence of
competition based on a product, which is now in the public domain.  As “LEGO”
and LEGO-style building blocks have come close to merging in the eyes of the
public, it is not satisfied with distinctive packaging or names in the
marketing operations of Ritvik.  It seems that, in order to satisfy the
appellant, the respondent would have to actively disclaim that it manufactures
and sells LEGO bricks and that its wares are LEGO toys.  The fact is, though,
that the monopoly on the bricks is over, and MEGA BLOKS and LEGO bricks may be
interchangeable in the bins of the playrooms of the nation — dragons, castles
and knights may be designed with them, without any distinction.  The marketing
operations of Ritvik are legitimate and may not be challenged under s. 7 (b). 
This is enough to dispose of the claim of the appellant, which had grounded its
claim of passing off on the existence of a trade-mark.  Nevertheless, given the
discussion in the courts below, some comments on the common law action for
passing off will be useful.  (5) The Doctrine of Passing off in Canadian Law  62                           
Remedies under the Trade-marks Act  rely extensively on the
historical development of the tort of passing off. In a broad sense, some of
the remedies under s. 7 , for example s. 7 (c), explicitly target “passing
off”.  The legal action initiated by the appellant often called upon the
elements of the tort of passing off, although it was based on s. 7(b) of
the Act.  In those circumstances, much of the discussion in the courts below
and even before our Court turned at times on the tort of passing off and the
conditions to establish liability on that basis.  For this reason, I will
briefly review the components of this tort, as it has now developed in Canadian
law.  63                           
This tort has a long history.  At a very early point in its development,
the common law became concerned with the honesty and fairness of competition. 
For that reason, it sought to ensure that buyers knew what they were purchasing
and from whom.  It also sought to protect the interest of traders in their
names and reputation. As far back as the 17th century, the courts started to
intervene.  Actions based at first on some form of deceit were allowed (see W.
R. Cornish and D. Llewelyn, Intellectual Property: Patents, Copyright, Trade
Marks and Allied Rights (5th ed. 2003), at pp. 573-76; see also R. S.
Jolliffe, “The Common Law Doctrine of Passing Off”, in G. F.
Henderson, ed., Trade-Marks Law of Canada (1993), 197, at
pp. 199-201).  The modern doctrine of passing off was built on these
foundations and became a part of Canadian law. Its principles now inform both
statute law and common law.  64                           
As can be seen in the decisions of the courts below, aspects of the
doctrine appear to give rise to controversy.  Disagreements arise in the case
law about the components of the tort.  Are there three, four or five?  How
should they be classified?  A short review of the jurisprudence focusing on the
decisions of our Court will hopefully shed a little more light on the contents
of the doctrine, in respect of issues relevant to the present appeal.  65                           
In recent times, the House of Lords applied two different, but related,
classifications in order to determine the conditions of liability under the
passing-off doctrine.  In Erven Warnink B.V. v. J. Townend & Sons (Hull)
Ltd., [1979] A.C. 731, at p. 742, Lord Diplock identified five
elements which were necessary to create a valid cause of action: (1) a
misrepresentation, (2) made by a trader in the course of trade, (3) to his
customers or to ultimate consumers of his product (4) which may, in a
reasonably foreseeable way, injure the business or goodwill of a competitor and
(5) which causes actual damage.  A few years later, Lord Oliver reduced the
classification to three components:  goodwill, deception and damage (Reckitt
& Colman Products Ltd. v. Borden Inc., [1990] 1 All E.R. 873, at p.
880; see also Bently and Sherman, at pp. 707-9).   The three necessary components of a passing-off
action are thus: the existence of goodwill, deception of the public due to a
misrepresentation and actual or potential damage to the plaintiff. [p. 132]   67                           
The first component is goodwill or reputation.  The claimant must
establish goodwill in respect of the distinctiveness of the product (Ciba-Geigy,
at pp. 132-33; Oxford Pendaflex Canada Ltd. v. Korr Marketing Ltd.,
[1982] 1 S.C.R. 494, at pp. 504 and 507, per Estey J.).  Evidence of
goodwill solely attached to the techniques and processes which create the
product will not do.  The doctrine of passing off did not develop to protect
monopolies in respect of products but of guises, get-ups, names and symbols
which identify the distinctiveness of a source.  68                           
The second component is misrepresentation creating confusion in the
public.  Misrepresentation may be wilful and may thus mean the same thing as
deceit. But now the doctrine of passing off also covers negligent or careless
misrepresentation by the trader (Ciba-Geigy, at p. 133; Consumers
Distributing Co. v. Seiko Time Canada Ltd., [1984] 1 S.C.R. 583, at
p. 601, per Estey J.).  In this respect, the trial judge’s
interpretation of this component was too narrow and not consistent with the
jurisprudence of our Court or the modern developments of the law of passing
off.  I will not comment on the third requirement, the proof of damages, which
was not discussed in the present case.  69                           
Under the modern law of passing off, a passing-off action by the
appellant was bound to fail.  It would not have been able to meet the first condition
of the action, namely that there be goodwill in respect of the distinctiveness
of the product.  The alleged distinctiveness of the product consisted precisely
of the process and techniques which were now common to the trade.  Again,
Kirkbi could not overcome another form of the functionality problem.  Granting
such a claim in these circumstances would amount to recreating a monopoly
contrary to basic policies of the laws and legal principles which inform the
various forms of intellectual property in our legal system. The appellant is no
longer entitled to protection against competition in respect of its product. 
It must now face the rigours of a free market and its process of creative
destruction.  V.  Conclusion 70                           
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal with costs.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellants:  Bereskin & Parr,
Toronto.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Dimock Stratton, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Canada:  Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the Attorney General of
Quebec:  Department of Justice, Québec.  