Swinamer v. Nova Scotia
(Attorney General), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 445  Patrick Owen Swinamer                                                                    Appellant  v.  The Attorney General of Nova Scotia representing Her Majesty The Queen in right of the province of Nova Scotia                                                 Respondent  and  The Attorney General of Canada                                                     Intervener  Indexed as:  Swinamer v.
Nova Scotia (Attorney General)  File No.:  22915.  1993:  November 8;
1994:  March  17.  Present:  La Forest,
Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the nova scotia supreme
court, appeal division                       At trial, the
Department was found liable. The trial judge concluded that it was negligent in
the manner in which it conducted the survey:  the Department should have
consulted experts, adequately trained the foreman so that he might recognize a
tree suffering from a severe fungus infection and taken the appropriate steps
to remove the tree.  The Court of Appeal allowed the province's appeal and
dismissed the claim.                     Held:  The appeal should be
dismissed.                     Per Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci and
Major JJ.:  The province owes a duty of care to those using its highways. 
That duty of care ordinarily extends to reasonable maintenance and would
include the duty to take reasonable steps to prevent accidents caused by trees
that are hazardous.  The appellant, as a user of the highway, was in sufficient
proximity to the Department of Transportation to come within the scope of that
duty of care.  When the tree which constitutes a danger to the users of the
highway is situated on land adjoining the highway, the Department has the
authority under s. 4 of the Public Highways Act, or even
ss. 70(f) and 71 of the Expropriation Act, to enter on that land to
remedy the dangerous situation.                     Section 5 of
the Public Highways Act, which provides that "nothing in this Act
compels or obliges the Minister to construct or maintain any highway or to
expend money on any highway", does not constitute a statutory exemption
from the duty of care, so as to exempt the Department from liability arising
from negligent conduct in highway maintenance.  Although s. 5 does not
impose a specific legal duty to exercise the statutory power conferred on the
Department to build highways, once it is exercised, a duty is created to
maintain those highways with due care.  As well, s. 5(1)(a) of the Proceedings
against the Crown Act does not exempt the Department from liability for
negligently failing to maintain its highways.                      No negligence can
be found on the part of the Department in the operational aspect of carrying
out the survey.  In light of the perceived risks, budgetary constraints and the
need to complete the survey expeditiously in order to present a request for
funds, there was no need to retain the services of an expert or to require the
foreman to undergo special training.  The tree that fell appeared to be in good
health and was not an apparent source of danger.                     Per La Forest and
McLachlin JJ.:  Cory J.'s reasons were agreed with, subject to the
following comments.  Whether a private law duty may be posited for public
authorities depends on their statutory powers.  When, as here, the governing
legislation confers powers but leaves the scale on which they are to be
exercised to the discretion of the public authority, there is no private law
duty on the public authority until it makes a policy decision to do something. 
Only then does a duty arise at the operational level to use due care in
carrying out the policy.  A policy decision is not an exception to a general
duty, but a precondition to the finding of a duty at the operational level.                     Per Sopinka J.: The Public Highways
Act does not create a duty to maintain highways but confers only a power to
maintain.  The bona fide exercise of that statutory discretion cannot
result in liability on the basis of a private law duty of care.  Here, the
conduct complained of was "a preliminary step" preparatory to the
exercise of that discretion and therefore cannot be the basis of liability.   Cases Cited  By Cory J.                     Applied:  Just v. British Columbia,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; referred to:  Brown v. British Columbia
(Minister of Transportation and Highways), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 420; Anns v.
Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Kamloops (City of) v.
Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Barron v. City of Natchez, 90 So.2d 673
(1956); Inabinett v. State Highway Department, 12 S.E.2d 848 (1941); Brown
v. State, 58 N.Y.S.2d 691 (1945).  By McLachlin J.                     Referred to:  Anns v. Merton London Borough
Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2
S.C.R. 2.  By Sopinka J.                     Referred to: Brown v. British Columbia
(Minister of Transportation and Highways), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 420.    Statutes and Regulations Cited  Crown
Proceeding Act,
R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 86, s. 2(c).  Expropriation
Act, R.S.N.S. 1989,
c. 156, ss. 70(f), 71.  Proceedings
against the Crown Act,
R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 360, s. 5(1)(a).  Public
Highways Act,
R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 371, ss. 4, 5.  Authors Cited  Fleming, John G.  The Law of Torts,
8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.                     APPEAL from a
judgment of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court, Appeal Division (1992), 108 N.S.R.
(2d) 254, 294 A.P.R. 254, 10 C.C.L.T. (2d) 207, 35 M.V.R. (2d) 191, allowing
respondent's appeal from a judgment of Grant J. (1991), 101 N.S.R. (2d)
333, 275 A.P.R. 333, 6 C.C.L.T. (2d) 270, which allowed appellant's action
against the province for negligence.  Appeal dismissed.                     Derrick J.
Kimball, Nash T.
Brogan and Heidi Foshay Kimball, for the appellant.                     Jonathan Davies, for the respondent.                     Ivan G.
Whitehall, Q.C.,
and Donald J. Rennie, for the intervener.                     The reasons of La
Forest and McLachlin JJ. were delivered by                     McLachlin
J. -- I have read the
reasons of my colleague Cory J. and agree with his conclusions.  I find it
necessary, however, to add a few words on the matter of the source of the duty
of care which lies on public authorities.                     Cory J., as I read
his reasons, finds a general duty of care on a province to maintain its
highways.  This duty is avoided only by establishing that the case falls within
a recognized exception to the general duty.  As he puts it,  "[t]he duty
of care should apply to a public authority unless there is a valid basis for
its exclusion" (p. 456).  He sees policy decisions as a ground of
exclusion.  He goes on to assert that "[a]s a general rule, the
traditional tort law duty of care will apply to a government agency in the same
way that it will apply to an individual" (p. 456).                     This approach may
be seen as a departure from the long-standing view that public authorities owe
no private duty to individuals capable of founding a civil action, unless such
a duty can be found in the terms of the authority's enabling statute.  As Lord
Wilberforce put it in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C.
728, at p. 754, to impose a general private law duty on such bodies  . .
. would be to neglect an essential factor which is that the local authority is
a public body, discharging functions under statute: its powers and duties are
definable in terms of public not private law.  The problem which this type of
action creates, is to define the circumstances in which the law should impose,
over and above, or perhaps alongside, these public law powers and duties, a
duty in private law towards individuals such that they may sue for damages in a
civil court.                     The reasoning in Anns
was adopted by this Court in City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2
S.C.R. 2, at p. 11, where Wilson J. emphasized that whether a private law duty
may be posited for public authorities depends on their statutory powers:  These
questions, Lord Wilberforce said, must be answered by an examination of the
governing legislation.                     Lord
Wilberforce categorized the various types of legislation as follows:                     (1)statutes
conferring powers to interfere with the rights of individuals in which case an
action in respect of damage caused by the exercise of such powers will
generally not lie except in the case where the local authority has done what
the legislature authorized but has done it negligently;                     (2)statutes
conferring powers but leaving the scale on which they are to be exercised to
the discretion of the local authority.  Here there will be an option to the
local authority whether or not to do the thing authorized but, if it elects to
do it and does it negligently, then the policy decision having been made, there
is a duty at the operational level to use due care in giving effect to it.                     This appeal falls
into the second category.  There is no private law duty on the public authority
until it makes a policy decision to do something.  Then, and only then, does a
duty arise at the operational level to use due care in carrying out the
policy.  On this view, a policy decision is not an exception to a general duty,
but a precondition to the finding of a duty at the operational level.                     Subject to these
comments, I would dismiss the appeal for the reasons given by Cory J.                     The following are
the reasons delivered by                     Sopinka
J. -- I agree with the
conclusion reached by my colleague Cory J. but, as in the case of Brown v.
British Columbia (Minister of Transportation and Highways), [1994] 1 S.C.R.
420, I must respectfully disagree that the legislation (Public Highways Act,
R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 371) creates a duty to maintain highways.  The
legislation confers a power to maintain.  The bona fide exercise of this
statutory discretion cannot result in liability on the basis of a private law
duty of care.  The conduct complained of was, as my colleague states, "a
preliminary step" preparatory to the exercise of that discretion and
cannot be the basis of liability.                     I would dispose of
the appeal as proposed by Cory J.                     The judgment of
Gonthier, Cory, Iacobucci and Major JJ. was delivered by                     Cory
J. -- This appeal raises
many of the same issues considered in Brown v. British Columbia (Minister of
Transportation and Highways), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 420, which was heard at the
same time.  Like that case, it involves a consideration of the liability of
governmental agencies in tort.  I believe this case can also be resolved by the
application of the principles set out in Just v. British Columbia,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228.  I. Factual
Background                     At about 3:00 on
Saturday afternoon November 26, 1983, the appellant, who was the plaintiff
in this case, was driving his truck on Falmouth Back Road, a public highway in
Nova Scotia.  A large elm tree fell across the truck crushing
Mr. Swinamer.  He suffered such terrible injuries that he will always
remain a paraplegic.                     The tree was an
elm, about 110 years old, 2.5 feet in diameter and some 60 to 70 feet tall.  It
was located on the farm of Mr. and Mrs. Redden, about three feet from the
edge of the highway right-of-way.  The branches of the tree overhung the
highway and, undoubtedly, its roots extended onto the right-of-way.                     The previous summer
the tree was in full foliage and appeared to be in good health.  The sudden and
unexpected collapse of the tree was caused by a severe fungus infection known
as Artists Conk.  A lay person looking at the tree could not determine if it
suffered from this disease.  However, if a wound was found in the tree, usually
close to the ground and often covered by leaves or undergrowth, an expert might
suspect its presence.  Even then, in order to determine the existence of the
disease, the tree would have to be drilled and the drill core tested.                     The Department of
Transportation in the province of Nova Scotia (now the Department of
Transportation and Communications) is divided into regions.  In each, the
divisional engineer assisted by a superintendent is responsible for maintaining
the highways within the boundaries of the region.                     As part of the
ordinary maintenance activities of the Department, fallen trees and branches
were removed usually after storms.  The Department, as well, removed trees
which had been identified as hazards either by the members of the public or
Department personnel.  These were invariably obviously dead trees, with
branches that could fall on the highway.                     In 1983 the
divisional engineer (Robert Colburn) received complaints about dead trees along
the sides of the roads in his county.  He very properly believed that they
could pose a hazard to the travelling public.  At the time he did not have
funds in his maintenance budget to remove them.  He assigned a foreman, Gerald
Allen, and a survey technician to survey the roads in the district to assess
the extent of the problem.  He instructed them to count the trees that were
dead and an obvious hazard to the travelling public.                     The foreman was not
a trained forester but did have some knowledge of forests and could identify a
dead tree.  Together with the survey technician he drove more than 800
kilometres over the roads of the region.  They counted over 200 trees which
were dead, marked them with survey stakes, plotted their locations in a log
book and submitted their report to the divisional engineer.  Among the trees
that they marked was one on the Redden property located a few hundred feet from
the tree which caused the accident.                     On the basis of
this survey the divisional engineer sent, in October 1983, a report to the
regional manager identifying the trees which required removal in the interest
of public safety and requested funding for this.  In January or February of
1984 funding was approved for the removal of only 66 of the trees.  Further
funding was requested and approved in subsequent years.  II.  Courts Below  Trial Court                     The trial judge
found the Department liable:  (1991), 101 N.S.R. (2d) 333, 275 A.P.R. 333, 6
C.C.L.T. (2d) 270.  He concluded that the Department was negligent in the
manner in which it conducted the inspection.  In his view, it should have
consulted experts, adequately trained the foreman so that he might recognize a
tree suffering from Artists Conk fungus and taken the appropriate steps to
remove the tree.  Court of Appeal                     The Court of Appeal
allowed the appeal and dismissed the claim:  (1992), 108 N.S.R. (2d) 254, 294
A.P.R. 254, 10 C.C.L.T. (2d) 207, 35 M.V.R. (2d) 191.  The court summarized its
reasons in these words (at p. 265 N.S.R.):  (1)  there
is no statutory duty requiring the Minister to maintain provincial highways;  (2)  there
is no liability imposed on an abutting owner for a nuisance on an adjoining
property;  (3)  there
is no statutory power to enter onto lands abutting the highway to inspect or
remove trees;  (4)  any
duty at common law to repair highways does not extend to adjoining lands;  (5)  even
assuming a duty to remove dangerous trees from lands abutting a highway, there
was no evidence that the tree in question constituted a danger prior to the
accident;  (6)  the
finding by the trial judge that there was a policy to inspect and remove
diseased trees from adjoining lands which was the key to his decision, was not
supported by the evidence.                     As
the evidence did not support such a conclusion with respect the decision cannot
stand.  III.  Analysis                     The applicable
parts of the reasons in Just are set out in the Brown decision
but for ease of reference are repeated here:  Over
the passage of time the increased government activities gave rise to incidents
that would have led to tortious liability if they had occurred between private
citizens.  The early governmental immunity from tortious liability became
intolerable.  This led to the enactment of legislation which in general imposed
liability on the Crown for its acts as though it were a person.  However, the
Crown is not a person and must be free to govern and make true policy decisions
without becoming subject to tort liability as a result of those decisions.  On
the other hand, complete Crown immunity should not be restored by having every
government decision designated as one of "policy".  Thus the dilemma
giving rise to the continuing judicial struggle to differentiate between
"policy" and "operation".  Particularly difficult decisions
will arise in situations where governmental inspections may be expected.                     The
dividing line between "policy" and "operation" is difficult
to fix, yet it is essential that it be done.                                                                     .
. .                     The
need for distinguishing between a governmental policy decision and its
operational implementation is thus clear.  True policy decisions should be
exempt from tortious claims so that governments are not restricted in making
decisions based upon social, political or economic factors.  However, the
implementation of those decisions may well be subject to claims in tort.  What
guidelines are there to assist courts in differentiating between policy and
operation?                     Mason J.,
speaking for himself and one other member of the Australian High Court in Sutherland
Shire Council v. Heyman (1985), 60 A.L.R. 1, set out what I find to be
most helpful guidelines.  He wrote:   The
distinction between policy and operational factors is not easy to formulate,
but the dividing line between them will be observed if we recognize that a
public authority is under no duty of care in relation to decisions which
involve or are dictated by financial, economic, social or political factors or
constraints.  Thus budgetary allocations and the constraints which they
entail in terms of allocation of resources cannot be made the subject of a duty
of care.  But it may be otherwise when the courts are called upon to apply a
standard of care to action or inaction that is merely the product of
administrative direction, expert or professional opinion, technical standards
or general standards of reasonableness.  (Emphasis added.)                     The
duty of care should apply to a public authority unless there is a valid basis
for its exclusion.  A true policy decision undertaken by a government agency
constitutes such a valid basis for exclusion.  What constitutes a policy
decision may vary infinitely and may be made at different levels although
usually at high level.                                                                     .
. .                     It
may be convenient at this stage to summarize what I consider to be the
principles applicable and the manner of proceeding in cases of this kind.  As a
general rule, the traditional tort law duty of care will apply to a government
agency in the same way that it will apply to an individual.  In determining
whether a duty of care exists the first question to be resolved is whether the
parties are in a relationship of sufficient proximity to warrant the imposition
of such a duty.  In the case of a government agency, exemption from this
imposition of duty may occur as a result of an explicit statutory exemption. 
Alternatively, the exemption may arise as a result of the nature of the
decision made by the government agency.  That is, a government agency will be
exempt from the imposition of a duty of care in situations which arise from its
pure policy decisions.                     In
determining what constitutes such a policy decision, it should be borne in mind
that such decisions are generally made by persons of a high level of authority
in the agency, but may also properly be made by persons of a lower level of
authority.  The characterization of such a decision rests on the nature of the
decision and not on the identity of the actors.  As a general rule, decisions
concerning budgetary allotments for departments or government agencies will be
classified as policy decisions.  Further, it must be recalled that a policy
decision is open to challenge on the basis that it is not made in the bona
fide exercise of discretion.  If after due consideration it is found that a
duty of care is owed by the government agency and no exemption by way of
statute or policy decision-making is found to exist, a traditional torts
analysis ensues and the issue of standard of care required of the government
agency must next be considered.  (Just,
supra, at pp. 1239-45.)                     Let us see how the
principles set out in Just should be applied to the facts of this case. 
We must first determine if there was a prima facie duty of care resting
upon the Department of Transportation to protect travellers from injury caused
by hazardous trees.  A.  Duty of Care                     There can be no
doubt that a duty is owed by a province to those who use its highways.  It was
put in this way in Just (at p. 1236):  In
light of that invitation to use both the facilities and the highway leading to
them, it would appear that apart from some specific exemption, arising from a
statutory provision or established common law principle, a duty of care was
owed by the province to those that use its highways.  That duty of care would
extend ordinarily to reasonable maintenance of those roads.  The appellant as a
user of the highway was certainly in sufficient proximity to the respondent to
come within the purview of that duty of care.  In this case it can be said that
it would be eminently reasonable for the appellant as a user of the highway to
expect that it would be reasonably maintained.  For the Department of Highways
it would be a readily foreseeable risk that harm might befall users of a
highway if it were not reasonably maintained. . . .                     Even
with the duty of care established, it is necessary to explore two aspects in
order to determine whether liability may be imposed upon the respondent. 
First, the applicable legislation must be reviewed to see if it imposes any
obligation upon the respondent to maintain its highways or, alternatively, if
it provides an exemption from liability for failure to so maintain them. 
Secondly, it must be determined whether the province is exempted from liability
on the grounds that the system of inspections, including their quantity and
quality, constituted a "policy" decision of a government agency and
was thus exempt from liability.                     Sections 4 and 5 of
the Public Highways Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 371, indicate that there
is a duty to maintain.  They provide as follows:                     4  The Minister has the
supervision, management and control of the highways and of all matters relating
thereto.                     5  The Minister may construct
or maintain any highway, or may on behalf of Her Majesty in right of the
Province enter into contracts or agreements for such construction or
maintenance, but nothing in this Act compels or obliges the Minister to
construct or maintain any highway or to expend money on any highway.  (Formerly
R.S.N.S. 1967, c. 248, ss. 3 and 4.)  That duty of care would ordinarily
extend to the reasonable maintenance of those roads.  The appellant, as a user
of the highway, was in sufficient proximity to the Department to come within
the scope of that duty of care.  It would be reasonable for him to expect that
the road would be reasonably maintained.  For the Department, it would be a
readily foreseeable risk that harm might befall users of the highway if it were
not reasonably maintained.                     In Just it
was found that maintenance extended to the reasonable prevention of injury to
travellers from dangerously situated rocks which could fall on the highway. 
Similarly, there is a duty owed to users of the highway to take reasonable
steps to prevent accidents which can ensue from trees that constitute a hazard
falling on the highway.  There can be no reasonable distinction drawn between
dangerously situated rocks which fall on a highway and obviously dead or
hazardous trees which fall on the highway.  There was then a duty of care
resting upon the Department of Transportation to protect travellers from injury
caused by trees that were hazardous.  It must next be determined whether there
is a statutory exemption or a policy decision which would relieve the
respondent from the imposition of this duty.  B.  Exemptions
or Restrictions on the Department's Liability                     (1)  Statutory
Exemptions                     The respondent,
like the Court of Appeal, relies on the same s. 5 of the Public
Highways Act as the basis for exempting the Department from liability for
maintenance, more specifically on the following words:  . .
. but nothing in this Act compels or obliges the Minister to construct or
maintain any highway or to expend money on any highway.                     It is true that
there is no similar provision in the British Columbia highways legislation
considered in Just.  However, in my view, the wording of the section is
not explicit enough to constitute a statutory exemption from the duty of care,
so as to exempt the respondent from liability in tort.  I would agree that the
presence of a discretion such as that provided in s. 5 might in some
circumstances support an argument that there is no statutory duty to maintain. 
However in my view, the absence of a provision providing a specific statutory
obligation to maintain is not sufficient to exempt the Crown from the general
common law duty of care owed to users of the highway.  The duty to maintain
arises out of the relationship that exists between the Department of
Transportation and the users of the highways.  If the Department is to be
exempted from liability for negligent conduct in the course of its duty to
maintain the highway, the wording of the statutory exemption should be clear
and precise.  Section 5 does not, in my view, exempt the Department of
Transportation from liability arising from negligent conduct in highway
maintenance.                     The remarks to be
found in the 8th edition of J. G. Fleming, The Law of Torts (1992), are
apposite.  The author observes at p. 155 that prior to Anns v. Merton
London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728 (H.L.), public authorities
"were excused because their statutory power did not create a legal duty
to come to the plaintiff's assistance" (emphasis in original).  This
concept was successfully challenged in Anns for although "the
defendant was under no public duty, . . . the statutory power conferred on it
for the health and safety of the public engendered a private duty, once having
decided to exercise that power, to carry it out with due care".  The
reasoning in the Anns decision has been approved and applied by the
Court.  See, for example, City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R.
2.  It follows that although the Public Highways Act does not impose a
specific legal duty to exercise the statutory power conferred on the province
to build highways, once it is exercised, a duty is created to maintain those
highways with due care when they are constructed.                     Next it was argued
that the differences in the legislation in Nova Scotia and
British Columbia which permit actions against the Crown were such that
Crown liability could not be found in this case.  It was stressed that
s. 5(1)(a) of the Proceedings against the Crown Act,
R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 360 (formerly R.S.N.S. 1967, c. 239,
s. 4(1)(a)), provides that the province is only liable for a tort
committed by its officers or agents, if that tortious act of the servant or
agent would, in itself, have given rise to a cause of action.  This, it was
said, should be contrasted with the Crown Proceeding Act of
British Columbia, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 86, s. 2(c), which provides
that the Crown is subject to all those liabilities to which it would be liable
if it were a person.  It was observed that it is only the legislation of Quebec
and British Columbia which provides that the Crown is liable to the same extent
as a person of full age and capacity.                     I cannot accept
this argument.  Obviously the Crown can only be liable as a result of the
tortious acts committed by its servants or agents since it can only act through
its servants or agents.  Let us assume, for the purposes of resolving this
issue, that the actions complained of by the appellant were indeed negligent. 
That is to say the failure of the Crown to rely on trained personnel to inspect
the trees and the failure of those persons or this personnel to identify the
tree in question as a hazard constituted negligence.  Yet those very actions or
failure to act were those of the Crown's servants undertaken in the course of
the performance of their work.  If those were indeed acts of negligence then
the Crown would be liable.  The arguments of the Crown are regressive and to
accept them would severely restrict the ability of injured persons to claim
against the Crown.  I would add that the United Kingdom's Crown Proceedings
Act, 1947 which was before the court in Anns, supra, is
similar to the Nova Scotia statute.                     If the Crown wishes
to exempt itself from tortious liability in the construction and maintenance of
highways it is a simple matter to legislate to that effect, and to leave the
propriety of that legislative action for the voters' consideration.  In the
absence of a clear statutory exemption, the common law duty to maintain the
highways must prevail.  (2)The
Lack of Statutory Power to Enter onto Lands Abutting the Highway to Inspect or
to Remove Trees                     The respondent
relies on the conclusion of the Court of Appeal that the Department had no
authority to enter on lands adjoining the highway to remedy a dangerous
situation.  Once again, I cannot accept this argument.  The presence, adjacent
to the highway, of an obvious danger to the users of that highway would justify
the respondent entering on the property to remedy the situation.                     It is rather
bizarre to think that the Department of Transportation could leave a very old,
very large dead tree leaning precariously over the highway without taking steps
to remedy the situation, simply because it was located just outside the highway
right-of-way.  The tree would constitute a continuing danger to all that use
the highway.  Its removal would be essential for the safety of all who
travelled the road.                     Section 4 of the Public
Highways Act provides that "[t]he Minister has the supervision,
management and control of the highways and of all matters relating thereto"
(emphasis added).  A large dead tree located three feet beyond the highway
right-of-way leaning menacingly over the highway must surely constitute a
"matter relating" to the highway.  That would, in itself, provide an
adequate statutory basis to enable the Department to enter on the adjacent land
to remedy the dangerous situation.  As well, it may be that the provisions of
the Expropriation Act, R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 156 (formerly S.N.S. 1973,
c. 7), particularly s. 70(f) and s. 71, would provide the
requisite statutory authority needed to remedy the dangerous situation.                      It
is settled that the tree which caused the injury was growing just off the
highway, on the land of Miss Gonzales, within two inches of the line of
her land.  The question arose and was discussed whether the highway agents or
employees could enter the land of Miss Gonzales and remove the tree.  We
think it is held by most of the courts that such action is not a trespass,
but falls within the scope of the duty of the Highway Department to keep the
road safe for those who are lawfully upon it.                                                                     .
. .                     It
is not to be understood that the highway officials may at their own free will
enter upon the lands of others and cut trees, even for use on the highway, but
we do say that if they know, or in the exercise of ordinary care in their duty
of keeping the highway safe for public use should know, that a tree is
dangerous to the safety of the public in its use of the highway, it is its
duty to enter upon the land and remove the danger.  [Emphasis added.]                     McGehee C.J. held
that a municipality is obliged to maintain its highways in a reasonably safe
condition for travel, not only with regard to obstructions and defects in the
travelled portion of a highway, but also with regard to the conditions
adjacent to and above the highway which might reasonably be anticipated to
result in injury and damage to travellers.                     Similarly, Judge
Greenberg of the New York Court of Claims, in the case of Brown v. State,
58 N.Y.S.2d 691 (1945), reached the same conclusion as to the duty resting on
the state to maintain its highways in a safe condition for travel.  I am in
agreement with the reasoning in both these cases.                     It seems eminently
reasonable to conclude that there is a power to remove trees that are an
obvious danger to users of the highway.  This is an integral part of the duty
to maintain the highways.  (3)Was the Decision of the Department of
Transportation Pertaining to Dead Trees One of Policy or Were its Actions in
Undertaking the Survey Operational in Nature?                     The trial judge, in
his reasons, reviewed the Department's decision to conduct a survey with the
object of ascertaining whether it constituted a policy decision which would
exempt the respondent from the duty to remove the tree which caused the
accident.  This is not the correct approach.  The enquiry should not be aimed
at determining whether a policy decision has been made which specifically
exempts a governmental authority from tort liability.  Rather, it should be
directed at determining what decisions constituted policy and were thus exempt
from tort liability and what decisions or actions were operational and thus
could, if negligent, attract liability.                     In this case, the
survey was undertaken in order to identify dead trees and those trees which
represented obvious dangers to travellers on the highway.  There was no general
policy in effect to inspect trees.  This is what distinguishes this case from Just,
where there was a general policy to inspect potentially dangerous rocks and to
take steps to eliminate them.  Here the policy was limited.  Its purpose was to
identify obviously dead and dangerous trees in order to apply for funds to
remove them.  This flows from the uncontradicted evidence of the divisional
engineer, the superintendent and the surveyor.  The removal of trees involved
the expenditure of funds which would have to be derived from funds allocated
for other highway maintenance projects.  The survey is an example of a
preliminary step in what will eventually become a policy decision involving the
expenditure and allocation of funds.                     That this was in
fact a policy decision can be seen from the trial judge's reasons.  He
considered factors such as past practice, budget, cost, the possibility of
closing the road, the nature of the inspection team and concluded that there
was "the will, the plan and the money to remove trees which were an
immediate hazard" (p. 346 N.S.R.).  The trial judge expressed the
view that money could be found or that the needed inspection could be made at
little cost.  These are all questions of expenditure and allocation of funds
and they provide clear indications that this was a policy decision.  Moreover,
the fact that budgetary considerations are questions of policy is not changed
by the fact that the cost of the measures sought may be small.  The trial judge
was in effect substituting his policy decision for that of the Department of
Transportation.  This was inappropriate and constitutes an error in
law.                      The decision to
inspect and identify dead trees was taken as a preliminary step in the policy
making process.  There is no suggestion that this was not a bona fide
decision or that it was so irrational as to constitute an improper exercise of
governmental discretion.  Policy decisions of government must be immune from
the application of private law standards of tort liability.  It now must be
considered whether there were any acts of negligence committed in the course of
carrying out the policy decision.  C.Was
the Department Negligent in the Operational Aspect of Carrying Out the Policy
Decision?                     I cannot find any
negligence on the part of the Department of Transportation in carrying out the
survey.  The Regional Department in which the accident occurred was responsible
for the maintenance of some 800 kilometres of roads.  It acted with prudence
and foresight in conducting a survey of those trees that were dead or posed a
clear danger to highway travellers.  There is no suggestion that every elm tree
should have been suspect.  In the circumstances that presented themselves,
there was no need to retain the services of an expert or to require the survey
foreman to undergo special training.  Such might have been the counsel of
perfection, but measured against the perceived risks, budgetary constraints and
the need to complete the survey expeditiously in order to present a request for
funds, it was simply not required.                     Certainly there was
no perceived danger that would require the Department to undertake a close
inspection for small, often hidden wounds in the trees and, if discovered, to
drill those trees and test the drill cores.  The tree that fell was in full
foliage and gave every indication of good health during the summer before the
accident.  It was not an apparent source of concern.  The survey was conducted
quickly and identified over 200 dead trees that could constitute a danger. 
There was no negligence that could be attributed to the employees of the Department
in the manner or method of conducting the survey.  That is to say there was no
negligence demonstrated in the operational aspect of carrying out the policy
decision.                     In passing, I would
again observe that the common law duty of maintaining the highways would
require the Department to remove trees which constituted an apparent danger to
travellers of the road.  A dead tree or a tree leaning over the road at an
acute and threatening angle would constitute a danger.  That danger would be
just as demanding of attention from the Department as would a hole which was
deteriorating to the extent that it could lead a driver to lose control. 
Failure to fill the hole or remove the obviously dangerous tree could equally,
in the circumstances of a particular case, constitute negligence attributable
to the Department.  This is not the situation presented in this case.  Here, it
was a tree in apparent good health that collapsed due to the ravages of a
disease that could not be perceived in the course of a careful layman's
inspection.  IV.  Disposition                     I must respectfully
disagree with the first four conclusions of the Court of Appeal.  However, for
the reasons set out above, I am in agreement with its conclusion that the
action be dismissed.  The appeal to this Court must thus be dismissed.  Both
parties were correct on some issues and as a result there should be no order as
to costs.                     Appeal dismissed.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Kimball & Associates, Wolfville, Nova Scotia.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  The Department of Justice, Halifax.                     Solicitor for the
intervener:  John C. Tait, Ottawa.  