Hollis v. Dow Corning Corp.,
[1995] 4 S.C.R. 634  Dow Corning Corporation                                                                 Appellant  v.  Susan Hollis and John Robert
Birch                                                 Respondents  Indexed as:  Hollis v.
Dow Corning Corp.  File No.:  23776.  1995:  February 2; 1995:  December
21.   on appeal from the court of appeal
for british columbia                       Torts -- Causation -- Whether
subjective or objective test to patient's decision to undergo surgery knowing
risks -- Whether manufacturer entitled to escape liability on what doctor would
have done if properly warned.                       Dr. Birch received little
warning from the implant manufacturer as to the possibility of the implants'
rupturing.  Even as early as 1979, Dow was aware that implant ruptures could
cause adverse reactions in the body arising from loose gel.  While the 1985
warning referred to the dangers of "enlarged lymph nodes, scar formation,
inflammation" and the potential, after a rupture, for "distant
migration of the gel", the 1976 and 1979 warnings made no reference to any
such potential consequences.  Nor did these earlier warnings make reference to
rupture occurring from anything less than "abnormal squeezing or
trauma".                      Held (Sopinka and McLachlin JJ.
dissenting):  The appeal should be dismissed.                       The "learned
intermediary" rule applies where an intermediate inspection of the product
is anticipated because the product is highly technical in nature or where a
consumer is placing primary reliance on the judgment of a "learned
intermediary" and not the manufacturer.  In such cases, a warning to the
ultimate consumer may not be necessary and the manufacturer may satisfy its
duty to warn the ultimate consumer by warning the learned intermediary of the
risks inherent in the use of the product.  This rule generally applies either
where a product is highly technical in nature and is intended to be used only
under the supervision of experts, or where the nature of the product is such
that the consumer will not realistically receive a direct warning from the
manufacturer before using the product.  The rule, which is in essence an
application of the common law principle of intermediate examination and
intervening cause, is an exception to the general manufacturer's duty to warn
the consumer and operates to discharge the manufacturer's duty to the ultimate
consumer, who has a right to full and current information about any risks
inherent in the ordinary use of the product.  The rule presumes that the
intermediary is "learned", i.e., fully apprised of the risks
associated with the use of the product.  Accordingly, the manufacturer can only
be said to have discharged its duty to the consumer when the intermediary's
knowledge approximates that of the manufacturer.  To allow manufacturers to
claim the benefit of the rule where they have not fully warned the physician
would undermine the policy rationale for the duty to warn, which is to ensure
that the consumer is fully informed of all risks.  Since the manufacturer is in
the best position to know the risks attendant upon the use of its product and is
also in the best position to ensure that the product is safe for normal use,
the primary duty to give a clear, complete, and current warning must fall on
its shoulders.                      The earlier warnings given the
medical profession by the manufacturer implied that rupture would occur only in
extreme cases of violent impact.  The 1985 warning, however, made it clear that
a patient who received an implant would have to consider altering her lifestyle
to avoid rupture.  A more accurate warning could quite reasonably have affected
Ms. Hollis' choice of professional and her resulting exposure to unnecessary
risk.                     Dow knew or should have known
of the risks referred to in the 1985 warning when the surgery was performed in
1983.  Between 1976 and 1984, Dow received 78 field reports from doctors of
post-operative "unexplained" ruptures occurring in its implants.  It
had a duty to convey its findings concerning both the "unexplained"
rupture phenomenon and the possible harm caused by loose gel inside the body to
the medical community much sooner than it did.  Since implants are surgically
placed inside the human body, and given that any defects in these products will
obviously have a highly injurious effect on the user, the onus on Dow to be
forthcoming with information was extremely high throughout the relevant
period.  The duty to warn is a continuing one and manufacturers of potentially
hazardous products have an obligation to keep doctors abreast of developments
even if they do not consider those developments to be conclusive.                       While some ambiguity existed
as to Dr. Birch's warning practices in 1983, Dow cannot argue on this basis
that no direct causal link existed between its breach of duty and the injuries
suffered by the plaintiff.  It is true that had Dr. Birch been adequately
warned and not passed on the information to Ms. Hollis, Dow would have been
absolved of liability by virtue of the learned intermediary doctrine.  It does
not follow from this, however, that, for Dow to be liable, Ms. Hollis must now
establish that Dr. Birch would have informed her if he had known.  To require
her to do so would be to ask her to prove a hypothetical situation relating to
her doctor's conduct -- a situation only brought about by Dow's failure to perform
its duty.  While the legal and persuasive onus in a negligence case generally
falls on the plaintiff, the plaintiff is not required to prove a hypothetical
situation of this kind.                     The victim's power of proof is
seriously undermined if called upon to prove what a doctor would have done in a
hypothetical situation.  The governing principle in a case of this nature is
informed consent, namely, the right of the patient to be fully informed by the
manufacturer of all material risks associated with the use of a medical
product.  This right to informed consent was not respected in this case.  Dow's
failure to warn was a cause of her injury; whether Dr. Birch's actions in the
hypothetical situation posited by Dow might also have been a cause is not a
matter for Ms. Hollis to prove.  Ms. Hollis, who was in a position of great
informational inequality with respect to both the manufacturer and the doctor,
played no part in creating the set of causal conditions leading to her injury. 
Justice dictates that she should not be penalized for the fact that had the
manufacturer actually met its duty to warn, the doctor still might have been at
fault.                     A manufacturer should not be
able to escape liability for failing to give a warning it was under a duty to
give by simply presenting evidence tending to establish that even if the doctor
had been given the warning, he or she would not have passed it on to the
patient, let alone putting an onus on the plaintiff to do so.  Adopting such a
rule would, in some cases, run the risk of leaving the plaintiff with no
compensation for her injuries.  She would not be able to recover against a
doctor who had not been negligent with respect to the information that he or
she did have; yet she also would not be able to recover against a manufacturer
who, despite having failed in its duty to warn, could escape liability on the
basis that, had the doctor been appropriately warned, he or she still would not
have passed the information on to the plaintiff.  Our tort law should not be
held to contemplate such an anomalous result.                     Per Sopinka and McLachlin JJ. (dissenting): 
La Forest J.'s analysis of the principles relating to the duty to
warn, and in particular the way the learned intermediary principles apply, were
agreed with.                      To establish liability, the
plaintiff must show not only a breach of duty by the defendant, but also that
the breach in question was the cause of the plaintiff's injury.  Here, Ms.
Hollis must show that her doctor would have warned her of any dangers that had
been brought to his attention and that if warned she would have refused the
operation.  Absent this form of proof, it cannot be said with any degree of
certainty that the failure of Dow to warn physicians was the cause of the
injuries suffered.  The absence of cause cannot be finessed by sweeping it
under the apportionment rug.                     The cases referred to by La
Forest J. with respect to reversal or relaxation of the burden of proof with
respect to causation do not support treating causation as irrelevant.  In any
event the cases referred to do not support reversing the burden of proof in
this case or, if they did, the issue of causation would not be resolved.  There
was abundant evidence to raise the issue of causation which should be weighed
by the trial judge at a new trial.                     A new trial should be ordered
when disposing of an appeal on a legal basis that was not dealt with or
resolved at trial and where crucial findings of fact concerning that issue were
not made by the trial judge.  A court of appeal is extremely reluctant to
assume the role of the trial judge in making factual findings essential to
resolving an issue.  More importantly, there is considerable support for the
view that the party affected is entitled to a new trial virtually as of right.                     An appellate court may be in
as good a position as a trial judge to make a factual finding in the following
limited circumstances:  (i) the trial judge has made the necessary
findings albeit in respect of a different legal issue, or it can be safely assumed
from findings actually made that but for the error of law the necessary
findings would have been made; (ii) the evidence is not in dispute or
conflict and no issue of credibility is involved; (iii) special
circumstances exist in which the parties urge the appellate court to make
necessary findings of fact.  No circumstances were present which would bring
this case within these criteria and this Court was clearly not in as good a
position as the trial judge to make the requisite findings.                     In addition to addressing
issues relating to the duty, factual issues needed to be decided.  No findings
were made at trial as to whether Ms. Hollis would have consented to the
operation, even if properly warned and as to whether Dr. Birch's conduct
would have been the same whether or not Dow was in breach of the duty to warn. 
In the absence of a finding in this Court that evidence was lacking to raise
the issues or that a weighing of the evidence cannot resolve the matter, a new
trial would enable the trial judge to carry out this function.  In any event, a
new trial will be held with respect to Dr. Birch, and the judgment of this
Court will not put an end to the litigation.  This Court should not decide the
issue because a subsequent trial judge would then not be able to decide
otherwise.  Finally, under the Negligence Act, where damage or loss is
caused by the fault of two or more persons, liability for the damage should be
apportioned in accordance with the degrees of fault.  Cases Cited  By La Forest J.   By Sopinka J. (dissenting)                     Buchan v. Ortho Pharmaceutical
(Canada) Ltd. (1986), 12 O.A.C.
361; Cobbs v. Grant, 502 P.2d 1 (1972); Reibl v. Hughes, [1980] 2
S.C.R. 880; Cook v. Lewis, [1951] S.C.R. 830; Snell v. Farrell,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 311; McGhee v. National Coal Board, [1973] 1 S.L.T.R.
14; Wilsher v. Essex Area Health Authority, [1988] A.C. 1074; Just v.
British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228; Koschman v. Hay (1977), 17
O.R. (2d) 557; Chan v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration),
[1995] 3 S.C.R. 593; Davie Shipbuilding Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 F.C.
461; Jardine v. Northern Co-operative Timber and Mill Association,
[1945] 1 W.W.R. 533; Nova, An Alberta Corporation v. Guelph Engineering Co.
(1989), 70 Alta. L.R. (2d) 97; Glow v. Paquin, [1932] 1 W.W.R. 737;  Patterson
v. Township of Aldborough (1913), 11 D.L.R. 437; Colautti Construction Ltd.
v. City of Ottawa (1984), 9 D.L.R. (4th) 265; Bank of Nova Scotia v.
Dunphy Leasing Enterprises Ltd. (1991), 83 Alta. L.R. (2d) 289; Fitz
Randolph v. Fitz Randolph (1918), 41 D.L.R. 739; McCarroll v. Powell,
[1955] 4 D.L.R. 631; Hunt v. MacLeod Construction Co., [1958] S.C.R.
737.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Negligence Act, R.S.B.C.
1979, c. 298, s. 2.  Sale of
Goods Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c.
370.  Authors Cited  Cross, Sir
Rupert.  Cross on Evidence, 7th ed.  By the late Sir Rupert Cross and
Colin Tapper.  London:  Butterworths, 1990.  Fleming, John G.  The Law of Torts, 8th
ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.  McCormick, Charles Tilford.  McCormick on
Evidence, 3rd ed. By Edward W.         Cleary, General Editor.  St. Paul,
Minn.:  West Publishing Co., 1984.                      APPEAL from a judgment of the
British Columbia Court of Appeal (1993), 81 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1, 103 D.L.R. (4th)
520, 48 W.A.C. 108, [1993] 6 W.W.R. 609, 16 C.C.L.T. (2d) 140,  ordering a new
trial (with respect to John Robert Birch) and dismissing an appeal (with
respect to Dow Corning Corporation) from a judgment of Bouck J., [1990] B.C.J.
No. 1059, allowing Susan Hollis' action against Dow Corning Corporation and
dismissing her action against John Robert Birch.  Appeal dismissed, Sopinka and
McLachlin JJ. dissenting.                     D. J. Mullan, Q.C., and D. W. Donohoe, for the
appellant.                     Donald J. McKinlay, for the respondent Susan Hollis.                     James M. Lepp and William S. Clark, for the respondent
John Robert Birch.                     The judgment of La Forest,
L'Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, Cory and Iacobucci JJ. was delivered by  1                        La Forest J. --
The question raised in this appeal is whether a manufacturer of silicone breast
implants may be held liable in tort to a patient who suffers injuries from an
unexplained rupture in the implants when the manufacturer has failed to give
adequate warning to the patient or the surgeon concerning the risks of
rupture.  The appellant, Dow Corning Corporation ("Dow"), is a United
States corporation which, during the course of the 1970s and 1980s, developed
and manufactured the silicone breast implant carrying the trade name
"Silastic".  On May 7, 1990, Bouck J. of the Supreme Court of British
Columbia awarded damages and costs against Dow to the respondent, Susan Hollis,
for the negligent manufacture of a Silastic breast implant that ruptured in her
body approximately 17 months after it was implanted in 1983.  Hollis' claims
against the respondent Dr. John Robert Birch, who inserted the implant, Dr.
James Quayle, who subsequently removed the implant, and Dow Corning Canada Inc.
("Dow Canada"), the Canadian sales agent for Dow, were dismissed.  A
majority of the Court of Appeal overturned Bouck J.'s finding that Dow had
negligently manufactured the implant, but dismissed the appeal on the ground
that Dow had failed to warn Ms. Hollis adequately concerning the risks of
rupture.  A majority of the Court of Appeal also ordered a new trial with
respect to Ms. Hollis' claim against Dr. Birch.  2                 Dow
was granted leave by this Court to appeal the Court of Appeal's finding that
Dow had breached its duty to warn, and asks this Court either to dismiss Ms.
Hollis' claim or to order a new trial.  For the reasons that follow, it is my
view that Dow's appeal should be dismissed.  The relevant facts are as follows.  Facts  3                 In
early June, 1983, Ms. Hollis, then 23 years old, was given a complete physical
examination by her family physician, Dr. Ken Mills.  Ms. Hollis was a shy and
quiet woman who had never before had a complete physical examination.  During
the course of the examination, Dr. Mills determined that Ms. Hollis suffered
from a congenital deformity of the breasts called "tubular breasts",
which produced a cylinder-like shape in her breasts and caused blood to collect
in the nipple area, resulting in a larger than normal areola.  Ms. Hollis told
Dr. Mills that she had suspected for several years that her breasts were
deformed, and had been self-conscious about them, but that she had never felt
the deformity was sufficiently serious to merit medical attention.  Despite Ms.
Hollis' reservations concerning her need for medical treatment, Dr. Mills
suggested that she see Dr. John Birch, an experienced plastic surgeon, whom Ms.
Hollis had seen earlier that year for treatment of a severe case of acne
scarring on her cheeks.  4                 Ms.
Hollis met with Dr. Birch in July, 1983.  During the meeting, Dr. Birch
informed her that her breasts were indeed deformed and explained that surgery
and implants could correct the shape of her breasts and the size of her areolae. 
Dr. Birch showed Ms. Hollis an implant and explained the surgical implantation
procedure.  He also told her that she would not be able to feel the implants
inside her after the operation and that they would not prevent her from
breast-feeding.  However, Dr. Birch did not warn Ms. Hollis that there were
risks of post-surgical complications.  He also failed to warn her of the
possibility that the implants might rupture inside her body.  On the basis of
Dr. Birch's advice, Ms. Hollis consented to surgery.  5                 On
October 21, 1983, Ms. Hollis underwent surgery for the implantation of two
Silastic silicone breast implants at the Kelowna General Hospital in Kelowna,
B.C.  The implants were "gel-filled, low profile round" Silastic implants
manufactured by the appellant Dow and purchased by Dr. Birch from Dow's
Canadian agent, Dow Canada.  These implants are sold only to doctors or medical
establishments and are not directly available to the public.  The operation
went smoothly and Ms. Hollis experienced a normal recovery.  However, by the
spring of 1984, the abnormality in Ms. Hollis' breasts had returned.  Dr. Birch
operated on Ms. Hollis a second time.  During the second operation, the plastic
surgeon assisting Dr. Birch stretched the areolae of the breasts, which
involved the application of light pressure to the breasts.  In April, 1984, Ms.
Hollis was examined by Dr. Birch, who found no problems with the breasts.  On
May 15, 1984, Ms. Hollis started a baker's course, which involved heavy upper
body and arm movements.  6                 In
January, 1985, Ms. Hollis noticed a lump in her right breast, and began to feel
pain there as well as in her right side.  Concerned that the lump might be
related to the implant, she went to see Dr. Quayle, another plastic surgeon,
who referred her to Dr. Turner, an expert in breast surgery.  Dr. Turner
concluded that the lump was likely related to the downward slippage of the
implants, although he noted that it could represent an area of benign breast
disease.  Dr. Turner recommended the removal of the implants.  On January 29,
1985, Ms. Hollis was again examined by Dr. Quayle.  He noted a degree of
fullness in the right lower breast.  She complained that her right side was
becoming very painful.  7                 On
March 19, 1985, Dr. Quayle operated to remove the implants.  He discovered that
the left implant was intact but that the right implant had ruptured, causing
irritation to the walls of the cavity in the right breast where the gel had
come into contact with the tissue.  The silicone gel from the right implant was
lying in the breast cavity, which was red and swollen.  Dr. Quayle removed the
gel with sponges but was unable to find the silicone envelope that had
surrounded the gel when the implant was originally inserted.  Dr. Quayle did
not preserve the gel for analysis, but returned the left implant to Ms.
Hollis.  The cause of the rupture of the implant in the right breast remains
unknown.  8                 After
the removal of the breast implants, Ms. Hollis' physical condition worsened. 
Between May 1985 and February 1987, she continued to experience pain in her
right breast and armpit and once again developed lumps in her right breast. 
The pain was especially severe when she raised her right arm and when she was
busy at work.  During that time, she met with several doctors and underwent
numerous tests.  On February 3, 1987, Dr. A. D. Courtemanche, a plastic
surgeon, operated on Ms. Hollis and found a tender elongated mass in both lower
quadrants of her right breast, which he thought was probably a remnant of the
breast implant, although he did not find any silicone in the right breast.  On
June 10, 1987, Dr. Courtemanche performed a subcutaneous mastectomy on both
breasts.  For cosmetic purposes, Ms. Hollis elected to have Dr. Courtemanche
implant two Dow Silastic II implants.  These implants were of a different model
and make-up than the original Silastic implants.  9                 The
subcutaneous mastectomy was successful, and Ms. Hollis has suffered no further
complications since 1987.  However, there is still residual scarring around the
breasts and Ms. Hollis maintains a lingering belief that the ruptured envelope
remains somewhere inside her body.  She is worried that the new implants will
break if she does routine exercises or returns to any vigorous job such as
baking.  These concerns have caused Ms. Hollis to suffer depression, for which
she has received psychiatric help.  10               Ms.
Hollis brought action in 1989 against Dow, Dow's Canadian agent, Dr. Birch and
Dr. Quayle.  The claim against Dow was for negligence in the manufacture of the
implant placed in her right breast and, alternatively, for failure of a duty to
give adequate warning to the medical profession or the public of the
possibility that the implants could rupture.  The claim against Dow's agent was
for failure to warn about the possibility that the implant might rupture.  The
claims against Dr. Birch were for negligent advice and negligent surgery with
respect to the original implants, as well as a claim, under the Sale of
Goods Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 370, that he sold her the implants when they
were not fit for their intended purpose.  The claims against Dr. Quayle were
for negligence in failing to operate and remove the implants promptly when he
discovered there might be a defect, and for failing to remove all the remnants
of the gel from her right breast.  Judgments of the Courts Below  British Columbia Supreme Court, [1990] B.C.J. No. 1059 (Bouck J.)  11               Bouck
J. found Dow liable to Ms. Hollis for negligently manufacturing the Silastic
implants.  He proceeded on the basis that there were four possible causes of
the rupture:  (i) an act or omission by Dr. Birch in inserting the implant;
(ii) an act or omission by Dr. Quayle in removing the implant; (iii) external
trauma to the implant during the time it was in Ms. Hollis' body; and (iv) an
inadequacy in the design or manufacture of the implant.  He made findings of
fact that eliminated all causes of rupture except faulty manufacturing and, on
that basis, reasoned that Dow was negligent either by inference or through the
application of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.  He stated:                     I
already found Dr. Birch took proper care to ensure the prosthesis remained
undamaged from the time he took possession of it until he finished the surgical
implantation.  There is no evidence Dr. Quayle punctured the envelope when he
removed it from the right breast of Miss Hollis. All the evidence is to the
effect the implant ruptured at some earlier time.  Nor is there anything to
indicate Miss Hollis intentionally or unintentionally abused the implant in any
way.  She made use of it in the normal manner contemplated by Dow Corporation. 
All of these findings rebut the defendants' suggestion that the implant was
damaged by others who had control of it, thus allowing the application of the
doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.  Bouck J. drew further support for his conclusion
from the fact that Dow had "replaced" the Silastic implant during the
mid-1980s with the thicker and more durable Silastic II model.  He observed
that Dow had introduced the Silastic II "to counteract that defect in the
earlier Silastic implant" and in response to 78 field reports Dow had
received between 1975 and 1984 of unexplained ruptures in the Silastic
implants.  This, he reasoned, "is a piece of evidence from which an
inference of negligence can be drawn".  12               Having
found Dow liable for negligent manufacture, Bouck J. did not proceed to address
Ms. Hollis' subsidiary claim that Dow had breached its duty to warn Ms. Hollis
or the medical profession of the possibility of post-surgical implant rupture.  13               Bouck
J. dismissed the actions against Dow Canada, Dr. Birch and Dr. Quayle.  With
respect to the claim against Dr. Birch, he found that Dr. Birch had not fallen
below the standard of care for doctors in 1983, when he performed the surgery
on Ms. Hollis, because the possibility of rupture of gel-filled implants was
neither well-known to the medical community in 1983 nor prevalent in the
medical literature.  With respect to the claim against Dr. Quayle, Bouck J.
found no evidence of negligence, and concluded that Dr. Quayle had followed the
correct medical procedures throughout.  With respect to the claim against Dow
Canada, he found that Dow Canada did not breach its duty to warn consumers or
doctors about the risk of rupture because it was only a sales agent; he further
found that it did not contribute any technical knowledge to the production of
the product, and therefore had insufficient knowledge in 1983 that the implants
were defectively manufactured.  British Columbia Court of Appeal (1993), 81 B.C.L.R. (2d) 1 (Prowse J.A.,
McEachern C.J.B.C., Southin J.A.)  14               A
majority of the Court of Appeal dismissed Dow's appeal from Bouck J.'s finding
of liability by Dow, but allowed Ms. Hollis' appeal from Bouck J.'s dismissal
of the action against Dr. Birch, ordering a new trial solely to resolve the
question of Dr. Birch's liability to Ms. Hollis.  15               With
respect to Dow's appeal, the Court of Appeal was unanimous in ruling that Bouck
J. had erred in drawing an inference of negligence against Dow, finding that he
had based his decision upon two erroneous factual findings:  first, that the
Silastic II implant "replaced" the Silastic I during the 1980s, when
these two products in fact shared the market from mid-1983 until late 1987 and,
second, that the evidence adduced at trial eliminated Ms. Hollis as a possible
cause of the rupture.  However, Prowse J.A., writing for a majority of the
Court of Appeal on this issue (McEachern C.J.B.C. concurring), dismissed the
appeal on the ground that Dow had failed to provide either Ms. Hollis or Dr.
Birch with adequate warnings of the risk of post-surgical implant rupture
arising from ordinary, non-traumatic, human activities.  16               Although
Bouck J. declined to rule on the duty to warn issue, Prowse J.A. found there
was sufficient evidence adduced at trial to substantiate Ms. Hollis' claim.  In
particular, Prowse J.A. found it significant that Dow had received reports of
between 77 and 81 "unexplained" post-surgical implant ruptures during
the period from 1975 to 1984, the majority of which were received prior to
1984, yet failed to warn the medical community until 1985 that the life
expectancy of any implant was unpredictable and that an implant could rupture
for a variety of reasons, including normal use.  Prowse J.A. also ruled that
Dow's breach of its duty to warn was the cause of Ms. Hollis' injuries, finding
that a reasonable woman in Ms. Hollis' position would not have consented to the
surgery in the face of an adequate warning.  In support of this conclusion,
Prowse J.A. observed that the surgery on Ms. Hollis was not medically necessary
and that, in contrast to many women who consent to breast implant surgery, Ms.
Hollis was not "pre-sold" when she first went to see Dr. Birch.  17               Southin
J.A. dissented with respect to the duty to warn, observing, at p. 34, that
Bouck J.'s failure to rule on this issue had created an "absence of
findings on crucial issues of fact".  Southin J.A. also ruled (McEachern
C.J.B.C. concurring) that a new trial was necessary to resolve the question of
Dr. Birch's liability.  Southin J.A. decided that Bouck J. had erred in
concluding that Dr. Birch did not have knowledge of the risk of rupture in
1983, but concluded that a new trial was necessary to determine whether that
risk was material and whether its non-disclosure caused Ms. Hollis' injury. 
Prowse J.A. dissented on this issue, deciding that Dr. Birch had knowledge of the
risk in 1983 and, as a result, found him liable for negligently failing to warn
Ms. Hollis of the risk of implant rupture.  Analysis  18               The
sole issue raised in this appeal is whether the Court of Appeal erred in
finding Dow liable to the respondent Ms. Hollis for failing adequately to warn
the implanting surgeon, Dr. Birch, of the risk of a post-surgical implant
rupture inside Ms. Hollis' body.  The appellant Dow does not contest Bouck J.'s
factual finding that Ms. Hollis' seven-year surgical ordeal caused her great
physical and psychological pain, residual scarring on her breasts, and a loss
of past and future income.  However, Dow submits that it was not responsible
for Ms. Hollis' injuries.  In support of this submission, Dow argues, first,
that the warning it gave Dr. Birch was adequate and sufficient to satisfy its
duty to Ms. Hollis, and second, that even if it did breach its duty to warn Ms.
Hollis, this breach was not the proximate cause of her injuries.  19               For
the reasons that follow, it is my view that the Court of Appeal reached the
correct conclusion and that the appeal should be dismissed.  Since Dow does not
challenge the trial judge's findings concerning Ms. Hollis' injuries, I will
concentrate on the issues of duty and causation which form the basis for Dow's
submissions in this appeal.  In the first part of these reasons, I will address
the question whether Dow breached its duty to warn, and the related question
whether Dow can rely on the so-called "learned intermediary" rule to
absolve itself of liability.  In the second part, I will consider whether Dow's
failure to warn was a proximate cause of Ms. Hollis' injuries.  1.  Dow's Duty to Warn and the "Learned
Intermediary" Rule                     (a)  The General Principles                     (i)  The Duty to Warn  20               It
is well established in Canadian law that a manufacturer of a product has a duty
in tort to warn consumers of dangers inherent in the use of its product of
which it has knowledge or ought to have knowledge.  This principle was
enunciated by Laskin J. (as he then was), for the Court, in Lambert v.
Lastoplex Chemicals Co., [1972] S.C.R. 569, at p. 574, where he stated:                     Manufacturers
owe a duty to consumers of their products to see that there are no defects in
manufacture which are likely to give rise to injury in the ordinary course of
use.  Their duty does not, however, end if the product, although suitable for
the purpose for which it is manufactured and marketed, is at the same time
dangerous to use; and if they are aware of its dangerous character they cannot,
without more, pass the risk of injury to the consumer.  The duty to warn is a continuing duty, requiring
manufacturers to warn not only of dangers known at the time of sale, but also
of dangers discovered after the product has been sold and delivered; see Rivtow
Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron Works, [1974] S.C.R. 1189, at p. 1200, per
Ritchie J.  All warnings must be reasonably communicated, and must clearly
describe any specific dangers that arise from the ordinary use of the product;
see, for example, Setrakov Construction Ltd. v. Winder's Storage &
Distributors Ltd. (1981), 11 Sask. R. 286 (C.A.); Meilleur v.
U.N.I.-Crete Canada Ltd. (1985), 32 C.C.L.T. 126 (Ont. H.C.); Skelhorn
v. Remington Arms Co. (1989), 69 Alta. L.R. (2d) 298 (C.A.); McCain
Foods Ltd. v. Grand Falls Industries Ltd. (1991), 116 N.B.R. (2d) 22
(C.A.).  21               The
rationale for the manufacturer's duty to warn can be traced to the
"neighbour principle", which lies at the heart of the law of
negligence, and was set down in its classic form by Lord Atkin in Donoghue
v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562 (H.L.).  When manufacturers place products
into the flow of commerce, they create a relationship of reliance with
consumers, who have far less knowledge than the manufacturers concerning the
dangers inherent in the use of the products, and are therefore put at risk if the
product is not safe.  The duty to warn serves to correct the knowledge
imbalance between manufacturers and consumers by alerting consumers to any
dangers and allowing them to make informed decisions concerning the safe use of
the product.  22               The
nature and scope of the manufacturer's duty to warn varies with the level of
danger entailed by the ordinary use of the product.  Where significant dangers
are entailed by the ordinary use of the product, it will rarely be sufficient for
manufacturers to give general warnings concerning those dangers; the warnings
must be sufficiently detailed to give the consumer a full indication of each of
the specific dangers arising from the use of the product.  This was made clear
by Laskin J. in Lambert, supra, where this Court imposed
liability on the manufacturer of a fast-drying lacquer sealer who failed to
warn of the danger of using the highly explosive product in the vicinity of a
furnace pilot light.  The manufacturer in Lambert had placed three
different labels on its containers warning of the danger of inflammability. 
The plaintiff, an engineer, had read the warnings before he began to lacquer
his basement floor and, in accordance with the warnings, had turned down the
thermostat to prevent the furnace from turning on.  However, he did not turn
off the pilot light, which caused the resulting fire and explosion.  Laskin J.
found the manufacturer liable for failing to provide an adequate warning,
deciding that none of the three warnings was sufficient in that none of them
warned specifically against leaving pilot lights on near the working area.  At
pages 574-75, he stated:  Where
manufactured products are put on the market for ultimate purchase and use by
the general public and carry danger (in this case, by reason of high
inflammability), although put to the use for which they are intended, the
manufacturer, knowing of their hazardous nature, has a duty to specify the
attendant dangers, which it must be taken to appreciate in a detail not known
to the ordinary consumer or user.  A general warning, as for example, that the
product is inflammable, will not suffice where the likelihood of fire may be
increased according to the surroundings in which it may reasonably be expected
that the product will be used.  The required explicitness of the warning will,
of course, vary with the danger likely to be encountered in the ordinary use of
the product.  23               In
the case of medical products such as the breast implants at issue in this
appeal, the standard of care to be met by manufacturers in ensuring that
consumers are properly warned is necessarily high.  Medical products are often
designed for bodily ingestion or implantation, and the risks created by their
improper use are obviously substantial.  The courts in this country have long
recognized that manufacturers of products that are ingested, consumed or
otherwise placed in the body, and thereby have a great capacity to cause injury
to consumers, are subject to a correspondingly high standard of care under the
law of negligence; see Shandloff v. City Dairy, [1936] 4 D.L.R. 712
(Ont. C.A.), at p. 719; Arendale v. Canada Bread Co., [1941] 2 D.L.R. 41
(Ont. C.A.), at pp. 41-42; Zeppa v. Coca-Cola Ltd., [1955] 5 D.L.R. 187
(Ont. C.A.), at pp. 191-93; Rae and Rae v. T. Eaton Co. (Maritimes) Ltd.
(1961), 28 D.L.R. (2d) 522 (N.S.S.C.), at p. 535; Heimler v. Calvert
Caterers Ltd. (1975), 8 O.R. (2d) 1 (C.A.), at p. 2.  Given the intimate
relationship between medical products and the consumer's body, and the
resulting risk created to the consumer, there will almost always be a heavy
onus on manufacturers of medical products to provide clear, complete and
current information concerning the dangers inherent in the ordinary use of
their product.  24               I
pause at this point to observe that there is an important analogy to be drawn
in this context between the manufacturer's duty to warn and the doctrine of
"informed consent" developed by this Court in recent years with
respect to the doctor-patient relationship.  In Hopp v. Lepp, [1980] 2
S.C.R. 192, at pp. 195-96, 210, and Reibl v. Hughes, [1980] 2 S.C.R.
880, at pp. 884-85, this Court decided that physicians have a duty, without
being questioned, to disclose to a patient the material risks of a proposed
procedure, its gravity, and any special or unusual risks, including risks with
a low probability of occurrence, attendant upon the performance of the
procedure; see also Ciarlariello v. Schacter, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 119.  The
principle underlying "informed consent", as Laskin C.J. explained in Hopp,
supra, at p. 196, is the "right of a patient to decide what, if
anything, should be done with his body"; see also Schloendorff v.
Society of New York Hospital, 105 N.E. 92 (N.Y.C.A. 1914), per
Cardozo J.  The doctrine of "informed consent" dictates that every
individual has a right to know what risks are involved in undergoing or
foregoing medical treatment and a concomitant right to make meaningful
decisions based on a full understanding of those risks.  As Robinson J.
observed in Canterbury v. Spence, 464 F.2d 772 (D.C. Cir. 1972), at p.
780:  True consent
to what happens to one's self is the informed exercise of a choice, and that
entails an opportunity to evaluate knowledgeably the options available and the
risks attendant upon each.  The average patient has little or no understanding
of the medical arts, and ordinarily has only his physician to whom he can look
for enlightenment with which to reach an intelligent decision.  From these
almost axiomatic considerations springs the need, and in turn the requirement,
of a reasonable divulgence by physician to patient to make such a decision
possible.  25               In
my view, the principles underlying the doctrine of "informed consent"
are equally, if not more, applicable to the relationship between manufacturers
of medical products and consumers than to the doctor-patient relationship.  The
doctrine of "informed consent" was developed as a judicial attempt to
redress the inequality of information that characterizes a doctor-patient
relationship.  An even greater relationship of inequality pertains both between
the manufacturer of medical products and the consumer and, to a lesser degree,
between the manufacturer and the doctor.  In contrast to the doctor-patient
relationship, where the patient can question the doctor with respect to the
risks and benefits of particular procedures and where doctors can tailor their
warnings to the needs and abilities of the individual patients, the
manufacturer-consumer relationship is characterized primarily by a lack of
direct communication or dialogue.  This lack of dialogue between manufacturer
and consumer creates, as Patricia Peppin notes in "Drug/Vaccine Risks: 
Patient Decision-Making and Harm Reduction in the Pharmaceutical Company Duty
to Warn Action" (1991), 70 Can. Bar Rev. 473, at p. 474, a
relationship of complete dependency between manufacturer and patient.  She
explains the relationship in the following terms:  The patient is
dependent both on the company and on the doctor to provide sufficient
information for an informed decision to be made, as well as for treatment to
heal the body, prevent a disease or palliate the pain.  Dependency
characterizes the relationship between vulnerable patient and the experts who
exercise control over the patient's bodily fate.  The physician's relationship
with the pharmaceutical company also exhibits a dependency of the doctor,
because of his or her limited pharmaceutical knowledge, on the company's
information; but the relationship is also one in which the physician is courted
through the company's marketing efforts and one in which the doctor is immune
from physical harm and vulnerability.                     Another
element of the context within which the legal principles operate is the
widespread use of pharmaceutical products apparently unaccompanied by
significant public knowledge of the inherent risks.  A similar observation was made by Robins J.A. in Buchan
v. Ortho Pharmaceutical (Canada) Ltd. (1986), 12 O.A.C. 361, which involved
a suit by a woman against the Ortho pharmaceutical company after that woman had
suffered a stroke from the use of Ortho's Novum oral contraceptives.  In
finding Ortho liable for failing to warn consumers about the risk of stroke
inherent in the use of the contraceptives, Robins J.A. made the following
observation, at p. 380:  As between
drug manufacturer and consumer, the manufacturer is a distant commercial entity
that, like manufacturers of other products, promotes its products directly or
indirectly to gain consumer sales, sometimes, as in this case, accentuating
value while under-emphasizing risks.  Manufacturers hold an enormous
informational advantage over consumers and, indeed, over most physicians.  The
information they provide often establishes the boundaries within which a
physician determines the risks of a possible harm and the benefits to be gained
by a patient's use of a drug.  26               In
light of the enormous informational advantage enjoyed by medical manufacturers
over consumers, it is reasonable and just to require manufacturers, under the
law of tort, to make clear, complete and current informational disclosure to
consumers concerning the risks inherent in the ordinary use of their products. 
A high standard for disclosure protects public health by promoting the right to
bodily integrity, increasing consumer choice and facilitating a more meaningful
doctor-patient relationship.  At the same time, it cannot be said that
requiring manufacturers to be forthright about the risks inherent in the use of
their product imposes an onerous burden on the manufacturers.  As Robins J.A.
explained in Buchan, supra, at p. 381, "drug manufacturers
are in a position to escape all liability by the simple expedient of providing
a clear and forthright warning of the dangers inherent in the use of their
products of which they know or ought to know".                     (ii)  The "Learned
Intermediary" Rule  27               As
a general rule, the duty to warn is owed directly by the manufacturer to the
ultimate consumer.  However, in exceptional circumstances, a manufacturer may
satisfy its informational duty to the consumer by providing a warning to what
the American courts have, in recent years, termed a "learned
intermediary".  The "learned intermediary" rule was first
elaborated in Sterling Drug, Inc. v. Cornish, 370 F.2d 82 (8th Cir.
1966), a suit brought by a patient blinded after taking the drug chloroquine
phosphate.  The rationale for the rule was outlined by Wisdom J. in Reyes v.
Wyeth Laboratories, 498 F.2d 1264 (5th Cir. 1974), at p. 1276, cert.
denied 419 U.S. 1096 (1974), a suit against a manufacturer of oral polio
vaccine, in the following terms:  Prescription
drugs are likely to be complex medicines, esoteric in formula and varied in
effect.  As a medical expert, the prescribing physician can take into account
the propensities of the drug, as well as the susceptibilities of his patient. 
His is the task of weighing the benefits of any medication against its
potential dangers.  The choice he makes is an informed one, an individualized
medical judgment bottomed on a knowledge of both patient and palliative. 
Pharmaceutical companies then, who must warn ultimate purchasers of dangers
inherent in patent drugs sold over the counter, in selling prescription drugs
are required to warn only the prescribing physician, who acts as a
"learned intermediary" between manufacturer and consumer.  The rule was later reaffirmed and developed in a
series of American cases during the 1970s and 1980s involving the liability of
manufacturers of prescription drugs; see, for example, Schenebeck v.
Sterling Drug, Inc., 423 F.2d 919 (8th Cir. 1970); Hoffman v. Sterling
Drug, Inc., 485 F.2d 132 (3rd. Cir. 1973); Dunkin v. Syntex
Laboratories, Inc., 443 F.Supp. 121 (W. D. Tenn. 1977); Lindsay v. Ortho
Pharmaceutical Corp., 637 F.2d 87 (2nd Cir. 1980); Timm v. Upjohn Co.,
624 F.2d 536 (5th Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 1112 (1981); Stanback
v. Parke, Davis and Co., 657 F.2d 642 (4th Cir. 1981); Walker v. Merck
& Co., 648 F.Supp. 931 (M.D. Ga. 1986), aff'd 831 F.2d 1069 (11th Cir.
1987); Plummer v. Lederle Laboratories, 819 F.2d 349 (2nd Cir. 1987). 
In Canada, the rule was first considered in an obiter passage by Linden
J. in Davidson v. Connaught Laboratories (1980), 14 C.C.L.T. 251 (Ont.
H.C.), at p. 274, and later applied by a five-member panel of the Ontario Court
of Appeal in Buchan, supra.  28               While
the "learned intermediary" rule was originally intended to reflect,
through an equitable distribution of tort duties, the tripartite informational
relationship between drug manufacturers, physicians and patients, the rationale
for the rule is clearly applicable in other contexts.  Indeed, the
"learned intermediary" rule is less a "rule" than a
specific application of the long-established common law principles of
intermediate examination and intervening cause developed in Donoghue v.
Stevenson, supra, and subsequent cases; see, for example, Holmes
v. Ashford, [1950] 2 All E.R. 76, at p. 80.  Generally, the rule is
applicable either where a product is highly technical in nature and is intended
to be used only under the supervision of experts, or where the nature of the product
is such that the consumer will not realistically receive a direct warning from
the manufacturer before using the product.  In such cases, where an
intermediate inspection of the product is anticipated or where a consumer is
placing primary reliance on the judgment of a "learned intermediary"
and not the manufacturer, a warning to the ultimate consumer may not be
necessary and the manufacturer may satisfy its duty to warn the ultimate
consumer by warning the learned intermediary of the risks inherent in the use
of the product.  29               However,
it is important to keep in mind that the "learned intermediary" rule
is merely an exception to the general manufacturer's duty to warn the
consumer.  The rule operates to discharge the manufacturer's duty not to the
learned intermediary, but to the ultimate consumer, who has a right to full and
current information about any risks inherent in the ordinary use of the
product.  Thus, the rule presumes that the intermediary is "learned",
that is to say, fully apprised of the risks associated with the use of the
product.  Accordingly, the manufacturer can only be said to have discharged its
duty to the consumer when the intermediary's knowledge approximates that of the
manufacturer.  To allow manufacturers to claim the benefit of the rule where
they have not fully warned the physician would undermine the policy rationale
for the duty to warn, which is to ensure that the consumer is fully informed of
all risks.  Since the manufacturer is in the best position to know the risks
attendant upon the use of its product and is also in the best position to
ensure that the product is safe for normal use, the primary duty to give a
clear, complete, and current warning must fall on its shoulders.                     (b)  Application of the
General Principles to the Case at Bar  30               The
first question to be answered in this appeal is whether Dow owed Ms. Hollis a
duty to warn her that the Silastic implant could rupture post-surgically inside
her body and, if so, whether Dow satisfied that duty.  In light of the
foregoing jurisprudence, it is clear that the answer to this question depends
on the answers to two subsidiary questions.  First, did Dow have a duty to warn
Ms. Hollis directly, or could it satisfy its duty to warn her by warning a
"learned intermediary", namely, Dr. Birch?  Second, assuming that Dow
could properly discharge its duty to Ms. Hollis by warning Dr. Birch, did Dow
adequately warn Dr. Birch of the risk of post-surgical rupture in light of its
state of knowledge at that time?  31               Turning
to the first of these questions, it is my view that the "learned
intermediary" rule is applicable in this context, and that Dow was
entitled to warn Dr. Birch concerning the risk of rupture without warning Ms.
Hollis directly.  A breast implant is distinct from most manufactured goods in
that neither the implant nor its packaging are placed directly into the hands
of the ultimate consumer.  It is the surgeon, not the consumer, who obtains the
implant from the manufacturer and who is therefore in the best position to read
any warnings contained in the product packaging.  In this respect, breast
implants are, in my view, analogous to prescription drugs, where the patient
places primary reliance for information on the judgment of the surgeon, who is
a "learned intermediary", and not on the manufacturer; see Buchan,
supra, at p. 368.  They are not analogous to oral contraceptives, with
respect to which many American courts have recently imposed a direct duty to
warn, because direct warnings from manufacturers of breast implants are simply
not feasible given the need for intervention by a physician; see MacDonald
v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 475 N.E.2d 65 (Mass. J.C. 1985), at p. 70, cert.
denied 474 U.S. 250 (1985); Buchan, supra, at pp. 368-69.  In
this respect, I observe that it is not, and has never been, Dow's practice to
send warnings concerning their breast implants directly to patients.  Although
Dow includes product information with its implants, the implants are sold only
to doctors or medical establishments, who are expected to pass this information
on to their patients.  In light of this fact, I conclude that a manufacturer in
Dow's position can discharge its duty to the ultimate consumer by giving the
treating surgeon clear, complete and current information concerning any general
and specific risks that arise from the ordinary use of the product.  32               However,
the mere fact that the "learned intermediary" rule is applicable in
this context does not absolve Dow of liability.  As I mentioned earlier, the
"learned intermediary" rule presumes that the intermediary is fully
apprised of the risks, and can only provide shelter to the manufacturer where
it has taken adequate steps to ensure that the intermediary's knowledge of the
risks in fact approximates that of the manufacturer.  Thus, the second, and
more important, question to be resolved is whether Dow fulfilled its duty to
Ms. Hollis by adequately warning Dr. Birch of the risk of post-surgical rupture
of the implant.  33               Although
Bouck J. declined to rule on this issue, a majority of the Court of Appeal
found that Dow's warning to Dr. Birch was inadequate.  In my view, the Court of
Appeal was correct in reaching this conclusion.  It is well established that
appellate courts have the jurisdiction to make a fresh assessment of the
evidence on the record where they deem such an assessment to be in the
interests of justice and feasible on a practical level; see Prudential Trust
Co. v. Forseth, [1960] S.C.R. 210, at pp. 216-17.  In this case, there was
sufficient evidence on the record to allow the Court of Appeal to make a full
and proper re-assessment of the duty to warn issue without sending the case
back to trial.  While appellate courts are generally, and justifiably, wary of
making findings of fact without having the advantage of seeing and hearing
testimony first-hand, I do not believe that such concerns arise in this case
because the bulk of the critical evidence adduced at trial was documentary, not
testimonial.  In light of the fact that Ms. Hollis has now waited close to
seven years for the final resolution of her claim, and the high costs already
created by the unusual length of this appeal process, I believe the Court of
Appeal followed the proper course in weighing and assessing this evidence in
order to achieve a measure of finality in this case; see, e.g., Davie
Shipbuilding Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 F.C. 461, at p. 464 (C.A.); Nova,
An Alberta Corporation v. Guelph Engineering Co. (1989), 70 Alta. L.R. (2d)
97 (Alta. C.A.), at pp. 110-12.  34               Turning
now to an assessment of the evidence itself, it is my view that the most
compelling evidence supporting the Court of Appeal's decision can be found in
the product inserts and literature which Dow supplied to doctors shortly before
and after Ms. Hollis' surgery.  By 1983, when Dr. Birch advised Ms. Hollis to
have implantation surgery, Dow had made available to doctors two warnings
regarding the risk of rupture of the Silastic implants.  The first was a
brochure directed at the medical community, dated 1976, and entitled
"Suggested Surgical Procedures for Silastic Mammary Prostheses",
which provided instructions regarding the use of the Silastic I breast implant
and read as follows:  1.This
prosthesis should be implanted without any alterations to its original design
or fabrication.  Meticulous care must be taken to avoid contact of any sharp
edges or pointed objects with the prosthesis; any inadvertent cut or puncture
will expose the silicone gel and render the prosthesis unusable.  Do not
implant or attempt to repair and then insert a ruptured mammary prosthesis.  2.When
antibiotic therapy and/or steroids (triamcinilone) are indicated, extreme care
should be taken to ensure that these are delivered into the surrounding tissue
and not inadvertently within the prosthesis.                                                                     . . .  5.Be
certain that the patient understands that following implantation, abnormal
squeezing or trauma to the breasts could conceivably rupture the implant. 
[Emphasis added.]  The second warning was a product insert for the
Silastic implant, dated November 1979, which outlined potential problems in
using the implants in the following terms:  3.If the
implant should accidentally rupture during insertion or be nicked with a sharp
instrument or suture needle during closure, remove the implant and replace.  Do
not try to repair implant or leave in surgical pocket with torn envelope and
exposed gel.  Note  A thorough
study of the information provided and the exercise of due care in handling
these devices should result in no problems for the surgeon.  However, since Dow
Corning realizes that accidental rupture of a device can occasionally occur, it
is recommended that an extra pair of the same size implants be available at the
time of surgery.  [Emphasis in original.]  35               It
is significant that the only reference in the 1976 and 1979 warnings to a risk
of post-surgical rupture was the statement that "abnormal squeezing or
trauma" might rupture the implants.  There is no reference in these
warnings to the possibility of rupture arising from normal squeezing or
non-traumatic, everyday activity.  This is significant because, in 1985, Dow
began warning physicians of the possibility of rupture due to normal,
non-traumatic activity in the product insert for the Silastic II implant, a new
breast implant developed in the early 1980s with a thicker envelope and greater
durability than the earlier Silastic I model.  The relevant portions of the
1985 insert read as follows:  Rupture of
implants has been reported both intra- and post-operatively.  Rupture may
result from the following . . . excessive stresses or manipulation
as may be experienced during normal living experiences including routine and
purposeful trauma as in vigorous exercise, athletics, and intimate physical
contact . . . or other unknown causes at the site of implantation.
. . .  The patient should be adequately informed of the possibility of implant
rupture with the use of this technique and of the necessity to remove a
ruptured implant should that occur.  [Emphasis added.]  It continues with a warning about the danger of
gel infection:  As reported in
the literature, when an implant ruptures gel may be released from the implant
envelope despite the cohesive properties of the gel. If left in place,
complications such as enlarged lymph nodes, scar formation, inflammation
. . . may result.  A limited
preliminary study has been reported to the medical community that in the
presence of select bacterial infection at the site of a ruptured implant,
extravasated gel may be altered by the bacteria with a resultant decrease in
cohesivity of the gel.  If true, there is greater potential for distant migration
of the gel.  In the event
that a ruptured prosthesis is suspected, and especially if the area becomes
infected, Dow Corning recommends removal of the envelope and gel.  These
potential consequences should be understood by the surgeon and explained to the
patient prior to implantation.  .
. .  In the event
of a rupture, Dow Corning recommends prompt removal of the envelope and gel. 
The long term physiological effects of uncontained silicone gel are currently
unknown.                                                                     . . .  Therefore, the
patient should not be lead [sic] to unrealistic expectations as to the
performance or cosmetic results that the surgery and prosthesis can provide. 
The patient should be informed that the life expectancy of any implant is
unpredictable.  36               It
is clear from a comparison of the 1985 warning with the earlier warnings that
the 1985 warning is far more explicit, both with respect to the potential
causes of post-surgical implant rupture and the potential effects.  Of
particular significance, in my view, is the statement in the 1985 warning that
rupture can be caused by "excessive stresses or manipulation as may be
experienced during normal living experiences" such as "vigorous
exercise, athletics, and intimate physical contact".  There is, without
question, a substantial difference between "trauma", on the one hand,
and the "stresses" and "manipulation" of "normal
living experiences", on the other hand.  The difference is that, while the
earlier warnings implied that rupture would occur only in extreme cases of
violent impact, the 1985 warning made it clear that a patient who received an
implant would have to consider altering her lifestyle to avoid rupture.  The
difference between the 1985 warning and the earlier warnings was significant to
a woman in Ms. Hollis' position because, subsequent to her surgery, she decided
to enrol in a baker's course, which involved regular and heavy upper body
movements.  While a baker's course may not cause "trauma" to an
implant, it would certainly create a risk of "excessive stresses or
manipulation".  Thus, a more accurate warning could quite reasonably have
affected her choice of profession and her resulting exposure to unnecessary
risk.  37               This
is not to say, of course, that the standard of care to which Dow must be held
for its warning practices in 1983 should be measured according to its knowledge
of the risks of implant rupture in 1985.  In light of the significant
differences between the 1985 warning and the earlier warnings, the crucial next
question is whether Dow knew or should have known of the risks referred to in
the 1985 warning when Ms. Hollis had her implantation surgery in 1983.  In my
view, there was sufficient evidence adduced at trial to establish that Dow did
have such knowledge.  At trial, evidence was introduced that, between 1976 and
1984, Dow had received 78 field reports from doctors of post-operative
"unexplained" ruptures occurring in the Silastic implants.  These
ruptures were categorized as "unexplained" because they were not
attributable to any known causes of rupture, such as trauma or surgical
mishap.  The number of complaints of implant ruptures Dow received during the
period 1975 to 1984 were as follows:  YearNumber
of Complaints                     1975           
                                  1                    1976           
                                  3                    1977           
                                  6                    1978           
                                  5                    1979           
                                  5                    1980           
                                  8                    1981                                             13                    1982                                             
7                    1983                                             13                    1984                                             17                    Total    78  38               From
the above table, it is apparent that, by late 1983, Dow had already received
between 48 and 61 of the 78 unexplained rupture reports it received before
issuing its revised 1985 warning.  Counsel for Dow conceded that the nature and
quantity of the information available to Dow did not change significantly
between late 1983 and early 1985.  Thus, although the reports were admitted
into evidence at trial for the purpose of establishing their existence and not
as to the truth of their contents, the mere fact that Dow had these reports in
their possession demonstrates that, in 1983, Dow had notice that ruptures were
occurring that were not directly attributable to abnormal squeezing or trauma. 
Counsel for Dow was unable to explain why it took Dow more than two years to
convey the information concerning the unexplained ruptures to either the
medical community or the consumers.  39               A
similar lag time can be discerned with respect to Dow's warnings concerning the
effects of implant ruptures on the body.  The evidence indicates that, prior to
1983, and even as early as 1979, Dow was aware that implant ruptures could
cause adverse reactions in the body arising from loose gel.  In a 1979 research
paper prepared by Dow's research department, the purpose of which was to
determine the nature of the particulate matter produced from implants by
abrasion, and to investigate possible changes in the lymph nodes and the
possible transfer of the particulate material from the implant site to the
lymph nodes, the department indicated the following:  The production
of particulate matter from orthopedic implants by abrasion, flexion, or other
stresses is a well known and common occurrence with most prosthetic materials. 
The occurrence of particulate matter associated with silicone elastomer
prostheses within the tissue capsule surrounding the prostheses is also known
to occur.  In late 1977,
we were appraised [sic] by Dr. A. B. Swanson of two patients, both of
whom had borne SILASTIC implants for several years, from whom enlarged axillary
lymph nodes had been removed due to suspicion of malignancy.  The department also concluded that loose gel
could travel from the implant site to the lymph nodes and could cause negative
reactions:  Thus, the
intracellular material within the lymph node in all probability, has originated
from the prosthetic device and appears to have produced a foreign body
granulomatous inflammatory reaction within the lymph node without a significant
degree of collagen proliferation.  The appearance of large aggregate masses in
the outer medullary regions is consistent with transport of the particulate elastomer
via the lymphatic system but does not exclude concomitant vascular transport.  In light of the state of Dow's knowledge in 1979,
it is significant that none of the Dow warnings before 1985 made reference to
adverse reactions to loose gel in the body or the possibility that loose gel
could travel away from the implant site.  While the 1985 warning referred to
the dangers of "enlarged lymph nodes, scar formation, inflammation"
and the potential, after a rupture, for "distant migration of the
gel", the 1976 and 1979 warnings make no reference to any such potential
consequences.  40               In
my view, Dow had a duty to convey its findings concerning both the
"unexplained" rupture phenomenon and the possible harm caused by
loose gel inside the body to the medical community much sooner than it did.  In
light of the fact that implants are surgically placed inside the human body,
and that any defects in these products will obviously have a highly injurious
effect on the user, the onus on Dow to be forthcoming with information was
extremely high throughout the relevant period.  Despite this fact, for over six
years Dow took no action to express its concerns to the medical community. 
Given Dow's knowledge of the potential harm caused by loose gel in the body,
this lag time is simply unacceptable.  The duty to warn is a continuing one and
manufacturers of potentially hazardous products have an obligation to keep
doctors abreast of developments even if they do not consider those developments
to be conclusive.  As Robins J.A. noted in Buchan, supra, at p.
375:  A manufacturer
of prescription drugs occupies the position of an expert in the field; this requires
that it be under a continuing duty to keep abreast of scientific developments
pertaining to its product through research, adverse reaction reports,
scientific literature and other available methods.  When additional dangerous
or potentially dangerous side-effects from the drug's use are discovered, the
manufacturer must make all reasonable efforts to communicate the information to
prescribing physicians.  Unless doctors have current, accurate and complete
information about a drug's risks, their ability to exercise the fully informed
medical judgment necessary for the proper performance of their vital role in
prescribing drugs for patients may be reduced or impaired.                                                                    . . .  . . .
where medical evidence exists which tends to show a serious danger inherent in
the use of a drug, the manufacturer is not entitled to ignore or discount that
information in its warning solely because it finds it to be unconvincing; the
manufacturer is obliged to be forthright and to tell the whole story.  41               In
its submissions to this Court, Dow attempted to justify its recalcitrant
warning practices by arguing that the numbers of "unexplained"
ruptures were small over the relevant period (the rate of rupture was less than
1/10 of 1 percent) and by arguing that "unexplained" ruptures, being
unexplained, are not a distinct category of risk of which they could
realistically have warned.  In my view, these arguments fail because both are
based upon the assumption that Dow only had the obligation to warn once it had
reached its own definitive conclusions with respect to the cause and effect of
the "unexplained" ruptures.  This assumption has no support in the
law of Canada.  Although the number of ruptures was statistically small over
the relevant period, and the cause of the ruptures was unknown, Dow had an
obligation to take into account the seriousness of the risk posed by a
potential rupture to each user of a Silastic implant.  Indeed, it is precisely
because the ruptures were "unexplained" that Dow should have been
concerned.  Certainly, it would not have been onerous for Dow to have included
an update in their product inserts to the effect that "unexplained"
ruptures had been reported which were not attributable to surgical procedures,
and a list of the possible side-effects of such ruptures.  As Prowse J.A.
observed, at pp. 20-21, of her reasons in the Court of Appeal:                     Dow
was in a much better position to advise of the incidence of rupture than was
any individual doctor or even the community of plastic surgeons performing
breast implantations, since Dow was the repository for complaints of rupture. 
This placed a significant onus on Dow to keep the medical community advised of
developments with respect to its products which could have serious consequences
for their patients.                                                                     . . .  Dow was not
required to issue a warning each time a rupture occurred, but it would not be
expecting too much to expect it to issue updated information in this regard to
the medical community on a yearly basis, or sooner, if the circumstances
warranted it.  42               I
conclude, therefore, that the Court of Appeal made no error in ruling that Dow
did not discharge its duty to Ms. Hollis by properly warning Dr. Birch
concerning the risk of post-surgical implant rupture.  2.  Did Dow's Breach of the Duty to Warn Cause
Ms. Hollis' Injury?  43               Dow
raises two distinct causation issues in this appeal.  The first is whether Ms.
Hollis would have elected to have the operation if she had been properly warned
of the risk by Dr. Birch.  Dow submits that a reasonable woman in Ms. Hollis'
position would have consented to the surgery despite the risk and, on this
basis, argues that its failure to warn was not the proximate cause of Ms.
Hollis' injury.  The second issue Dow raises is whether Dr. Birch would have
warned Ms. Hollis if he had been properly warned by Dow of the risk.  Dow
submits that Ms. Hollis had the onus of establishing that Dr. Birch would not
have warned Ms. Hollis even if fully apprised by Dow of the risk and, once
again, argues that its failure to warn cannot be the proximate cause of her
injuries.  Counsel for Ms. Hollis sought to meet the first issue on a factual
basis alone.  As to the second issue, however, he contested as well the
underpinnings of Dow's argument, which as will appear raises more substantial
legal issues.  I shall accordingly approach the issues on that basis.  (a)Would
Ms. Hollis Have Consented to the Operation Even if Properly Warned of the Risk?                     (i)  The Appropriate Test  44               In
determining whether Ms. Hollis would have consented to the operation had she
been properly warned by Dr. Birch of the risk of rupture, Prowse J.A. applied
the modified objective test developed by this Court in Reibl, supra,
which involved a negligence action by a patient against a surgeon for failing
to warn him of the risk of paralysis entailed in elective surgery performed by
that surgeon.  The test applied by Prowse J.A. was as follows:  would a
reasonable woman in Ms. Hollis' particular circumstances have consented to the
surgery if she had known all the material risks?  I note, however, that in Buchan,
supra, at pp. 380-81, Robins J.A. found the Reibl test to be
inapplicable to products liability cases, and instead applied a subjective
test.  Robins J.A.'s rationale deserves to be quoted at length:                     The
considerations applicable to and the responsibilities involved in a
doctor-patient relationship differ markedly from those of a
manufacturer-consumer relationship.  As between doctor and patient, there is a
direct and intimate relationship in which the relative advantages and
disadvantages of a proposed medical treatment, including the taking of a drug,
can be considered, discussed and evaluated.  As between drug manufacturer and
consumer, the manufacturer is a distant commercial entity that, like
manufacturers of other products, promotes its products directly or indirectly
to gain consumer sales, sometimes, as in this case, accentuating value while
under-emphasizing risks.  Manufacturers hold an enormous informational
advantage over consumers and, indeed, over most physicians.  The information
they provide often establishes the boundaries within which a physician
determines the risks of possible harm and the benefits to be gained by a
patient's use of a drug.  Manufacturers, unlike doctors, are not called upon to
tailor their warnings to the needs and abilities of the individual patient;
and, unlike doctors, they are not required to make the type of judgment call
that becomes subject to scrutiny in informed consent actions.                     When
a manufacturer's breach of the duty to warn is found to have influenced a
physician's opinion as to the safety of a drug thereby contributing to the
physician's non-disclosure of a material risk and the consumer's ingestion of
the drug, the manufacturer is not entitled to require the injured consumer to
prove that a reasonable consumer in her position would not have taken the drug
if properly warned.  At this juncture, the case stands on no different footing
than the usual products liability case in which there is no question of the
intervention of an intermediary, and should be treated as such.  The
manufacturer has put a product on the market without proper warning.  The
likelihood that the consumer will take the drug without knowledge of its potential
risks is a foreseeable consequence of the breach of the duty to warn.  Whether
the particular consumer would have taken the drug even with a proper warning is
a matter to be decided by the trier of fact on all of the relevant evidence.                                                                     . . .                     In
my opinion, it was open to the trial judge, viewing the evidence as he did, to
credit the plaintiff's testimony that she would not have taken the pill had she
been told of the danger of stroke, and to determine the causation issue
accordingly.  Whether a so-called reasonable woman in the plaintiff's position
would have done likewise is beside the point.  Robins J.A. also addressed the argument that the
imposition of a subjective standard would place an undue burden on drug
manufacturers.  He rejected this argument for the following reason, at p. 381:                     The
suggestion that the determination of this causation issue other than by way of
an objective test would place an undue burden on drug manufacturers is answered
by noting that drug manufacturers are in a position to escape all liability by
the simple expedient of providing a clear and forthright warning of the dangers
inherent in the use of their products of which they know or ought to know.  In
my opinion, it is sound in principle and in policy to adopt an approach which
facilitates meaningful consumer choice and promotes marketplace honesty by
encouraging full disclosure.  This is preferable to invoking evidentiary
burdens that serve to exonerate negligent manufacturers as well as
manufacturers who would rather risk liability than provide information which
might prejudicially affect their volume of sales.  45               In
my view, the rationale given by Robins J.A. for a subjective test is compelling
and justifies the adoption of the subjective test in cases of this nature.  The
most serious concern raised by the application of a subjective test is that the
plaintiff, with the benefit of hindsight, will always claim that she would not
have used the product if she had been properly warned.  In Reibl, supra,
at pp. 897-99, Laskin C.J. elaborated upon this concern in the following terms:                             Since
proximate causation exists only if disclosure would have resulted in the
patient's foregoing the proposed treatment, a standard must be developed to
determine whether the patient would have decided against the treatment had he
been informed of its risks.  Two possible standards exist:  whether, if
informed, the particular patient would have foregone treatment (subjective
view); or whether the average prudent person in plaintiff's position, informed
of all material risks, would have foregone treatment (objective view).  The
objective standard is preferable, since the subjective standard has a gross
defect:  it depends on the plaintiff's testimony as to his state of mind,
thereby exposing the physician to the patient's hindsight and bitterness.                                                                     . . .  It could hardly
be expected that the patient who is suing would admit that he would have agreed
to have the surgery, even knowing all the accompanying risks.  His suit would
indicate that, having suffered serious disablement because of the surgery, he
is convinced that he would not have permitted it if there had been proper
disclosure of the risks, balanced by the risks of refusing the surgery.  46               Although
the concern raised by Laskin C.J. is valid and should continue to be applied in
a doctor-patient relationship, in a suit against a manufacturer for failure to
warn this concern can be adequately addressed at the trial level through
cross-examination and through a proper weighing by the trial judge of the
relevant testimony.  While this difference between the type of proof required
in the two kinds of actions may seem anomalous, it is amply justified having
regard to the different circumstances in which the relevant duties arise, and
the consequent difference in the nature of these duties.  As Robins J.A.
intimated in Buchan, the duty of the doctor is to give the best medical
advice and service he or she can give to a particular patient in a specific
context.  It is by no means coterminous with that of the manufacturer of
products used in rendering that service.  The manufacturer, on the other hand,
can be expected to act in a more self-interested manner.  In the case of a
manufacturer, therefore, there is a greater likelihood that the value of a
product will be overemphasized and the risk underemphasized.  It is, therefore,
highly desirable from a policy perspective to hold the manufacturer to a strict
standard of warning consumers of dangerous side effects to these products. 
There is no reason, as in the case of a doctor, to modify the usual approach to
causation followed in other tortious actions.  Indeed the imbalance of
resources and information between the manufacturer and the patient, and even
the doctor, weighs in the opposite direction.  Moreover, it is important to
remember that many product liability cases of this nature will arise in a
context where no negligence can be attributed to a doctor.  It would appear
ill-advised, then, to distort the rule that is appropriate for claims against a
manufacturer simply because of an apparent anomaly that results in cases where
a doctor is also alleged to have been negligent.                     (ii)  The Application of
the Test to the Facts of the Case at Bar  47               In
my view, there was sufficient evidence adduced at trial to satisfy the
subjective Buchan test.  Ms. Hollis testified quite clearly at trial
that, had she had been properly warned by Dr. Birch of the risk of rupture, she
would not have had the surgery.  She stated:                     Q.And
what, if anything, would you have done if you had been advised that that was a
risk of the procedure?                     A.I
would not have had the procedure.                     Q.Why
would that be?                     A.Well,
when I held that implant in my hand, I gave it back very quickly and it did
bother me to hold it.  Had I known that that gel could have escaped the bag in
some way, I know I wouldn't have had the surgery.  No adverse findings were made either at trial or
on appeal with respect to the credibility of Ms. Hollis' testimony.  48               Moreover,
there was ample evidence adduced at trial to lend credence to Ms. Hollis' claim
that she would not have had the surgery if properly warned.  At trial, two
plastic surgeons gave testimony concerning whether a reasonable woman in Ms.
Hollis' position would have consented to the surgery if properly warned.  Dow's
witness was Dr. Warren, a plastic surgeon specializing in breast prosthesis
implantation, who testified that "the vast majority" of women who
seek breast implants "seem to come in `pre-sold'" on the idea of
getting an implant.  According to Dr. Warren, when the women are
"pre-sold" they are not generally deterred by warnings concerning the
risk of rupture.  He stated:                     Q.And
they have obviously gone ahead and had the operation?   Dr. Birch called Dr. Thompson as a witness.  Dr.
Thompson is a plastic surgeon who, in the course of his practice, does breast
prosthesis implantation.  Under cross-examination, Dr. Thompson testified that
the decision whether to have implant surgery following a proper warning will
depend in large part upon the level of risk aversion to which each individual
patient is susceptible.  He stated:                     QIn
your experience with patients, is it apparent to you that some patients are
risk takers and others are not risk takers?                     AYes.                     QSome
people think nothing at all of accepting the risk of death under anaesthesia to
have breast implants, when you think about it, is that correct?                     AYes.                     QAnd
other people would single out that risk, as an example, as too great a risk to
bother having breast implants?                     AYes. 
Yes.                     QAnd
those judgments are different between virtually everyone in the population?                     AYes.                     QAnd
both views are reasonable?                     AYes.  49               In
my view, there was ample evidence on the record to demonstrate that Ms. Hollis
did not fall into the category of "pre-sold" women described by Dr.
Warren.  On the contrary, the evidence indicates that Ms. Hollis was not a risk
taker and that she did not even consider having breast surgery until after her
general practitioner, Dr. Mills, referred her for that purpose to Dr. Birch, a
plastic surgeon who had been treating her for acne scarring on her cheeks.  Ms.
Hollis testified that, prior to her first physical exam in 1983, she had not
been interested in having plastic surgery on her breasts.  She stated:  A.I knew my
breasts were not attractive.  I might say that I became more conscious of it or
self-conscious of it in my later teens.                                                                     . . .                     A.I
never really thought of getting them fixed.  I just thought they were
unattractive.  I never thought of having anything done to them.  Ms. Hollis also testified that, prior to her
second referral to Dr. Birch, she had never seen a doctor specifically about
correcting her condition.  She stated:                                                                      . . .                      And
he said, if nothing else, Dr. Birch might be able to do something with the
nipple or the nipple could have something done.  50               At
trial, Dow's lawyers cross-examined Ms. Hollis persistently concerning whether
she was ashamed of her breasts, whether she thought they were abnormal and
whether she thought they would affect her ability to get married.  Ms. Hollis
admitted that she knew her breasts did not fit the "ideal" concept of
an attractive breast but insisted that she was not ashamed of them.  She
testified:                     Q.And
you were concerned about what effect your appearance at that time would have on
your prospects of marriage, weren't you?                     A.I
hadn't thought of them in that way, to that extent.  I thought they were
unattractive breasts and that I would live with them.                                                                     . . .                     A.I
looked at it more that the breasts would not be something I would have given a
lot of thought to had I been in love with someone and wanted to marry.  I would
think that they would have been fine, even though they were unattractive.  Ms. Hollis also testified that, prior to the
surgery, the appearance of her breasts had no significant effect on her social
life.  Her concerns about their appearance did not affect the way she wore
clothing or her relationships with other people.  Indeed, when asked if she had
breast implant surgery to help her poor self-image, Ms. Hollis testified that
her low self-esteem at that time was attributable to other factors.  She
stated:                     Q.I
mean, you did have a poor self-image of yourself at that point, didn't you?                     A.I
don't know if you would say poor, you know.  I didn't have a wonderful
self-image of myself, but, again, I'm not sure if it was simply because of my
breasts.                     Q.Well,
that was the major ingredient, if there were other factors?                     A.I
don't know if I could even agree to that at that time.  51               The
veracity of Ms. Hollis' testimony concerning this question was borne out by Dr.
Birch's testimony.  Dr. Birch testified that, when he originally saw Ms. Hollis
to examine the acne scarring on her face, they had no discussion with respect
to breast problems or a desire on her part to have breast surgery.  Dr. Birch
testified that it was only when Dr. Mills referred her back to him a second
time that he examined her breasts.  Prior to that second examination, Dr. Mills
spoke to Dr. Birch, explained to him that Ms. Hollis was very shy, and told him
to be gentle with her.  Dr. Birch also testified that Ms. Hollis was very
tentative about approaching the whole issue of the condition of her breasts. 
He stated:                     QNow,
what was Miss Hollis' reaction or manner of presentation to you in your office
on that occasion, that July 28th visit?                     AWell,
she was as Dr. Mills had described her to be, a quiet, shy person who didn't
seem to me to have easily approached this whole question of the problem she was
having with her breasts.  It seemed to be a very important problem to her, but
she was extremely reticent in being examined so that it almost created some
difficulty in carrying out an examination at first . . . .  Dr. Birch testified that Ms. Hollis was more shy
than the average woman with respect to exposing her naked body.  He stated:  . . .
I probably examine an average of five women a day that way and so I have some
idea of what average characteristics of women's behavior in that regard are and
she was not within the average at all.  Dr. Birch testified under cross-examination that
the majority of his patients who have breast implants are pleased with the
results.  However, he felt that Ms. Hollis' case could not be compared to cases
of purely cosmetic surgery in which women may be very keen to keep implants
even though they may have experienced problems with them.  He stated:                      AYes,
in general I think that that's a true statement.  They become happy with the
increased volume.  Now, we're not talking about cases like Miss Hollis, we're
talking usually about cases that are just routine breast enlargement
procedures.  52               I,
therefore, conclude that Ms. Hollis would not have opted for the surgery had
she known of all the attendant risks.   (b)Would
Dr. Birch's Conduct Have Been the Same Whether or Not Dow Was in Breach of the
Duty to Warn?  53               The
second causation issue raised by Dow is whether Dr. Birch would have
warned Ms. Hollis of the risk of rupture if Dow had properly warned Dr. Birch
about that risk.  Dow argues that there is no direct causal link between its
breach of the duty to warn and Ms. Hollis' injury because, in 1983, Dr. Birch
was aware of the risk of implant rupture but did not make a habit of warning
his patients about that risk.  In support of this argument, Dow relies on Dr.
Birch's testimony at trial that, in 1983, he was warning only 20% to 30% of his
patients of implant rupture, and that, in determining the nature and scope of
his warnings to patients, he relied more on the articles he read in medical
journals than on manufacturers' warnings.  54               It
is right to say, however, that the trial judge found that in 1983 the average
plastic surgeon in British Columbia did not in fact know about the possibility
that rupture of Silastic implants could be a factor of any significance.  This
finding is supported and amplified by the fact that after Dow began circulating
its more extensive 1985 warning and knowledge of the risk of rupture in the
medical community became more prevalent, Dr. Birch adapted his practice
accordingly, and by 1989 he was warning all his patients of the risk of
rupture.  55               I
do not propose to enter further into or assess these factors.  I say this
because, while Dow is correct in submitting that there was some ambiguity at
trial concerning Dr. Birch's warning practices in 1983, Dow's argument is based
upon the assumption that to succeed in her claim against Dow Ms. Hollis must
prove that Dr. Birch would have warned her if Dow had properly warned Dr.
Birch.  I do not think this assumption is well founded.  Ms. Hollis, it will be
remembered, demonstrated that Dow had breached its duty to warn her of the risk
of rupture, that she would not have undergone the medical procedure if she had
been fully informed of the risks, and that she suffered injury from the
rupture.  Had Dr. Birch been adequately warned but had not passed on the
information to Ms. Hollis, Dow would, it is true, have been absolved of
liability by virtue of the learned intermediary doctrine.  But I fail to see
how one can reason from this that, for Dow to be liable, Ms. Hollis must now establish
that Dr. Birch would have informed her if he had known.  To require her to do
so would be to ask her to prove a hypothetical situation relating to her
doctor's conduct, one, moreover, brought about by Dow's failure to perform its
duty.  While the legal and persuasive onus in a negligence case generally falls
on the plaintiff, I do not see how this can require the plaintiff to prove a
hypothetical situation of this kind.  56               The
reasoning in this Court's decision in Cook v. Lewis, [1951] S.C.R. 830,
is helpful in this context.  In that case, the plaintiff was shot by one of two
members of a hunting party.  The jury had found that the plaintiff had been
shot by one of the two hunters, and that both of the hunters had been negligent
in shooting in the plaintiff's direction, but were unable to say which hunter's
bullet had actually hit the plaintiff.  On this basis, the jury exculpated both
defendants from negligence.  This Court set aside the jury finding and ruled
that, once the plaintiff had proved that he had been shot by one of the
defendants, the onus was on the defendants to establish absence of negligence. 
Unless they could exculpate themselves both would be liable.  In a concurring
judgment setting forth his reasons for reversing the burden of proof, Rand J.
made the following remarks, at pp. 832-33, that serve to illuminate the present
discussion:                     What,
then, the culpable actor has done by his initial negligent act is, first, to
have set in motion a dangerous force which embraces the injured person within
the scope of its probable mischief; and next, in conjunction with circumstances
which he must be held to contemplate, to have made more difficult if not
impossible the means of proving the possible damaging results of his own act or
the similar results of the act of another.  He has violated not only the
victim's substantive right to security, but he has also culpably impaired the
latter's remedial right of establishing liability.  By confusing his act with
environmental conditions, he has, in effect, destroyed the victim's power of
proof.                     The
legal consequence of that is, I should say, that the onus is then shifted to
the wrongdoer to exculpate himself; it becomes in fact a question of proof
between him and the other and innocent member of the alternatives, the burden
of which he must bear.  The onus attaches to culpability, and if both acts
bear that taint, the onus or prima facie transmission of responsibility
attaches to both, and the question of the sole responsibility of one is a
matter between them.  [Emphasis added.]  57               In
my view, a close analogy can be drawn between Cook and the case at bar. 
The facts on the record demonstrate that Ms. Hollis was inadequately warned of
the possibility that the breast implants manufactured by Dow and surgically
implanted by Dr. Birch could rupture.  While the victim's power of proof has
not been destroyed in the same sense as in the hunting party case, it has been
seriously undermined in that the plaintiff is, on Dow's contention, called upon
to prove what a doctor would have done in a hypothetical situation.  It must be
kept in mind that the governing principle in a case of this nature is informed
consent, namely, the right of the patient to be fully informed by the
manufacturer of all material risks associated with the use of a medical
product.  It is clear from the record that Ms. Hollis' right to informed
consent was not respected in this case.  We know that Dow's failure to warn was
a cause of her injury; whether Dr. Birch's actions in the hypothetical
situation posited by Dow might also have been a cause is not a matter for Ms.
Hollis to prove.  Ms. Hollis, who was in a position of great informational
inequality with respect to both the manufacturer and the doctor, played no part
in creating the set of causal conditions leading to her injury.  Justice
dictates that she should not be penalized for the fact that had the
manufacturer actually met its duty to warn, the doctor still might have been at
fault.  58               I
observe that the Ontario Court of Appeal in obiter in Buchan, supra,
has adopted a somewhat similar approach to causal analysis in cases of this
nature.  There Robins J.A. had this to say, at p. 377:                     Once
the breach of duty to warn prescribing physicians has been established, I think
it fair and reasonable to presume that the inadequacy of the warning was a
contributing cause of the ingestion of the drug.  It ought not to be
incumbent on a plaintiff to prove as part of her case what her doctor might or
might not have done had he been adequately warned.  One can assume that a
doctor would not ignore a proper warning or fail to disclose a material risk or
otherwise act negligently.  Even if the evidence were to indicate that the
doctor was negligent, the manufacturer would not be shielded from liability if
such negligence were a foreseeable consequence of the breach of duty to warn. 
The presumption may, of course, be rebutted if the defendant comes forth with
evidence that despite the inadequacy of the warning the doctor's conduct toward
his patient would have been the same whether or not the manufacturer was in
breach of the duty.  [Emphasis added.]  59               In
the last sentence of this statement, Robins J.A. refers to the possibility that
the manufacturer might be able to adduce evidence that the doctor's conduct
might have been the same whether or not the manufacturer was in breach of its
duty.  I should say that whatever effect this may have regarding the
apportionment of liability between the doctor and the manufacturer in the event
that the doctor is also found to be negligent, it in no way absolves the
manufacturer from liability to the plaintiff, except in cases where some
extraneous conduct by the doctor would have made the failure to give adequate
warning irrelevant.  But that is not this case.  In sum, in a case like the
present, I see no reason why in establishing the liability of the manufacturer
the law should adopt a rule requiring the plaintiff to delve into what the
doctor might have done.  60               Simply
put, I do not think a manufacturer should be able to escape liability for
failing to give a warning it was under a duty to give, by simply presenting evidence
tending to establish that even if the doctor had been given the warning, he or
she would not have passed it on to the patient, let alone putting an onus on
the plaintiff to do so.  Adopting such a rule would, in some cases, run the
risk of leaving the plaintiff with no compensation for her injuries.  She would
not be able to recover against a doctor who had not been negligent with respect
to the information that he or she did have; yet she also would not be
able to recover against a manufacturer who, despite having failed in its duty
to warn, could escape liability on the basis that, had the doctor been
appropriately warned, he or she still would not have passed the information on
to the plaintiff.  Our tort law should not be held to contemplate such an
anomalous result.  61               As
I see it, the plaintiff's claim against the manufacturer should be dealt with
in accordance with the following rationale.  The ultimate duty of the
manufacturer is to warn the plaintiff adequately.  For practical reasons, the
law permits it to acquit itself of that duty by warning an informed
intermediary.  Having failed to warn the intermediary, the manufacturer has
failed in its duty to warn the plaintiff who ultimately suffered injury by
using the product.  The fact that the manufacturer would have been absolved had
it followed the route of informing the plaintiff through the learned
intermediary should not absolve it of its duty to the plaintiff because of the
possibility, even the probability, that the learned intermediary would not have
advised her had the manufacturer issued it.  The learned intermediary rule
provides a means by which the manufacturer can discharge its duty to give
adequate information of the risks to the plaintiff by informing the
intermediary, but if it fails to do so it cannot raise as a defence that the
intermediary could have ignored this information.  I observe that a number of
courts in the United States have reached a similar conclusion.  In McCue v.
Norwich Pharmacal Co., 453 F.2d 1033 (1st Cir. 1972), at p. 1035, for
example, the Court of Appeal for the First Circuit stated:  Even if a
physician's carelessness may have taken a form not specifically anticipated,
defendant should not escape liability so long as its failure to give an
adequate warning may have contributed thereto . . . .  [H]aving
put a dangerous drug on the market without adequate warning defendant cannot be
heard to say that the physician might have disregarded a proper one. 
[Emphasis added.]  See also Sterling, supra, and Hamilton
v. Hardy, 549 P.2d 1099 (Colo. C.A. 1976).  Conclusion  62               On
the basis of the foregoing, it is my view that Dow breached its duty to warn
Dr. Birch concerning the risks of post-surgical rupture in the Silastic implant
and because of this failure to warn is liable to Ms. Hollis for her injuries. 
Accordingly, I would dismiss the appeal.  63               Ms.
Hollis is entitled to her costs throughout.                     The reasons of Sopinka and
McLachlin JJ. were delivered by  64               Sopinka J. (dissenting)
-- I agree with Justice La Forest in his analysis of the principles relating to
the duty to warn and in particular that the learned intermediary principles
apply as he proposes.  I respectfully disagree, however, with his analysis and
application of the principles relating to causation.  In my view the so-called
subjective test is inappropriate to determine whether Ms. Hollis would have
consented to the operation if properly warned.  In addition, I cannot agree
that Ms. Hollis need not prove that any warning received by Dr. Birch would
have been passed along by the doctor to his patients.  Finally, I  disagree
that this Court is in a position to resolve factual issues which were not
addressed at trial and which are vital to a determination of the liability of
Dow.  In my opinion a new trial is necessary to resolve these issues by reason
of:                     (1)  the settled practice of
appellate courts not to make findings of fact that were not made at trial in
the circumstances of this case;                     (2)  the finding of fact with
respect to whether Ms. Hollis would not have consented to the operation if
properly warned will trump this issue in the new trial relating to the
liability of Dr. Birch;                     (3)  a finding of liability of
Dow in this Court will make it extremely difficult or impossible for the trial
judge to assess the degrees of fault of Dow and Dr. Birch.  Analysis  Causation                     The Test  65               In
his reasons, La Forest J. adopts a subjective test to determine whether Ms.
Hollis would have consented to the operation if properly warned.  In this
regard, he adopts the reasoning of Robins J.A. in Buchan v. Ortho
Pharmaceutical (Canada) Ltd. (1986), 12 O.A.C. 361.  In reviewing the
evidence to determine if there "was sufficient evidence adduced at trial
to satisfy the subjective Buchan test" (para. 47), however, he
refers to the evidence of experts which is only relevant in applying a
reasonable woman test.  He concludes, at para. 52, that "Ms. Hollis would
not have opted for the surgery".  66               In
determining that Ms. Hollis would not have opted to undergo the implantation,
my colleague refers to the evidence of experts in the field of breast implant
surgery.  In support of his position, La Forest J. (at para. 48)
relies on the evidence of two plastic surgeons who "gave testimony
concerning whether a reasonable woman in Ms. Hollis' position would have consented
to the surgery if properly warned".  The Buchan subjective test,
however, places no reliance on evidence as to what a reasonable woman would
do.  The exposition of the subjective test which my colleague adopts is set out
in the following passage from Buchan, at p. 381, part of which is
reproduced in La Forest J.'s decision:                     In
my opinion, it was open to the trial judge, viewing the evidence as he did, to
credit the plaintiff's testimony that she would not have taken the pill had she
been told of the danger of stroke, and to determine the causation issue
accordingly.  Whether a so-called reasonable woman in the plaintiff's position
would have done likewise is beside the point.  The selection of a method of
preventing unwanted pregnancy in the case of a healthy woman is a matter, not
of medical treatment, but of personal choice; and it is not unreasonable that
notice of a serious potential hazard to users of oral contraceptives could
influence her selection of another method of birth control.  So long as the
court is satisfied that the plaintiff herself would not have used the drug if
properly informed of the risks, this causation issue should be concluded in her
favour regardless of what other women might have done.  [Emphasis added.]  67               The
Buchan subjective approach fails to take into account the inherent
unreliability of the plaintiff's self-serving assertion.  It is not simply a
question as to whether the plaintiff is believed.  The plaintiff may be
perfectly sincere in stating that in hindsight she believed that she would not
have consented to the operation.  This is not a statement of fact that, if
accepted, concludes the matter.  It is an opinion about what the plaintiff
would have done in respect of a situation that did not occur.  As such, the
opinion may be honestly given without being accepted.  In evaluating the
opinion, the trier of fact must discount its probity not only by reason of its
self-serving nature, but also by reason of the fact that it is likely to be
coloured by the trauma occasioned by the failed procedure.  For this reason,
the most reliable approach in determining what would in fact have occurred
is to test the plaintiff's assertion by reference to objective evidence as to
what a reasonable person would have done.  The matter is aptly summarized by
the Supreme Court of California in Cobbs v. Grant, 502 P.2d 1 (1972). 
At pp. 11-12, they held:                     The
patient-plaintiff may testify on this subject but the issue extends beyond his
credibility.  Since at the time of trial the uncommunicated hazard has
materialized, it would be surprising if the patient-plaintiff did not claim
that had he been informed of the dangers he would have declined treatment. 
Subjectively he may believe so, with the 20/20 vision of hindsight, but we doubt
that justice will be served by placing the physician in jeopardy of the
patient's bitterness and disillusionment.  Thus an objective test is
preferable:  i. e., what would a prudent person in the patient's position have
decided if adequately informed of all significant perils.  This was the test adopted by this Court in Reibl
v. Hughes, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 880, which was followed by Prowse J.A. for the
majority in the Court of Appeal.  In Reibl, Laskin C.J. stated, at
p. 898:  It could hardly
be expected that the patient who is suing would admit that he would have agreed
to have the surgery, even knowing all the accompanying risks.  His suit would
indicate that, having suffered serious disablement because of the surgery, he
is convinced that he would not have permitted it if there had been proper
disclosure of the risks, balanced by the risks of refusing the surgery.  Yet, to
apply a subjective test to causation would, correlatively, put a premium on
hindsight, even more of a premium than would be put on medical evidence in
assessing causation by an objective standard.  [Emphasis added.]  Laskin C.J. went on, however, to stress at p. 900
that the patient's testimony is essential but "it must be objectively
assessed in terms of reasonableness".  68               In
Laskin C.J.'s view, this was the most reliable way to answer the question as to
what would have occurred.  This answers the concern of Robins J.A. that the
plaintiff's choice must be respected.  The Reibl approach is a more
reliable method of determining what that choice would have been.  The
subjective test places too much of a premium on the plaintiff's present belief
as to what it would have been.  Assuming that it is in fact the Buchan
subjective test that my colleague advocates, expert medical evidence as to what
a reasonable woman would do is, to use the words of Robins J.A. at p. 381,
"beside the point".  La Forest J.'s apparent need to bolster Ms.
Hollis' testimony by reference to such expert evidence clearly demonstrates the
inherent weakness of the Buchan subjective test.  As a result of this
weakness, I would reject the subjective test in favour of the approach adopted
in Reibl.  69               Moreover,
I see no reason why the test for determining the same issue should be different
for the physician and the manufacturer.  With respect to both, the question for
the plaintiff is the same.  How would the plaintiff have responded if properly
warned by the physician?  Is the trial judge to apply two different tests to
determine the same question?  If so, this could conceivably result in a finding
that, vis-à-vis the physician, the patient would have consented, and vis-à-vis
the manufacturer, she would not.  Indeed, in the new trial which has been
directed by the Court of Appeal with respect to Dr. Birch, the trial judge is
obliged to apply the Reibl test and may very well find that Ms. Hollis
would have agreed to the implant if properly warned.  70               I
fail to understand how a different test for the physician and the manufacturer,
which, my colleague acknowledges, seems anomalous, can be redeemed on the basis
that a stricter standard can be expected of the manufacturer.  This ignores the
fact we are dealing with a situation in which the manufacturer's duty to the
plaintiff is discharged by informing the physician of risks.  The physician is
expected to pass this on to the patient.  If the risk is one about which the
plaintiff ought to be warned, it can hardly be suggested that the physician can
water down the warning because a lower standard applies to the physician.  One
could, perhaps, talk about a different standard when comparing the respective
duties to warn when the learned intermediary rule does not apply and both the
physician and manufacturer have a duty to warn the plaintiff directly. 
However, when the duties of the manufacturer and the physician to warn the
plaintiff are to be discharged by virtue of the information received from the
manufacturer being passed on to the plaintiff and both the physician and
manufacturer are sued in one action for breach of that duty, there is no room
for the application of a different standard.  Indeed, the issue of causation
has nothing to do with the standard of disclosure.  In resolving this issue,
the Court attempts to determine what the plaintiff's response would have been
on the assumption that the appropriate warning has been given in accordance
with the appropriate standard.  The debate concerns the bases on which that response
should be measured, not about the standard of disclosure.  71               But,
whether the subjective or objective test is adopted, it is a difficult question
of fact which should be determined at trial and not on appeal.  I will return
to this later in these reasons.                     Burden of Proof  72               In
determining the second causation issue of whether Dr. Birch would have warned
Ms. Hollis of the risk of rupture if Dow had properly warned Dr. Birch about
that risk, La Forest J. proposes to eliminate the fundamental
requirement of tort law that the plaintiff establish causation in order to
prove the defendant's liability.  Once Ms. Hollis demonstrated that Dow had
breached its duty to warn of the risk of rupture, La Forest J. would hold that
the plaintiff's burden of proving her case had been discharged, and that any
possibility that Dr. Birch would have failed to pass on any warning is
nothing more than a question of apportionment.  This approach runs counter to
well established tort principles.  Simply put, in order to establish liability,
the plaintiff must show not only a breach of duty by the defendant, but also
that the breach in question was the cause of the plaintiff's injury.  73               In
the instant case, this burden applies to require the plaintiff to show that her
injuries would not have occurred had Dow discharged its duty to warn Dr. Birch
of any dangers inherent in the implants.  In other words, Ms. Hollis must show
that her doctor would have warned her of any dangers that had been brought to
his attention and that if warned she would have refused the operation.  Absent
this form of proof, it cannot be said with any degree of certainty that the
failure of Dow to warn physicians was the cause of the unfortunate
injuries suffered by Ms. Hollis.  74               Professor
John G. Fleming, in The Law of Torts (8th ed. 1992), at p. 143,
explains the necessity of a factual finding of a cause and effect relationship
between the defendant's breach of duty and the plaintiff's injury as follows:  If such a
causal relation does not exist, that puts an end to the plaintiff's case: to
impose liability for loss to which the defendant's conduct has not in fact
contributed would be incompatible with the principle of individual
responsibility on which the law of torts has been traditionally based. 
[Emphasis in original.]  75               If
Dr. Birch would not have passed on information from Dow to Ms. Hollis, Dow's
failure to provide the warning cannot be said to have contributed to Ms.
Hollis' injury.  Liability cannot be based on failure to take measures which
would have no effect and be pointless.  76               The
absence of cause cannot be finessed by sweeping it under the apportionment rug
as suggested by my colleague.  A finding of causation is a prerequisite to
apportionment.  Apportionment is authorized only in the circumstances mandated
by the Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 298, where the damage or loss
is caused by the fault of two or more persons.  77               My
colleague refers to a number of cases, such as Cook v. Lewis, [1951]
S.C.R. 830, Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311, and Buchan, supra,
which either reversed or relaxed the ordinary burden which rests on the
plaintiff to prove causation.  Those cases do not support treating causation as
irrelevant.  Indeed, they start with the premise that causation is a
fundamental principle and address whether the plaintiff's ordinary burden
should be eased.  Not only is the requirement that causation be established
fundamental to the law of torts, but, as well, the principle that the burden of
proof of causation generally rests with the plaintiff is also well entrenched. 
The House of Lords in McGhee v. National Coal Board, [1973] 1 S.L.T.R.
14, toyed with the notion that the burden should be reversed in certain
circumstances.  On further consideration, however, this approach was firmly
rejected in Wilsher v. Essex Area Health Authority, [1988] A.C. 1074. 
In none of the foregoing cases was it suggested that the problem could be
avoided by treating the issue of causation as irrelevant.  I propose, however,
to discuss the cases to which my colleague refers because they either do not
support the reversal of the burden of proof or, if they did, that would not
resolve the issue of causation in this case.  78               My
colleague refers to the judgment of this Court in Cook v. Lewis, supra. 
In that appeal, the plaintiff hunter had been shot in the face by bird-shot. 
Two defendants admitted to having discharged their guns in the vicinity of the
plaintiff at almost the same time, but not at the same bird.  In that case,
this Court determined that the plaintiff's need to prove causation could be
obviated by reversing the ordinary burden of proof in certain situations. 
According to the Court in Cook, the reversal of the burden was
appropriate in that case because the defendants had essentially removed the
means of proof of causation from the plaintiff.  As Rand J. stated, at p. 832:                     What,
then, the culpable actor has done by his initial negligent act is, first, to
have set in motion a dangerous force which embraces the injured person within
the scope of its probable mischief; and next, in conjunction with circumstances
which he must be held to contemplate, to have made more difficult if not
impossible the means of proving the possible damaging results of his own act or
the similar results of the act of another.  He has violated not only the
victim's substantive right to security, but he has also culpably impaired
the latter's remedial right of establishing liability.  By confusing his
act with environmental conditions, he has, in effect, destroyed the victim's
power of proof.  [Emphasis added.]  Since the "negligent actor ha[d] culpably
participated in the proof-destroying fact", the burden of proof was
reversed (at p. 835), and the plaintiff was relieved of the need to prove
direct causation.  79               Similarly,
this Court in Snell v. Farrell, supra, at p. 321, expressed the
view that the burden on the plaintiff could be reversed where the subject matter
of the alleged tortious conduct lies "particularly within the
knowledge" of the defendant.  In Snell, the defendant surgeon had
removed a cataract from the patient plaintiff's eye and the patient had later
lost her sight in that eye as a result of optic nerve atrophy.  The defendant
doctor, knowing what he had done, was in a significantly better position to
determine what had occurred.  In the reasons for judgment for a unanimous
Court, the grounds for reversing the burden of proof with respect to causation
were stated at pp. 326-27:  If I were
convinced that defendants who have a substantial connection to the injury were
escaping liability because plaintiffs cannot prove causation under currently
applied principles, I would not hesitate to adopt one of these alternatives. 
In my opinion, however, properly applied, the principles relating to causation
are adequate to the task.  Adoption of either of the proposed alternatives
would have the effect of compensating plaintiffs where a substantial connection
between the injury and the defendant's conduct is absent.  Reversing the burden
of proof may be justified where two defendants negligently fire in the
direction of the plaintiff and then by their tortious conduct destroy the means
of proof at his disposal.  In such a case it is clear that the injury was not
caused by neutral conduct.  It is quite a different matter to compensate a
plaintiff by reversing the burden of proof for an injury that may very well be
due to factors unconnected to the defendant and not the fault of anyone.  80               As
a result, the burden of proof is properly reversed where the defendant has
somehow participated in destroying the means of proving the case against it or
where the defendant somehow controls the relevant evidence.  Only within this limited
sphere of cases is the plaintiff partially relieved of the burden of proving
causation.  In this case, there is neither any suggestion of a tortious
destruction of the means of proof nor does the evidence lie peculiarly in the
control of the defendant Dow.  On the contrary, the issue in question is
largely dependent on the evidence of Dr. Birch.  Both Ms. Hollis and Dow have
equal access to the evidence of Dr. Birch.  Indeed, in this situation, the
physician is likely to be inclined to favour his patient, the plaintiff.  It is
not in the interests of the physician to assert that he would not have passed
on a warning that the manufacturer was duty-bound to give him for the benefit
of the plaintiff.  As the means of proving causation remains available to the
plaintiff, it would be inconsistent with Snell to reverse the burden of
proof.  As a result, the burden of proving causation remains on the plaintiff
in this case.  In order to discharge the burden in question, the plaintiff must
adduce evidence that her doctor would have warned her of any dangers associated
with breast implants had those dangers been brought to his attention by the
defendant.  81               An
alternative method of obviating the plaintiff's burden of proof was suggested
by the Court of Appeal in Buchan.  In that case, the court expressed the
view that a "rebuttable presumption" exists such that a plaintiff in
Ms. Hollis' position need not establish all elements of causation.  According
to the court, at p. 377:                     Once
the breach of duty to warn prescribing physicians has been established, I think
it fair and reasonable to presume that the inadequacy of the warning was a
contributing cause of the ingestion of the drug.  It ought not to be incumbent
on a plaintiff to prove as part of her case what her doctor might or might not
have done had he been adequately warned.  One can assume that a doctor would
not ignore a proper warning or fail to disclose a material risk or otherwise
act negligently.  Even if the evidence were to indicate that the doctor was
negligent, the manufacturer would not be shielded from liability if such
negligence were a foreseeable consequence of the breach of duty to warn.  The
presumption may, of course, be rebutted if the defendant comes forth with evidence
that despite the inadequacy of the warning the doctor's conduct toward his
patient would have been the same whether or not the manufacturer was in breach
of the duty.  Based on this approach, the plaintiff need not
prove that her doctor would have warned her of any dangers unless the
defendant presents some evidence tending to show that the doctor may not
have in fact passed along the appropriate warning.  The burden on the defendant
is discharged where sufficient evidence is adduced to raise the issue of
causation.  This is an "evidential" burden of proof, which has been
described by Professor Tapper in Cross on Evidence (7th ed. 1990), at
p. 113, as:  . . . the
obligation to show, if called upon to do so, that there is sufficient evidence
to raise an issue as to the existence or non-existence of a fact in issue, due
regard being had to the standard of proof demanded of the party under such
obligation.  Thus, the rebuttable presumption referred to in Buchan
merely requires the defendant to furnish sufficient proof to raise a question
of whether or not the "learned intermediary" would have passed a
warning along had one been provided by the manufacturer.  Where this nominal
burden has been discharged, the ultimate burden of proving causation remains on
the plaintiff, requiring her to show that any warnings received by Dr. Birch
would have been passed along.  82               If
the burden of proof were reversed as proposed in Cook v. Lewis, it would
not operate against the defendant if there was sufficient evidence to raise the
issue of causation.  In that event, the trier of fact would be obliged to weigh
the evidence.  The burden of proof would only be applied if the trier of fact
were unable to come to a determinate conclusion.  See Cross on Evidence,
supra, at pp. 112-13, and McCormick on Evidence (3rd ed.
1984), at p. 947.  83               Whether
one applies the presumption in Buchan or reverses the burden of proof as
in Cook v. Lewis, I am of the view that there was abundant evidence in
this case to raise the issue and it was conflicting.  My colleague has reviewed
some of this evidence.  I agree with Bouck J.'s finding that the
possibility of rupture of gel-filled implants, including the risk of rupture
owing to trauma or abnormal squeezing, was not well known to the medical
community in July-October 1983 when Ms. Hollis consulted Dr. Birch and he
performed the surgery.  The only apparent warning received by Dr. Birch
concerned ruptures resulting from abnormal trauma, and contained the following
statement:  5.Be certain
that the patient understands that following implantation, abnormal squeezing or
trauma to the breasts could conceivably rupture the implant.  84               Dr.
Birch failed to warn Ms. Hollis and it was not his habit to warn patients of
the risk of rupture due to trauma or abnormal squeezing because he did not
regard it as a common occurrence.  In this regard, he relied primarily on
medical literature and not the manufacturer's literature.  He testified as
follows:  Q.I'm going to
point number five, do you see that?  It says:                            "Be
certain that the patient understands that following implantation, abnormal
squeezing or trauma to the breast could conceivably rupture the implant."                            Doctor, do --                     A.   Yes.                     Q.--
you see that.  Now, doctor, you don't rely on the manufacturers' literature,
though, with respect to these particular products, do you?                     A.No. 
I rely more on the medical literature.  85               Counsel
for Ms. Hollis relies heavily on the 1985 warning as evidence of the type of
warning that Dow had a duty to give in 1983.  My colleague accepts this as
significant evidence as to the type of warning that should have been given. 
There is cogent evidence in the record that if this warning had been given to
Dr. Birch in 1983, he would not necessarily have passed it on.  In October
1987, two years after Dr. Birch had received the 1985 warning referred to
above, it was still not his practice to pass the warning on to patients. 
Examined for discovery in October 1987, he gave the following evidence:  QIs that your
practice now to do that, to discuss the possibility of rupture of prosthesis?  ANot usually.  86               While
by 1989 he was warning all his patients of the risk of rupture, at trial he
could not say "[w]hen it became more than 50 per cent".  This is
consistent with his testimony that he relied more upon the state of medical knowledge
and medical literature than upon manufacturers' literature.  This evidence
might very well have been accepted by the trial judge if he had considered this
issue.  In my view, if my colleague had referred to this evidence, he could not
have concluded but that there was ample evidence to raise the issue.  87               Accordingly,
if this issue had been addressed at trial, the trial judge would have been
obliged to weigh the evidence in order to resolve the conflict.  The burden of
proof would play no part in this determination.  Only if the evidence were so
evenly balanced that a determinate conclusion could not be reached would resort
to the legal burden of proof have been necessary.  The weighing of conflicting
evidence is vital in the resolution of any factual issue in respect of which
the evidence is in conflict.  This did not occur at trial here. 
Prowse J.A., in her majority judgment, did not weigh the evidence because
she concluded that Dow had a duty to warn Ms. Hollis directly.  As a result,
this aspect of causation did not arise.  My colleague does not weigh the
evidence because he largely dispenses with the need to prove causation.  The
result is that this fundamental step in the trial process which is so important
in resolving factual disputes will have been by-passed if a new trial is not
directed.  I now turn to address that issue more specifically.  A New Trial is Necessary  88               The
issue in this case is not the right of an appellate court to review findings of
fact made at trial or what standard governs such review.  The issue is what
approach should a court of appeal adopt when disposing of an appeal on a legal
basis that was not dealt with or resolved at trial, where crucial findings of
fact concerning that issue were not made by the trial judge.  In the former
case, the trial judge has addressed the factual question with which the
appellate court should not interfere or substitute its own decision unless the
appellate court can identify why the trial judge's conclusions are clearly
wrong.  The parties, however, have had the factual issue considered.  The claim
to a new trial in such circumstances is less compelling by reason of the fact
that the factual issues have been weighed at trial.  If the court of appeal can
identify where the trial judge was clearly wrong, there is less concern that
the parties are deprived of the advantage of having had at least one assessment
of the facts.  The appellate court can correct clear error with the background
of that assessment.  Nevertheless, findings of credibility and conflicts in the
evidence that are dependent on the advantages of seeing and hearing the witness
are generally exceptions to the exercise of the power of an appellate court to
substitute its findings for those of the trial judge.  This applies even if the
conflict is between expert witnesses.  Moreover, even when an appellate court
exercises the power to interfere with the findings, the usual order is to
direct a new trial if the nature of the evidence is such that there is an
advantage in hearing and seeing the witnesses.  89               In
contrast, in a case in which a trial judge fails to make factual findings which
are essential to resolve an issue, a court of appeal is extremely reluctant to
assume the role of the trial judge.  In such circumstances, it is more
hazardous to venture an opinion that the trial judge would not have had an
advantage when there has been no demonstration as to how the trial judge
availed himself or herself of the advantage.  More importantly, there is
considerable support for the view that the party affected is entitled to a new
trial virtually as of right.  In Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2
S.C.R. 1228, this Court reversed the Court of Appeal which had affirmed the
judgment at trial dismissing the plaintiff's action.  The trial judge
classified certain practices of the government agency as policy rather than
operational and therefore exempt from liability.  Although these practices and
their deficiencies were fully explored in the evidence presented at trial, this
Court nevertheless ordered a new trial.  Speaking for the majority,
Cory J. stated, at pp. 1246-47:                     At
trial the conclusion was reached that the number and frequency of inspections,
of scaling and other remedial measures were matters of policy; as a result no
findings of fact were made on the issues bearing on the standard of care. 
Since the matter was one of operation the respondent was not immune from suit
and the negligence issue had to be canvassed in its entirety.  The appellant
was therefore entitled to a finding of fact on these questions and a new trial
should be directed to accomplish this.                                                                     .
. .                     To
proceed in this way is fair to both the government agency and the litigant. 
Once a duty of care that is not exempted has been established the trial will
determine whether the government agency has met the requisite standard of
care.  At that stage the system and manner of inspection may be reviewed. 
However, the review will be undertaken bearing in mind the budgetary restraints
imposed and the availability of personnel and equipment to carry out such an
inspection.  90               Similarly,
in Koschman v. Hay (1977), 17 O.R. (2d) 557 (C.A.), in an appeal in
which the trial judge had failed to resolve conflicts in the evidence,
Lacourcière J.A. stated, at p. 558:                     The
vital importance of reasons for judgment in such cases cannot be
over-emphasized.  This Court cannot decide issues of fact on the bald record. 
The parties are entitled to the findings of the trial Judge on disputed
evidence, and an appellate Court cannot properly exercise its function without
them.  I refer to a decision of this Court in DeJussel et al. v. Hajzer,
[1948] O.W.N. 468, and to Wright and Wright v. Ruckstuhl, [1955] O.W.N.
32, [1955] 2 D.L.R. 77, where Chief Justice Pickup, speaking for the Court,
expressed this principle in no uncertain terms.  This Court has never departed
from that principle.  We are, therefore, unanimously forced to conclude that
the assessment of the plaintiffs' damages must be sent back for a new trial.  91               La
Forest J. in Chan v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration),
[1995] 3 S.C.R. 593, identifies the difficulty which an appellate court faces
in assessing factual issues when the trier of fact has failed to do so.  He
states, at para. 45:                     A
reviewing court must, in assessing a Board's factual decision, attempt to put
itself in its position.  This can pose serious difficulties where the Board has
made no finding on a critical issue but has simply disposed of the matter on
the basis of a legal finding.  92               Courts
have departed from this established practice in exceptional circumstances in
which the appellate court is able to conclude that it is in as good a position
to resolve the issue as the trial judge.  In such circumstances, there is no
special advantage in remitting the matter back to the trial judge, and the
party affected is not prejudiced thereby.  A material consideration is that a
final resolution of the case will avoid a new trial.  93               Circumstances
that permit the conclusion to be drawn that the appellate court is in as good a
position as the trial judge and that no advantage is lost include:  (i)the trial
judge has made the necessary findings albeit in respect of a different legal
issue, or it can be safely assumed from findings actually made that but for the
error of law the necessary findings would have been made;  (ii)the
evidence is not in dispute or conflict and no issue of credibility is involved;  (iii)special
circumstances exist in which the parties urge the appellate court to make
necessary findings of fact.  See Snell v. Farrell, supra; Davie
Shipbuilding Ltd. v. The Queen, [1984] 1 F.C. 461 (C.A.); Jardine v.
Northern Co-operative Timber and Mill Association, [1945] 1 W.W.R. 533
(B.C.C.A.); Nova, An Alberta Corporation v. Guelph Engineering Co.
(1989), 70 Alta. L.R. (2d) 97.  94               Cases
in which this power has been exercised have stressed that it should only be
resorted to in "unique" circumstances (Nova, at p. 112) and
with extreme care to ensure that "such a course will . . . do complete
justice between the parties" (Glow v. Paquin, [1932] 1 W.W.R. 737
(Man. C.A.), at p. 742).  As a result, the preferred course of action is to
order a new trial.  See Patterson v. Township of Aldborough (1913), 11
D.L.R. 437 (Ont. C.A.); Colautti Construction Ltd. v. City of Ottawa
(1984), 9 D.L.R. (4th) 265 (Ont. C.A.); Bank of Nova Scotia v. Dunphy
Leasing Enterprises Ltd. (1991), 83 Alta. L.R. (2d) 289 (C.A.); Fitz Randolph
v. Fitz Randolph (1918), 41 D.L.R. 739 (N.B.C.A.).  95               No
circumstances are present which would bring this case within the above criteria
and we are clearly not in as good a position as the trial judge to make the
requisite findings.  My colleague addresses this issue (at para. 33) only
in relation to the finding of a duty to warn and justifies our addressing the
issue on the basis that the "bulk of the critical evidence adduced at
trial was documentary, not testimonial".  This is not, however, the only
factual issue which was not addressed at trial.  We have two additional factual
issues in respect of which there were no findings at trial:  (i)Would Ms.
Hollis have consented to the operation even if properly warned?  (ii)Would Dr.
Birch's conduct have been the same whether or not Dow was in breach of the duty
to warn?  96               With
respect to the first issue, notwithstanding that it was not dealt with by the
trial judge, my colleague concludes (at para. 47) that "there was
sufficient evidence adduced at trial to satisfy the subjective Buchan
test".  La Forest J. recognizes the concern expressed by Laskin
C.J. that this test places too high a premium on the self-serving evidence of
the plaintiff.  In his view (at para. 46), however, this concern is adequately
addressed "through cross-examination and through a proper weighing by the
trial judge of the relevant testimony".  I do not understand how the
concern of Laskin C.J. is addressed when the evidence was not weighed by the
trial judge and is dealt with on the basis of the subjective Buchan test
for the first time in this Court.  The hallmark of this test as explained in Buchan
is acceptance of the evidence of the plaintiff on the assertion that she would
not have consented to the operation.  Ms. Hollis was asked at trial what she
would have done if advised of "all of those complications".  She
replied: "I would not have had the surgery".  If, as explained by
Robins J.A. in Buchan, the entire issue turns on whether the trial judge
gives credit to this statement and the evidence of expert witnesses as to what
other reasonable women would do is not relevant, then it is vital that the
trial judge make a specific finding as to the credibility of this statement. 
The fact that in this case the trial judge made no adverse finding with respect
to this statement and accepted her evidence on other issues cannot be a
substitute for a finding on this crucial issue.  Indeed, the trial judge made
no comment with respect to Ms. Hollis' credibility or demeanour as a witness in
general.  A trial judge or jury is perfectly at liberty to accept part of a
witness's evidence and reject other parts.  We do not know whether he would
have done so in this case.  97               On
the other hand, if the testimony of experts was relevant, five plastic surgeons
testified that many women were not deterred by possible complications.  This
evidence conflicted with the evidence of Ms. Hollis and could only be resolved
at trial.  98               My
colleague resolves the second causation issue (namely, whether or not Dr. Birch
would have passed any warnings along), by effectively deciding that this aspect
of causation does not arise.  As explained above, my colleague's approach flies
in the face of well established legal principles by eliminating the need for
the plaintiff to show that her injuries would not have occurred had Dow warned
the "learned intermediary".  Clearly, the issue of causation must be
resolved.  In the absence of a finding in this Court that evidence was lacking
to raise the issues or that a weighing of the evidence cannot resolve the
matter, a new trial should be ordered for the purpose of enabling the trial
judge to carry out this function.  99               Apart
from the foregoing, there are three additional reasons for ordering a new trial
in this case.  100             First,
there will be a new trial in any event with respect to Dr. Birch, and the
judgment of this Court will not put an end to the litigation.  101             Second,
the issue as to whether Ms. Hollis would have proceeded with the implant if
properly warned is an issue in the new trial ordered in respect of Dr. Birch. 
That order is not in issue here.  Dr. Birch is entitled to raise the issue of
causation.  If this Court determines that issue and decides that on the
evidence Ms. Hollis would have refused consent, I cannot see how a trial judge
could decide otherwise.  If he did, such inconsistent findings would not
enhance the image of justice.  102             Finally,
under the Negligence Act, where damage or loss is caused by the fault of
two or more persons, liability for the damage must be apportioned in accordance
with the degrees of fault.  In accordance with s. 2 of the Negligence Act,
the trial judge will have to determine the degree to which Dr. Birch was at
fault.  This involves a comparison of the degrees of fault of Dow and Dr.
Birch.  Such a comparison is at worst impossible and at best extremely
difficult without hearing and weighing the evidence of negligence with respect
to each defendant.  It is, therefore, the practice to have a joint trial which
includes as parties all those alleged to be at fault for having caused the
damage or loss claimed.  It is in keeping with the intent and purpose of the Negligence
Act that all parties alleged to be at fault should be before the trial
judge at the end of the case.  See McCarroll v. Powell, [1955] 4 D.L.R.
631 (Ont. C.A.), at pp. 635-36; Hunt v. MacLeod Construction Co., [1958]
S.C.R. 737.  The problem that I foresee for the trial judge is that the
evidence with respect to Dow's breach of duty will have to be tendered but
presumably in the absence of Dow as a party.  The trial judge will not,
however, be free to evaluate this evidence free of the opinion of this Court. 
For example, the trial judge might be of the view that on the evidence before
him or her no fault is established.  Yet he or she must find some fault because
this Court has determined that Dow was at fault.  Moreover, unless Dow is able
to re-inject itself into the proceedings, its degree of fault will be
determined ex parte.  103             Accordingly,
I would allow the appeal and direct a new trial as proposed by Southin J.A.
dissenting on this issue.                     Appeal dismissed with costs to
the respondent Susan Hollis, Sopinka and McLachlin JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Clark, Wilson, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the respondent
Susan Hollis:  Lang, Michener, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for
the respondent John Robert Birch:  Harper, Grey, Easton, Vancouver.  