Hill
v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130  Morris
Manning and the
Church of Scientology of Toronto                                     Appellants  v.  S.
Casey Hill                                                                                    Respondent  and  The
Attorney General for Ontario, the Canadian Civil
Liberties Association, the Writers' Union of
Canada, PEN Canada, the Canadian Association of
Journalists, the Periodical Writers Association of
Canada, the Book and Periodical Council, the
Canadian Daily Newspaper Association, the Canadian Community
Newspapers Association, the Canadian News
Directors Association of Canada, the Canadian Book
Publishers' Council and the Canadian Magazine Publishers'
Association                                                               Interveners  Indexed
as:  Hill v.
Church of Scientology of Toronto  File
No.:  24216.  1995:  February 20; 1995:  July 20.   on
appeal from the court of appeal for ontario      The appellant M, accompanied by representatives of
the appellant Church of Scientology, held a press conference on the courthouse steps. 
M, who was wearing his barrister's gown, read from and commented upon
allegations contained in a notice of motion by which Scientology intended to
commence criminal contempt proceedings against the respondent, a Crown
attorney.  The notice of motion alleged that the respondent had misled a judge
and had breached orders sealing certain documents belonging to Scientology. 
The remedy sought was the imposition of a fine or his imprisonment.  At the
contempt proceedings, the allegations against the respondent were found to be
untrue and without foundation.  He thereupon commenced an action for damages in
libel against the appellants.  Both appellants were found jointly liable for
general damages in the amount of $300,000 and Scientology alone was found liable
for aggravated damages of $500,000 and punitive damages of $800,000.  This
judgment was affirmed by the Court of Appeal.  The major issues raised in this
appeal are whether the common law of defamation is consistent with the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and whether the jury's award of damages can
stand.  Held:  The
appeal should be dismissed.  Per La Forest, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and
Major JJ.: The respondent's action
for damages does not constitute government action within the meaning of s. 32  of the Charter .  The fact that persons are
employed by the government does not mean that their reputation is automatically
divided into two parts, one related to their personal life and the other to
their employment status.  Reputation is an integral and fundamentally important
aspect of every individual; it exists for everyone quite apart from
employment.  The appellants impugned the character, competence and integrity of
the respondent himself, and not that of the government.  He, in turn, responded
by instituting legal proceedings in his own capacity.  There was no evidence
that the Ministry of the Attorney General or the Government of Ontario required
or even requested him to do so.  Neither is there any indication that the
Ministry controlled the conduct of the litigation in any way.  The fact that
the respondent's suit may have been funded by the Ministry does not alter his
constitutional status or cloak his personal action in the mantle of government
action.  Further, even if there were sufficient government action to bring this
case within s. 32 , the appellants
failed to provide any evidentiary basis upon which to adjudicate their
constitutional attack.  The common law must be interpreted in a manner which
is consistent with Charter  principles.  This obligation is simply a
manifestation of the inherent jurisdiction of the courts to modify or extend
the common law in order to comply with prevailing social conditions and
values.  In its application to the parties in this action, the common law of
defamation complies with the underlying values of the Charter  and there
is no need to amend or alter it.  The common law strikes an appropriate balance
between the twin values of reputation and freedom of expression.  The
protection of reputation is of vital importance, and consideration must be
given to the particular significance reputation has for a lawyer.  Although it
is not specifically mentioned in the Charter , the good reputation of the
individual represents and reflects the innate dignity of the individual, a
concept which underlies all the Charter  rights.  Further, reputation is
intimately related to the right to privacy, which has been accorded
constitutional protection.  The "actual malice" rule should not be
adopted in Canada in an action between private litigants.  The law of
defamation is not unduly restrictive or inhibiting.  Freedom of speech, like
any other freedom, is subject to the law and must be balanced against the
essential need of individuals to protect their reputation.       Cases Cited  By Cory J.  Not followed:  New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964); referred
to:  Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General), [1989] 2 S.C.R.
1326; RWDSU v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573; McKinney
v. University of Guelph, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 229; Nelles v. Ontario,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 170; Lavigne v. Ontario Public Service Employees Union,
[1991] 2 S.C.R. 211; MacKay v. Manitoba, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 357; B.C.G.E.U.
v. British Columbia (Attorney General), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 214; R. v. Swain,
[1991] 1 S.C.R. 933; R. v. Salituro, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 654; Dagenais v.
Canadian Broadcasting Corp., [1994] 3 S.C.R. 835; Re British Columbia
Government Employees' Union, [1983] 6 W.W.R. 640; R. v. Oakes,
[1986] 1 S.C.R. 103; Sweeney v. Patterson, 128 F.2d 457 (1942), cert.
denied 317 U.S. 678 (1942); Reference re Alberta Statutes, [1938] S.C.R.
100; Switzman v. Elbling, [1957] S.C.R. 285; Boucher v. The King,
[1951] S.C.R. 265; Cherneskey v. Armadale Publishers Ltd., [1979] 1
S.C.R. 1067; United States of America v. Cotroni, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1469; R.
v. Keegstra, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 697; R. v. Butler, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 452;
Globe and Mail Ltd. v. Boland, [1960] S.C.R. 203; Derrickson v. Tomat
(1992), 88 D.L.R. (4th) 401; De Libellis Famosis (1605), 5 Co. Rep.
125a, 77 E.R. 250; King v. Lake (1679), Hardres 470, 145 E.R. 552; Rosenblatt
v. Baer, 383 U.S. 75 (1966); Vogel v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp.,
[1982] 3 W.W.R. 97; R. v. Dyment, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417; Barr v. Matteo,
360 U.S. 564 (1959); Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc.,
472 U.S. 749 (1985); Coughlin v. Westinghouse Broadcasting & Cable, Inc.,
476 U.S. 1187 (1986); Derbyshire County Council v. Times Newspapers Ltd.,
[1993] 1 All E.R. 1011; Theophanous v. Herald & Weekly Times Ltd.
(1994), 124 A.L.R. 1; Silkin v. Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd., [1958] 1
W.L.R. 743; Adam v. Ward, [1917] A.C. 309; McLoughlin v. Kutasy,
[1979] 2 S.C.R. 311; Horrocks v. Lowe, [1975] A.C. 135; Taylor v.
Despard, [1956] O.R. 963; Netupsky v. Craig, [1973] S.C.R. 55; Douglas
v. Tucker, [1952] 1 S.C.R. 275; Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada v.
Dalrymple, [1965] S.C.R. 302; Gazette Printing Co. v. Shallow
(1909), 41 S.C.R. 339; Canadian Newspapers Co. v. Canada (Attorney General),
[1988] 2 S.C.R. 122; Walker v. CFTO Ltd. (1987), 59 O.R. (2d) 104; Rantzen
v. Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) Ltd., [1993] 4 All E.R. 975; Ley v.
Hamilton (1935), 153 L.T. 384; Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd.,
[1978] 2 S.C.R. 229; Arnold v. Teno, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 287; Thornton v.
Board of School Trustees of School District No. 57 (Prince George), [1978]
2 S.C.R. 267; Jill Fishing Ltd. v. Koranda Management Inc., [1993]
B.C.J. No. 1861 (QL); Cassell & Co. v. Broome, [1972] 1 All E.R.
801; Blackshaw v. Lord, [1983] 2 All E.R. 311; Sutcliffe v. Pressdram
Ltd., [1990] 1 All E.R. 269; Carson v. John Fairfax & Sons Ltd.
(1993), 113 A.L.R. 577; Lawson v. Burns, [1976] 6 W.W.R. 362; Kerr v.
Conlogue (1992), 65 B.C.L.R. (2d) 70; Egger v. Chelmsford, [1965] 1
Q.B. 248.   Not followed:  New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964); referred
to:  RWDSU v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573; R. v.
Salituro, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 654; Dagenais v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp.,
[1994] 3 S.C.R. 835; R. v. Park, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 836; Gazette
Printing Co. v. Shallow (1909), 41 S.C.R. 339; Edmonton Journal v.
Alberta (Attorney General), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Act to amend
the Courts of Justice Act, 1984,
S.O. 1989, c. 67, s. 4.  Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms, ss. 1 , 2 (b),
32(1) .  Constitution Act, 1982, s. 52 .  Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 137(1).  Crown Attorneys Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.49.   Libel and Slander Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.12.  Marriage
Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 256, s. 20(2).  Ministry of the Attorney General
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.17.  Authors Cited  Australia.   Law Reform Commission. 
Report No. 11.  Unfair Publication:  Defamation and Privacy.  Canberra: 
Australian Government Publishing Service, 1979.  Barrett, David A.  "Declaratory Judgments for Libel:  A Better
Alternative" (1986), 74 Cal. L. Rev.
847.  Bezanson, Randall P.  "Libel Law and the Realities of
Litigation:  Setting the Record Straight" (1985), 71 Iowa L. Rev.
226.  Bollinger, Lee C.  "The End of New York Times v Sullivan: 
Reflections on Masson v New Yorker Magazine", [1991] Sup. Ct. Rev.
1.   Canadian Daily Newspaper Association. 
Response to A Consultation Draft of the General Limitations Act
(September 1991).   Christie, George C.  "Injury to Reputation and the
Constitution:  Confusion Amid Conflicting Approaches" (1976), 75 Mich. L. Rev.
43.  Epstein, Richard A.  "Was New York Times v. Sullivan
Wrong?" (1986), 53 U. Chi. L. Rev. 782.  Gatley on Libel and Slander, 8th ed.  By Philip Lewis.  London:  Sweet &
Maxwell, 1981.  Gatley on Libel and Slander in a
Civil Action:  With Precedents of Pleadings, 4th ed.  By Richard O'Sullivan.  London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 1953.  Hawreluk, David.  "The Lawyer's
Duty to Himself and the Code of Professional Conduct" (1993), 27 L.
Soc. Gaz. 119.  Ireland.  Law Reform Commission.  Report
on the Civil Law of Defamation.  Dublin:  Law Reform Commission, 1991.  Lepofsky, M. David.  "Making
Sense of the Libel Chill Debate:  Do Libel Laws `Chill' the Exercise of Freedom
of Expression?" (1994), 4 N.J.C.L. 169.   Lewis, Anthony.  "New York
Times v. Sullivan Reconsidered:  Time to Return to `The Central Meaning of
the First Amendment'" (1983), 83 Colum. L. Rev. 603.  London, Martin.  "The `Muzzled
Media':  Constitutional Crisis or Product Liability Scam?".  In At What
Price?  Libel Law and Freedom of the Press.  New York:  Twentieth Century
Fund, 1993.  McLellan, A. Anne, and Bruce P. Elman.  "To Whom Does the Charter  Apply?  Some
Recent Cases on Section 32 " (1986), 24 Alta. L. Rev. 361. Salmond and Heuston on the Law of
Torts, 20th ed.  By R. F. V. Heuston and R. A. Buckley.  London: 
Sweet & Maxwell, 1992.  United Kingdom.  Report of the
Committee on Defamation.  London:  H.M.S.O., 1975.  Veeder, Van Vechten.  "The
History and Theory of the Law of Defamation" (1903), 3 Colum. L. Rev.
546.   APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court of
Appeal (1994), 18 O.R. (3d) 385, 114 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 71 O.A.C. 161, 20 C.C.L.T.
(2d) 129, affirming a judgment of the Ontario Court of Justice (General
Division) awarding the respondent damages for libel against the appellants. 
Appeal dismissed.  Bryan Finlay, Q.C., and Christopher J. Tzekas,
for the appellant Morris Manning.  Marc J. Somerville, Q.C., and R. Ross Wells,
for the appellant the Church of Scientology of Toronto.  Robert P. Armstrong, Q.C., and Kent E. Thomson,
for the respondent.  Lori Sterling and Hart Schwartz, for the intervener the Attorney General for
Ontario.  Robert J. Sharpe
and Kent Roach, for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties
Association.  Edward M. Morgan,
for the interveners the Writers' Union of Canada, PEN Canada, the Canadian
Association of Journalists, the Periodical Writers Association of Canada, and
the Book and Periodical Council.   The judgment of La Forest, Gonthier, Cory,
McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ. was delivered by  1                 Cory J. -- On September 17, 1984, the
appellant Morris Manning, accompanied by representatives of the appellant
Church of Scientology of Toronto ("Scientology"), held a press
conference on the steps of Osgoode Hall in Toronto.  Manning, who was wearing
his barrister's gown, read from and commented upon allegations contained in a
notice of motion by which Scientology intended to commence criminal contempt
proceedings against the respondent Casey Hill, a Crown attorney.  The notice of
motion alleged that Casey Hill had misled a judge of the Supreme Court of
Ontario and had breached orders sealing certain documents belonging to
Scientology.  The remedy sought was the imposition of a fine or the
imprisonment of Casey Hill.  2                 At
the contempt proceedings, the allegations against Casey Hill were found to be
untrue and without foundation.  Casey Hill thereupon commenced this action for
damages in libel against both Morris Manning and Scientology.  On October 3,
1991, following a trial before Carruthers J. and a jury, Morris Manning and Scientology were found jointly liable
for general damages in the amount of $300,000 and Scientology alone was found
liable for aggravated damages of $500,000 and punitive damages of $800,000. 
Their appeal from this judgment was dismissed by a unanimous Court of Appeal: 
(1994), 18 O.R. (3d) 385, 114 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 71 O.A.C. 161, 20 C.C.L.T. (2d)
129.  I.  Factual Background  3                 As
in all actions for libel, the factual background is extremely important and
must be set out in some detail.  At the time the defamatory statements were
made, Casey Hill was employed as counsel with the Crown Law Office, Criminal
Division of the Ministry of the Attorney General for the Province of Ontario. 
He had given advice to the Ontario Provincial Police ("OPP")
regarding a warrant obtained on March 1, 1983 which authorized a search of the
premises occupied by Scientology.  During the execution of the search warrant
on March 3 and 4, 1983, approximately 250,000 documents, comprising over 2
million pages of material, were seized.  These documents were stored in some
900 boxes at an OPP building in Toronto.  4                 Immediately
following the seizure, Scientology retained Clayton Ruby to bring a motion to
quash the search warrant and to seek the return of the seized documents.  Casey
Hill, who had gained experience and special skill in the area of search and
seizure, acted as counsel for the Crown.    7                 In
March of 1983, Scientology retained Charles Campbell to make an application to
Rosemarie Drapkin, the Deputy Registrar General of the Ministry of Consumer and
Commercial Relations, requesting that its president, Earl Smith, be granted the
authorization to solemnize marriages pursuant to s. 20(2) of the Marriage Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 256.  One year later, Scientology commenced an
application for judicial review of Rosemarie Drapkin's failure to approve that
application.   9                 During
the last week of July 1984, Casey Hill travelled to Nassau to meet with the
Attorney General of the Bahamas in respect of an ongoing criminal
investigation.  In the course of a telephone conversation, Kim Twohig conveyed
to Casey Hill the urgent need she had to gain access to the documents as a date
had been fixed to hear Scientology's application for judicial review.  Casey
Hill testified that he told Kim Twohig that her Criminal Code  application
would have to be served on the Crown Law Office, Criminal Division in the usual
fashion to obtain its consent.  10               Kim Twohig prepared the necessary materials, including
the notice of motion and an affidavit of Rosemarie Drapkin, and obtained the
requisite consent from James Blacklock of the Crown Law Office, Criminal
Division.  The application was then filed in Weekly Court on July 30, 1984 with
the assistance of Jerome Cooper, a solicitor with the Ministry of Consumer and
Commercial Relations.  No notice was given to Scientology.  The following day,
a consent order granting access to all of the seized documents was issued by
Sirois J. in chambers without submissions from counsel.  11               In her testimony at the trial of this action, Kim Twohig
agreed that she alone made the decision not to provide notice to Scientology of
her application. She testified that she assumed that the presiding judge would
determine whether notice was necessary or appropriate.  It was only later that
she realized that the order of Sirois J. might provide access to sealed
documents.  12               By letter dated August 22, 1984, Rosemarie Drapkin wrote
to Charles Campbell concerning Scientology's application and advised that she
had "reviewed certain documents relating to the Scientology organization
which were seized pursuant to the search warrant" issued on March 1,
1983.  Attached to the letter was a list of 89 documents, some of which had
purportedly been sealed by order of Osler J.  It was this information which
raised the concern of Scientology and its legal advisers.  13               In response, Clayton Ruby wrote a somewhat precipitous
and very aggressive letter to the Solicitor General of Ontario dated August 28, 1984.  In it he accused the OPP of acting
"as if there were no rule of law" and of "simply ignoring solicitor/client
privilege and making a mockery of the courts".  He called for a "full
investigation" and demanded disciplinary action be taken "against
everyone involved".  Clayton Ruby was not aware of the order of Sirois J.
at that time.  He simply assumed that those involved had acted improperly.  14               As early as September 5, 1984, Clayton Ruby, along with
other counsel and representatives of Scientology, decided that what had
occurred was "disgraceful and shocking" and constituted contempt. 
They arrived at this conclusion without having taken any steps to ensure the
accuracy of their impressions.     18               On September 11, 1984, however, without making any
further inquiries and without awaiting the reply from Casey Hill and Howard
Morton, Ruby retained the appellant Morris Manning to advise Scientology in
respect of possible contempt proceedings.  On September 13, 1984,
representatives of Scientology met with Morris Manning, Charles Campbell,
Clayton Ruby, Michael Code and an articling student at Ruby's office.  A
decision was made to commence an application for criminal contempt against both
Casey Hill and Jerome Cooper.  Morris Manning testified that a critical piece
of information which prompted him to bring the contempt application was the
characterization by Michael Code of Casey Hill's attitude during their
conversation.  Casey Hill had allegedly said that if the Church missed sealing
all copies of the privileged documents it was "too bad".  In Morris
Manning's opinion, this demonstrated a contemptuous attitude towards the
court.  He reached this conclusion without ever speaking to Casey Hill or any
of the others involved in the incident such as Rosemarie Drapkin, Kim Twohig,
James Blacklock, Jerome Cooper or Detective Inspector Ormsby, the senior
officer of the OPP responsible for the investigation of Scientology.  Nor had
Morris Manning interviewed those representatives of Scientology who were
directly involved in the sealing of the documents.  19               The evidence adduced at the contempt hearing clearly
established that Casey Hill played no part in the application before Sirois J.
and had nothing to do with the execution or filing of the consent on behalf of
the Attorney General for Ontario.  In fact, he was only informed of any
difficulties associated with the order of Osler J. in late August 1984, when he
received a telephone call from Detective Inspector Ormsby.  At that time,
Ormsby advised him that Rosemarie Drapkin had attended at the OPP building in
which the seized documents were held with the order of Sirois J., but that she was denied access to the sealed
documents.  The sealed documents were never opened.  What Rosemarie Drapkin may
have seen were unsealed copies of the sealed documents that were probably
located in different boxes than the sealed originals.  20               Between September 13 and 17, 1984, Morris Manning
prepared a notice of motion for the contempt application returnable in Weekly
Court some time in early January 1985.  During this time, he did not make any
attempt to determine what was being done with the seized documents or to
ascertain whether any continuing breach of privilege was occurring.  (A)  The "Enemy Canada" File  21               Long before he gave advice to the OPP in connection with
the search and seizure of documents which took place on March 3 and 4, 1983,
Casey Hill had become a target of Scientology's enmity. Over the years, he had
been involved in a number of matters concerning Scientology's affairs.  As a
result, it kept a file on him.  This was only discovered when the production of
the file was ordered during the course of this action.  The file disclosed that
from approximately 1977 until at least 1981, Scientology closely monitored and
tracked Casey Hill and had labelled him an "Enemy Canada".  Casey
Hill testified that from his experience, persons viewed by Scientology as its
enemies were "subject to being neutralized".  (B)  The Press Conference  22               In the file of Charles Campbell there was a note dated
September 10 or 11, 1984 which made reference to a press conference to be held
the following Monday, September 17, 1984.  It appears, then, that before it had
even consulted Morris Manning, Scientology intended to call a press conference   24               He testified that he answered a number of questions
concerning the contempt proceedings and then, at the request of the media, read
a passage from the notice of motion for the television cameras.  Copies of the
notice of motion were distributed to the media along with a typewritten
document, prepared by Scientology, entitled "Chronology of Events Leading
to Contempt Motion".  25               The notice of motion in essence alleged that Casey Hill
had participated in the misleading of Sirois J. and that he had participated in
or aided and abetted others in the opening and inspection of documents which to
his knowledge were sealed by Osler J.  26               On the evening of September 17, 1984, the CFTO broadcast
was seen by an audience of approximately 132,000 people.  The text of the
broadcast is set out in Appendix A to these reasons.  The CBC broadcast was
seen by approximately 118,000 people.  The text is found in Appendix B.  The
following morning, an article appeared in The Globe and Mail entitled
"Motion of Contempt Launched by Church".  Approximately 108,000
copies of the edition containing this article were distributed.  The article is
reproduced in Appendix C.  All three publications repeated the allegations made
in the notice of motion. (C)  The Felske Memorandum  27               Patricia Felske is a Scientologist who had attended at
the offices of the OPP on a regular basis since March 1983 for the purpose of
reviewing the seized materials and ensuring that the privileged documents were
sealed.  Between August 29, 1984, and September 27, 1984, she, along with other
representatives from Scientology, opened the sealed envelopes and verified
their contents against photocopies of the documents that Rosemarie Drapkin had
examined.  Their purpose was to determine whether Ms. Drapkin had been granted
access to the restricted materials.  28               On September 17, 1984, the day of the press conference,
the Scientology investigation was well advanced and neither then nor later was
there any indication that Drapkin gained access to sealed documents. 
Scientology and Manning nevertheless proceeded with the press conference before
any conclusive findings had been made on this issue.  29               On November 2, 1984, Patricia Felske prepared a brief
summary of her findings, entitled "Time Track Re:  Solicitor and Client
Privileged Documents", which she sent to Clayton Ruby, Charles Campbell,
Morris Manning and Diane Martin, another of Scientology's lawyers.  In it she
concluded that "[t]here was no evidence to support any allegation that
the sealed envelopes had been tampered with by the OPP" (emphasis
added).  (D)  The Contempt Trial  30               The contempt trial was heard by Cromarty J. for 11 days
beginning the next Monday, November 5, 1984.  Morris Manning and Charles
Campbell had carriage of the proceedings on behalf of Scientology.  A number of
witnesses were called by them, including Clayton Ruby, Michael Code, Kim
Twohig, Rosemarie Drapkin, James Blacklock, Detective Inspector Ormsby and four
other members of the OPP who had direct responsibility for the seized
documents.   32               From the contents of the Felske Memorandum, which only
came to light at the trial of the present action, it is evident that prior
to the start of the contempt hearing, Scientology was well aware that no sealed
envelopes had been opened.  Yet, it still proceeded with a contempt prosecution
against Casey Hill.  33               Morris Manning testified that he never received the
Felske Memorandum and conceded that if he had been aware of it, he would have
been obliged to disclose it to Casey Hill.  However, on the weekend prior to
the start of the contempt trial, Morris Manning was briefed by Charles
Campbell.  At trial, both Campbell and Ruby acknowledged that they had received
the Felske Memorandum.  In addition, Campbell testified that all important
information concerning the prosecution was shared with everybody involved.  It
might be inferred that this would include Manning.  34               Further, Morris Manning met with Patricia Felske and two
other representatives of Scientology during the weekend prior to the hearing of
the contempt motion.  However, he testified that they were not interviewed for
the purpose of giving evidence at the contempt trial nor were they called to do
so.  Cromarty J. characterized the failure to call these individuals as "a
most eloquent omission".  35               There was another equally eloquent omission.  The OPP
officers who were called by Scientology to testify were not asked to produce
the sealed envelopes they were directed to bring with them to court.  If they
had, it would have been obvious that the envelopes had not been tampered with.  (E)              The
Attempt to Disqualify Casey Hill from the Search and Seizure Proceedings  36               As stated earlier, Scientology made an application in
March 1983 to quash the search warrant which the OPP had used to seize its
documents.  This application was commenced before Osler J. prior to September
17, 1984, but was adjourned until the completion of the contempt proceedings. 
Throughout this time, Casey Hill represented the Crown as lead counsel.  37               The application was resumed on December 18, 1984.  By that time, the contempt charges had
been dismissed as unfounded and this libel action had been commenced.  Casey
Hill continued to represent the Crown but made a full disclosure of all the
relevant circumstances to Osler J.  He submitted that the proceedings involved
the interpretation and application of legal principles rather than the exercise
of prosecutorial discretion and, as a consequence, his ability to act as
responding counsel was not impaired.  38               Scientology, nevertheless, moved to disqualify Casey
Hill on the ground that occasions might arise where he would have to exercise a
discretion as to the production of a document and as to the significance to be
attached to it.  Scientology contended that this could reflect adversely upon
it and, in due course result in a favourable consideration of Casey Hill's
libel suit.  Scientology was essentially suggesting that Casey Hill would use
his position as Crown counsel to further his private interests.  This was a
serious attack on his professional integrity which added to the sting of the
libel uttered to that point.  39               Osler J. emphatically rejected these arguments.  He
stated that it was fundamentally important for the Crown to "proceed
courageously in the face of threats and attempts at intimidation or in the face
of proceedings that have been found to be groundless but have obviously had the
effect of harassment".  (F)  Pleas of Justification  40               On February 18,
1985, Scientology delivered its statement of defence in this action. 
Notwithstanding the findings contained in the Felske Memorandum prepared by its
own members, and the conclusion reached by Cromarty J. in the contempt hearing,
Scientology entered a plea of justification.  41               Scientology also put forward as true an allegation that
Casey Hill directed and supervised the OPP in the opening and reviewing of 20
boxes of documents which had been sealed by order of Linden J.  This was found
by the Court of Appeal to constitute a separate allegation of contempt and a
further attack upon the integrity of Casey Hill in the performance of his
duties as Crown counsel.  42               Scientology maintained its plea of justification
throughout the trial and did not withdraw it until the first day of the hearing
before the Court of Appeal on December 6, 1993, some nine years after the original libel.  43               Morris Manning delivered his statement of defence on
April 1, 1985, and also asserted a
plea of justification which he did not withdraw until the week prior to the
commencement of the trial.  He persisted in this plea despite the decision of
Cromarty J. dismissing the motion
to commit Casey Hill for contempt and despite the overwhelming evidence
indicating that the allegations made against Hill were false.  (G)  The Conduct of Scientology at Trial  44               Scientology continued its attack against Casey Hill
throughout the trial of this action, both in the presence of the jury and in
its absence.  More than once, it reiterated the libel even though it knew that
these allegations were false.  Clearly, it sought to repeatedly attack Casey
Hill's moral character.  Some examples are set out below.    (2)  The
"Veiled Threat" Against Clayton Ruby  46               Michael Code testified that during the course of his
conversation with Casey Hill on September 6, 1984, the latter had made a veiled
threat against Clayton Ruby which he described in the following terms:  He [Casey Hill] suggests we may receive an ominous
reply to Clay's complaints.  He is awaiting a report back from the police. 
What he said to me was something to the effect that there was a police
investigation of Mr. Ruby's conduct and basically, you better watch it. 
[Emphasis added.]  47               When Casey Hill was called in reply, he denied making
any such threat or using the word "ominous" during the conversation. 
Rather, he testified that he had used the word "omnibus" in reference
to a combined reply to the letters that Ruby sent to the Solicitor General and
to himself.  (3)  The
Closing Address to the Jury by Counsel for Scientology  49               During his closing address, counsel for Scientology
contended that Casey Hill had demonstrated feigned and insincere emotion when
he described his reaction to seeing the publication of the CFTO broadcast on
the evening of September 17, 1984.  He suggested to the jury that it may have
been nothing more than a "skilled performance to tug at your
heartstrings" in order to influence the verdict.  (H)  The Events Following the Verdict of the Jury  50               The day after the jury's verdict, on October 4, 1991,
Scientology republished the libel in a press release delivered to the media.  A
few weeks later, it issued another press release attacking the verdict of the
jury as "outrageous" and "so exorbitant and so grossly out of
proportion that it was influenced more by L.A. Law than Canadian legal
tradition".  Shortly thereafter, it proceeded with a motion before
Carruthers J. to adduce evidence
which, it contended, would bear "directly on the credibility and
reputation of the plaintiff S. Casey Hill".  That motion was later
withdrawn.  II.  Judgments Below  (A)  Trial by Jury (Carruthers
J. presiding)  51               This action for damages for libel was commenced on
December 14, 1984.  The trial
before Carruthers J. and a jury lasted from September 3, 1991 until October 3, 1991.  The questions posed to the jury and their
answers were as follows:                                                      SPECIAL
VERDICT                                                            QUESTIONS  A.  With Respect to the Defendant, Morris Manning  1.  Did
the CBC broadcast refer to the plaintiff?  A.  Yes  2.    Did Morris Manning instruct,
authorize or consent to the publication of the Notice of Motion at the press
conference?  A.  Yes  B.  With Respect to Both Defendants  3.    Are the words complained of in
the CFTO and CBC broadcasts on September 17, 1984, the Globe & Mail article
on September 18, 1984 and the Notice of Motion defamatory of the plaintiff? A.  Yes  4.    If the answer to Question 3 is
"yes", what general damages, if any, is the plaintiff, Casey Hill,
entitled to from the defendants, The Church of Scientology of Toronto and
Morris Manning?  A.  $300,000  5.    If your answer to Question 3 is
"yes", is he entitled to any aggravated damages from the defendant,
Morris Manning, in addition to any general damages already assessed, and if so,
in what amount?  A.  Nil  6.    If your answer to Question 3 is
"yes", is he entitled to any aggravated damages from the defendant,
The Church of Scientology of Toronto, in addition to any general damages
already assessed, and if so, in what amount?  A.  $500,000  7.    If your answer to Question 3 is
"yes", is he entitled to any punitive damages from the defendant, The
Church of Scientology of Toronto, and if so, in what amount?  A.  $800,000  52               Following the verdict, the appellants made a motion
before Carruthers J. requesting
that he completely disregard the jury's assessment of damages because it was
"outrageous, exorbitant and entirely out of proportion to the sting of the
defamation" ((1992), 7 O.R. (3d) 489, at p. 497).  Carruthers J. concluded that the jury was
properly instructed as to the object and purpose of each head of damage and
that there was evidence upon which the jury could have reached a conclusion
that it was entitled to award damages under each of the three heads.  53               Carruthers J. refused to "invade the province of
the jury" in order to make his own assessment of the damages (at p. 502).  He noted that since both defendants
vigorously opposed each of the several motions on behalf of the plaintiff to
discharge the jury, it was not open to them to suggest that he fix damages
himself.  (B)  Court of Appeal (1994), 18
O.R. (3d) 385  54               The Court of Appeal, in its careful and extensive
reasons, rejected the appellants' allegation that the common law of defamation
violated s. 2 (b) of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  It did so for two reasons.  First, the
court held that it was nothing more than a "bare assertion" of
unconstitutionality which could not support their constitutional challenge (at
p. 414).  Second, the court held
that even if the constitutional challenge could be resolved in the absence of
an evidentiary foundation, the appellants failed to show that the action for
damages commenced by Casey Hill was a form of "government action"
which was necessary in order to attract the application of the Charter . 
The court rejected the argument that Casey Hill's position as a public figure
implicated the government in whatever action he pursued.  It also dismissed the
submission that the government funding of his action was relevant to this
question.  55               The Court of Appeal then considered the argument that
interpreting the common law in a manner consistent with the Charter 
required the adoption of the "actual malice" standard of liability
set out in the reasons of the U.S. Supreme Court in New York Times Co. v.
Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964).  There, Brennan J. held that public officials could only collect
damages for statements concerning their fitness for office in circumstances
where they could demonstrate that the defamatory statement was made "with
knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false
or not" (p. 280).  After
noting that the common law concept of malice involves an assessment of
different factors, such as animosity, hostility, ill will and spite, the court
concluded that the adoption of the rule in New York Times v. Sullivan, supra,
would result in a major change to the common law that was neither necessary nor
merited.  It found that the existing rule was historically based on sound
policy reasons which recognized the importance of the protection of the
reputation of individuals who assume the responsibilities of public officials.  56               The appellants also submitted that the trial judge erred
in ruling that the circumstances of the press conference did not constitute an
occasion of qualified privilege and in declining to charge the jury with
respect to that defence.  The Court of Appeal found that under the common law,
qualified privilege attached only to the publication of documents read or
referred to in open court.  It was opposed to conferring a privilege on a press
conference held for the purpose of disseminating to the public details of a
pending legal proceeding at a time when no document in connection with that
legal proceeding had yet been filed in any court office.  In rejecting the
argument that this Court's judgment in Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney
General), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326, superseded the common law rule, the court
stated that, while there is a right to publish details of judicial proceedings
before they are heard in open court, "such publication does not enjoy the
protection of qualified privilege if it is defamatory" (p. 427).  57               On the subject of general damages, the Court of Appeal
examined the libellous statement, the circumstances of its publication and its
effect on Casey Hill.  It found that "[t]he false statements can be seen
as little short of allegations of a criminal breach of trust" (p. 437), "calculated to engender in the minds of
those who learned of [them] that they were very serious and entirely
credible" (p. 438). 
Accordingly, they justified a very substantial award of general damages to
compensate Casey Hill for the damage to his reputation and the injury to his feelings. 
This, it was held, should be the result even though he had received several
promotions and appointments by the time of trial.  58               With respect to aggravated damages, the Court of Appeal
examined the circumstances existing prior to, at the time of and following the
publication of the libel.  It concluded that the jury was entitled to find that
its award for general damages was not large enough to provide adequate solatium
to Casey Hill for the aggravation of his injury which was caused by
Scientology's malicious libel and reprehensible conduct.  59               The court then turned its attention to the issue of
punitive damages and concluded as follows at p. 459:  What the circumstances of this case
demonstrated beyond peradventure to the jury was that Scientology was engaged
in an unceasing and apparently unstoppable campaign to destroy Casey Hill and
his reputation.  It must have been apparent to the jury that a very substantial
penalty was required because Scientology had not been deterred from its course
of conduct by a previous judicial determination that its allegations were
unfounded nor by its own knowledge that its principal allegation [that the
sealed documents had been opened] was false.  60               The court also observed that it would not interfere with
the award of punitive damages on the ground that Scientology persisted in its
attack on Casey Hill's reputation even after the jury's verdict.   III.  Analysis  62               Two major issues are raised in this appeal.  The first
concerns the constitutionality of the common law action for defamation.  The
second relates to the damages that can properly be assessed in such actions. 63               Let us first review the appellants' submissions
pertaining to defamation actions.  The appellants contend that the common law
of defamation has failed to keep step with the evolution of Canadian society. 
They argue that the guiding principles upon which defamation is based place too
much emphasis on the need to protect the reputation of plaintiffs at the
expense of the freedom of expression of defendants.  This, they say, is an
unwarranted restriction which is imposed in a manner that cannot be justified
in a free and democratic society.  The appellants add that if the element of
government action in the present case is insufficient to attract Charter 
scrutiny under s. 32 , the
principles of the common law ought, nevertheless, to be interpreted, even in a
purely private action, in a manner consistent with the Charter .  This,
the appellants say, can only be achieved by the adoption of the "actual
malice" standard of liability articulated by the Supreme Court of the
United States in the case of New York Times v. Sullivan, supra.  64               In addition, the appellant Morris Manning submits that
the common law should be interpreted so as to afford the defence of qualified
privilege to a lawyer who, acting on behalf of a client, reads and comments in
public upon a notice of motion which he believes, in good faith, has been filed
in court, and which subsequently is filed.  Let us consider first whether the Charter 
is directly applicable to this case.  (A)  Application of the Charter  65               The appellants have not challenged the constitutionality
of any of the provisions of the Libel and Slander Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. L.12.  The question, then, is whether the common law
of defamation can be subject to Charter  scrutiny.  The appellants submit
that by reason of his position as a government employee, Casey Hill's action
for damages constitutes "government action" within the meaning of s. 32  of the Charter .  In the alternative, the
appellants submit that, pursuant to s. 52  of the Constitution Act, 1982 , the common law must be
interpreted in light of Charter  values.  I will address the s. 32  argument first.  (1)  Section 32 :  Government Action  66               Section 32(1)
reads:  32. (1)  This
Charter applies  (a)  to the Parliament and government of Canada in respect of all matters
within the authority of Parliament including all matters relating to the Yukon
Territory and Northwest Territories; and  (b)  to the legislature and government of each province in respect of all
matters within the authority of the legislature of each province.   It is my view that s. 32  of the Charter  specifies the actors to
whom the Charter  will apply.  They are the legislative, executive and
administrative branches of government.  It will apply to those branches of
government whether or not their action is invoked in public or private
litigation. . . .  It will apply to the common law, however, only
in so far as the common law is the basis of some governmental action which, it
is alleged, infringes a guaranteed right or freedom.  [Emphasis added.]  68               La Forest
J., writing for the majority in McKinney v. University of Guelph, [1990]
3 S.C.R. 229, stressed the importance of this limitation on the application of
the Charter  to the actions of government.  He said this at p. 262:  The exclusion of private activity from
the Charter  was not a result of happenstance.  It was a deliberate
choice which must be respected.  We do not really know why this approach was
taken, but several reasons suggest themselves.  Historically, bills of rights,
of which that of the United States is the great constitutional exemplar, have
been directed at government.  Government is the body that can enact and enforce
rules and authoritatively impinge on individual freedom.  Only government
requires to be constitutionally shackled to preserve the rights of the
individual.  69               La Forest
J. warned that subjecting all private and public action to constitutional
review would mean reopening whole areas of settled law and would be
"tantamount to setting up an alternative tort system" (p. 263).  He
expressed the very sage warning that this "could strangle the operation of
society" (p. 262).  See also McLellan and Elman, "To Whom Does the
Charter  Apply?  Some Recent Cases on Section 32 " (1986), 24 Alta. L.
Rev. 361, at p. 367, cited in Dolphin
Delivery Ltd., supra, at p. 597.  70               The appellants argue that at all material times Casey
Hill was an agent of the Crown, acting on behalf of the Attorney General of
Ontario, and that the defamatory statements which are the subject of the
present action were made in relation to acts undertaken by him in that
capacity.  They further submit that Casey Hill commenced these legal
proceedings at the direction and with the financial support of the Attorney
General in order to vindicate the damage to the reputation of the Ministry
resulting from criticism levelled at the conduct of one of its officials.  It
is, therefore, contended that this action represents an effort by a government
department to use the action of defamation to restrict and infringe the freedom
of expression of the appellants in a manner that is contrary to the Charter .  71               These submissions cannot be accepted.  They have no
legal, evidentiary or logical basis of support.  Casey Hill's constitutional
status for the purpose of the application of the Charter  should not be
determined by the nature of the allegations made against him.  Rather, the
determination of whether state involvement existed is dependent upon the
circumstances surrounding the institution of the libel proceedings.  72               The fact that persons are employed by the government
does not mean that their reputation is automatically divided into two parts,
one related to their personal life and the other to their employment status. 
To accept the appellants' position would mean that identical defamatory
comments would be subject to two different laws, one applicable to government
employees, the other to the rest of society.  Government employment cannot be a
basis for such a distinction.  Reputation is an integral and fundamentally
important aspect of every individual.  It exists for everyone quite apart from
employment.  73               In order to establish the requisite government action
for Charter  scrutiny, the appellants argue that it is easy to
distinguish between a janitor working in a government building who is simply an
employee and a Crown Attorney who is an agent of the state.  It is said that
when a person who is clearly an agent of the state acts, he or she is acting for
or on behalf of the state.  I cannot accept this proposition.  There are a
significant number of public servants who represent the Crown in any number of
ways.  While it might be easy to differentiate between the extreme examples set
forth by the appellants, the grey area between those extremes is too extensive
and the functions of the officials too varied to draw any effective line of
distinction.  The experience in the United States following the decision in New
York Times v. Sullivan, supra, is instructive in this regard.  That
case modified the common law in relation to defamation suits brought by public
officials and touched off an intense debate with respect to who might be
designated as a public official or figure rather than a private person.  See,
for example, G. C. Christie, "Injury to Reputation and the Constitution: 
Confusion Amid Conflicting Approaches" (1976), 75 Mich. L. Rev. 43.  74               There is no doubt that Crown Attorneys exercise
statutory powers as agents of the government.  See Ministry of the Attorney
General Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.17;
Crown Attorneys Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.49; and the Criminal Code,  s. 504 .  Therefore, as McIntyre J. pointed out in Nelles
v. Ontario, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 170, at p. 209, they benefit from the protection of any immunity which attaches to
their office.  However, they may become personally liable when they exceed
their statutory powers.  By extension, actions taken by Crown Attorneys which
are outside the scope of their statutory duties are independent of and distinct
from their status as agents for the government.  Such was the case here.   76               The private nature of these proceedings is apparent, as
well, from the respondent's statement of claim, and particularly from the
allegation contained in para. 19
that the defamatory statements:  . . . constituting as they do statements of the most
serious professional misconduct by the Plaintiff, have damaged his professional
reputation and brought him into public scandal, odium and contempt, by reason
of which the Plaintiff has suffered damage.    79               In my opinion, the appellants have not satisfied the
government action requirement described in s. 32 .  Therefore, the Charter  cannot be applied
directly to scrutinize the common law of defamation in the circumstances of
this case.  80               Even if there were sufficient government action to bring
this case within s. 32 , the
appellants failed to provide any evidentiary basis upon which to adjudicate
their constitutional attack.  This Court has stated on a number of occasions
that it will not determine alleged Charter  violations in the absence of
a proper evidentiary record.  See, for example, MacKay v. Manitoba,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 357.  In light of the conclusion that the government action
requirement of s. 32  has not been
met, I need not address this issue.  Yet, I feel a brief comment is necessary
because of the light it sheds on the manner in which the appellants have
conducted themselves in this litigation.  82               There is no government action involved in this
defamation suit.  It now must be determined whether a change or modification in
the law of defamation is required to make it comply with the underlying values
upon which the Charter  is founded.  (2)  Section 52 :  Charter Values and the Common Law  (a)  Interpreting
the Common Law in Light of the Values Underlying the Charter  (i)    Review
of the Decisions Dealing With the Issue   The English text provides that "any law that is
inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution is, to the extent of the
inconsistency, of no force or effect".  If this language is not broad
enough to include the common law, it should be observed as well that the French
text adds strong support to this conclusion in its employment of the words
"elle rend inopérantes
les dispositions incompatibles de tout autre règle de droit". . . .  To adopt a construction of s. 52(1)  which would exclude from Charter 
application the whole body of the common law which in great part governs the
rights and obligations of the individuals in society, would be wholly
unrealistic and contrary to the clear language employed in s. 52(1) of the Act.  [Emphasis in Dolphin Delivery.]  In
emphasizing that the common law should develop in a manner consistent with Charter 
principles, a distinction was drawn between private litigants founding a cause
of action on the Charter  and judges exercising their inherent
jurisdiction to develop the common law.  At page 603 this was written:  Where, however, private party "A" sues
private party "B" relying on the common law and where no act of
government is relied upon to support the action, the Charter  will not
apply.  I should make it clear, however, that this is a distinct issue from
the question whether the judiciary ought to apply and develop the principles of
the common law in a manner consistent with the fundamental values enshrined in
the Constitution.  The answer to this question must be in the affirmative. 
In this sense, then, the Charter  is far from irrelevant to private
litigants whose disputes fall to be decided at common law.  But this is
different from the proposition that one private party owes a constitutional
duty to another, which proposition underlies the purported assertion of Charter 
causes of action or Charter defences between individuals.  [Emphasis
added.]  84               Since 1986, this Court has subjected the common law to Charter 
scrutiny in a number of situations where government action was based upon a
common law rule:  B.C.G.E.U. v. British Columbia (Attorney General),
[1988] 2 S.C.R. 214; R. v. Swain, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 933; R. v. Salituro,
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 654; and Dagenais v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp., [1994]
3 S.C.R. 835.  However, Dolphin Delivery, supra, remains the only
case which has closely examined the application of the Charter  in the
context of purely private litigation.  Nevertheless, it is helpful to review
the different approaches which have been suggested in those cases in order to
better appreciate which principles should properly apply in cases of private
litigation.  85               In R. v. Salituro, supra, the Crown called
the accused's estranged wife as a witness.  The common law rule prohibiting
spouses from testifying against each other was found to be inconsistent with
developing social values and with the values enshrined in the Charter . 
At page 670, Iacobucci J., writing
for the Court, held:  Judges can and should adapt the common law to
reflect the changing social, moral and economic fabric of the country.  Judges
should not be quick to perpetuate rules whose social foundation has long since
disappeared.  Nonetheless, there are significant constraints on the power of
the judiciary to change the law.  As McLachlin J. indicated in Watkins, supra,
in a constitutional democracy such as ours it is the legislature and not the
courts which has the major responsibility for law reform; and for any changes
to the law which may have complex ramifications, however necessary or desirable
such changes may be, they should be left to the legislature.  The judiciary
should confine itself to those incremental changes which are necessary to keep
the common law in step with the dynamic and evolving fabric of our society.  Further,
at p. 675 this Court held:  Where the principles underlying a
common law rule are out of step with the values enshrined in the Charter ,
the courts should scrutinize the rule closely.  If it is possible to change the
common law rule so as to make it consistent with Charter  values, without
upsetting the proper balance between judicial and legislative action that I
have referred to above, then the rule ought to be changed.  86               Unlike the present appeal and the decisions of this
Court in B.C.G.E.U., Swain, and Dagenais, the common law
rule in Salituro was not alleged to infringe a specific Charter 
right.  Rather, it was alleged to be inconsistent with those fundamental values
that provide the foundation for the Charter .  Although the Court in Salituro
considered whether Parliament had, through the Evidence Act, intended to
preserve the common law rule, it did not undertake an analysis similar to that
which would be required under s. 1 
to determine if the Charter  breach was justifiable.  Rather, it
proceeded to balance, in a broad and flexible manner, the conflicting values. 
The reasons examined the origins of the impugned common law rule and the
justifications which had been raised for upholding it.  These concerns were
weighed against the Charter 's recognition of the equality of women and,
more specifically, against the concept of human dignity which inspires the Charter . 
It was held that the values which were set out in the common law rule did not
represent the values of today's society which are reflected in the provisions
of the Charter .  87               In B.C.G.E.U., supra, McEachern C.J.B.C.
on his own motion issued an injunction against a union picketing in front of
the courthouse:  [1983] 6 W.W.R. 640.  It was held that the common law rule
giving rise to the picketing injunction breached s. 2 (b).  The breach was then found to be
justified following a traditional s. 1 
analysis.   If a new common law rule could be
enunciated which would not interfere with an accused person's right to have
control over the conduct of his or her defence, I can see no conceptual problem
with the Court's simply enunciating such a rule to take the place of the old
rule, without considering whether the old rule could nonetheless be upheld
under s. 1  of the Charter .  Given that the common law rule was fashioned
by judges and not by Parliament or a legislature, judicial deference to elected
bodies is not an issue.  If it is possible to reformulate a common law rule so
that it will not conflict with the principles of fundamental justice, such a
reformulation should be undertaken.  Of course, if it were not possible to
reformulate the common law rule so as to avoid an infringement of a
constitutionally protected right or freedom, it would be necessary for the
Court to consider whether the common law rule could be upheld as a reasonable
limit under s. 1  of the Charter .  Nevertheless,
in R. v. Swain, the formal s. 1  analysis was undertaken since Oakes,
supra, provided a familiar structure for analysis, the constitutional
questions were stated with s. 1  in
mind and the Court had the benefit of extensive argument on s. 1 .  89               Finally, in Dagenais, supra, the CBC
challenged a publication ban which prevented them from airing one of their
programmes.  It was held that where the common law rule on publication bans
conflicted with Charter  values, the common law rule must be varied in
such a manner as to enable the Court to consider both the objective of a
publication ban and the proportionality of the ban's effect on protected Charter 
rights.  Without adopting a formal s. 1  analysis, it was held that this approach "clearly reflects the
substance of the Oakes test applicable when assessing legislation under
s. 1  of the Charter "
(p. 878).  90               In light of these cases, then, it remains to be
determined what approach should be followed when, in the context of private
litigation with no government action involved, a common law rule is alleged to
be inconsistent with the Charter .  (ii)   Approach
That Should Be Followed  91               It is clear from Dolphin Delivery, supra,
that the common law must be interpreted in a manner which is consistent with Charter 
principles.  This obligation is simply a manifestation of the inherent
jurisdiction of the courts to modify or extend the common law in order to
comply with prevailing social conditions and values.  As was said in Salituro,
supra, at p. 678:  The courts are the custodians of the common law, and
it is their duty to see that the common law reflects the emerging needs and
values of our society.  92               Historically, the common law evolved as a result of the
courts making those incremental changes which were necessary in order to make
the law comply with current societal values.  The Charter  represents a
restatement of the fundamental values which guide and shape our democratic
society and our legal system.  It follows that it is appropriate for the courts
to make such incremental revisions to the common law as may be necessary to
have it comply with the values enunciated in the Charter .  93               When determining how the Charter  applies to the
common law, it is important to distinguish between those cases in which the
constitutionality of government action is challenged, and those in which there
is no government action involved.  It is important not to import into private
litigation the analysis which applies in cases involving government action.  94               In Dolphin Delivery, supra, it was noted
that the Charter  sets out those specific constitutional duties which the
state owes to its citizens.  When government action is challenged, whether it
is based on legislation or the common law, the cause of action is founded upon
a Charter  right.  The claimant alleges that the state has breached its
constitutional duty.  The state, in turn, must justify that breach.  While
criminal cases present the prime example of government action, challenges to
government action can also arise in civil cases.  The state's obligation to
uphold its constitutional duties is no less pressing in the civil sphere than
in the criminal.  The two cases of B.C.G.E.U., supra, and Dagenais,
supra, present a very specific type of "government action" in
the civil context.  In both cases, the Court was called upon to consider the
operations of the Court and to determine the extent of its own jurisdiction to
consider matters which were essentially public in nature.  The cases did not
involve strictly private litigation.  Therefore, they must be approached with
caution when considering what analysis should be applied in purely private
civil litigation.  95               Private parties owe each other no constitutional duties
and cannot found their cause of action upon a Charter  right.  The party
challenging the common law cannot allege that the common law violates a Charter 
right because, quite simply, Charter  rights do not exist in the
absence of state action.  The most that the private litigant can do is argue
that the common law is inconsistent with Charter  values.  It is
very important to draw this distinction between Charter  rights and Charter 
values.  Care must be taken not to expand the application of the Charter 
beyond that established by s. 32(1) ,
either by creating new causes of action, or by subjecting all court orders to Charter 
scrutiny.  Therefore, in the context of civil litigation involving only private
parties, the Charter  will "apply" to the common law only to
the extent that the common law is found to be inconsistent with Charter 
values.   97               When the common law is in conflict with Charter 
values, how should the competing principles be balanced?  In my view, a
traditional s. 1  framework for
justification is not appropriate.  It must be remembered that the Charter 
"challenge" in a case involving private litigants does not allege the
violation of a Charter  right.  It addresses a conflict between
principles.  Therefore, the balancing must be more flexible than the
traditional s. 1  analysis
undertaken in cases involving governmental action cases.  Charter 
values, framed in general terms, should be weighed against the principles which
underlie the common law.  The Charter  values will then provide the
guidelines for any modification to the common law which the court feels is
necessary.  98               Finally, the division of onus which normally operates in
a Charter  challenge to government action should not be applicable in a
private litigation Charter  "challenge" to the common law. 
This is not a situation in which one party must prove a prima facie violation
of a right while the other bears the onus of defending it.  Rather, the party
who is alleging that the common law is inconsistent with the Charter 
should bear the onus of proving both that the common law fails to comply with Charter 
values and that, when these values are balanced, the common law should be
modified.  In the ordinary situation, where government action is said to
violate a Charter  right, it is appropriate that the government undertake
the justification for the impugned statute or common law rule.  However, the
situation is very different where two private parties are involved in a civil
suit.  One party will have brought the action on the basis of the prevailing
common law which may have a long history of acceptance in the community.  That
party should be able to rely upon that law and should not be placed in the
position of having to defend it.  It is up to the party challenging the common
law to bear the burden of proving not only that the common law is inconsistent
with Charter  values but also that its provisions cannot be justified.  99               With that background, let us first consider the common
law of defamation in light of the values underlying the Charter .  (b)  The
Nature of Actions for Defamation:  The Values to Be Balanced  100             There can be no doubt that in libel cases the twin values
of reputation and freedom of expression will clash.  As Edgerton J. stated in Sweeney
v. Patterson, 128 F.2d 457 (D.C. Cir. 1942), at p. 458, cert. denied 317 U.S. 678 (1942), whatever is
"added to the field of libel is taken from the field of free
debate".  The real question, however, is whether the common law strikes an
appropriate balance between the two.  Let us consider the nature of each of
these values.  (i)    Freedom
of Expression  101             Much has been written of the great importance of free
speech.  Without this freedom to express ideas and to criticize the operation
of institutions and the conduct of individual members of government agencies,
democratic forms of government would wither and die.  See, for example, Reference
re Alberta Statutes, [1938] S.C.R. 100, at p. 133; Switzman v. Elbling, [1957] S.C.R. 285,
at p. 306; and Boucher v. The
King, [1951] S.C.R. 265, at p. 326. 
More recently, in Edmonton Journal, supra, at p. 1336, it was said:   102             However, freedom of expression has never been recognized
as an absolute right.  Duff C.J. emphasized this point in Reference re
Alberta Statutes, supra, at p. 133:  The right of public discussion is, of
course, subject to legal restrictions; those based upon considerations of
decency and public order, and others conceived for the protection of various
private and public interests with which, for example, the laws of defamation
and sedition are concerned.  In a word, freedom of discussion means . . . "freedom governed by law."  [Emphasis added.]  See
also Cherneskey v. Armadale Publishers Ltd., [1979] 1 S.C.R. 1067, at
pp. 1072 and 1091.  103             Similar reasoning has been applied in cases argued under
the Charter .  Although a Charter  right is defined broadly,
generally without internal limits, the Charter  recognizes, under s. 1 , that social values will at times conflict and
that some limits must be placed even on fundamental rights.  As La Forest J. explained in United States of America
v. Cotroni, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1469, at p. 1489, this Court has adopted a flexible approach to measuring the
constitutionality of impugned provisions wherein "the underlying values
[of the Charter ] must be sensitively weighed in a particular context
against other values of a free and democratic society . . .".   105             In R. v. Butler, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 452, the obscenity
provisions of the Criminal Code, s. 163 , were questioned.  It was held, under the s. 1  analysis, that pornography could not stand on an
equal footing with other kinds of expression which directly engage the
"core" values of freedom of expression.  Further, it was found that
the fact that the targeted material was expression motivated by economic profit
more readily justified the imposition of restrictions.   It would tend to deter sensitive and honourable men
from seeking public positions of trust and responsibility, and leave them open
to others who have no respect for their reputation.  See
also Derrickson v. Tomat (1992), 88 D.L.R. (4th) 401 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 408.  (ii)   The
Reputation of the Individual  107             The other value to be balanced in a defamation action is
the protection of the reputation of the individual.  Although much has very
properly been said and written about the importance of freedom of expression,
little has been written of the importance of reputation.  Yet, to most people,
their good reputation is to be cherished above all.  A good reputation is
closely related to the innate worthiness and dignity of the individual.  It is
an attribute that must, just as much as freedom of expression, be protected by
society's laws.  In order to undertake the balancing required by this case,
something must be said about the value of reputation.  108             Democracy has always recognized and cherished the
fundamental importance of an individual.  That importance must, in turn, be
based upon the good repute of a person.  It is that good repute which enhances
an individual's sense of worth and value.  False allegations can so very
quickly and completely destroy a good reputation.  A reputation tarnished by
libel can seldom regain its former lustre.  A democratic society, therefore,
has an interest in ensuring that its members can enjoy and protect their good
reputation so long as it is merited.   The earliest evidence in recorded
history of any sanction for defamatory statements is in the Mosaic code.  In Exodus
XXII 28 we find `Thou shalt not revile the gods nor curse the ruler of thy
people' and in Exodus XXIII 1 `Thou shalt not raise a false report:  put
not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness'.  There is also a
condemnation of rumourmongers in Leviticus XIX 16 `Thou shalt not go up
and down as a talebearer among thy people'.  110             To make false statements which are likely to injure the
reputation of another has always been regarded as a serious offence.  During
the Roman era, the punishment for libel varied from the loss of the right to
make a will, to imprisonment, exile for life, or forfeiture of property.  In
the case of slander, a person could be made liable for payment of damages.  111             It was decreed by the Teutons in the Lex Salica
that if a man called another a "wolf" or a "hare", he must
pay the sum of three shillings; for a false imputation of unchastity in a woman
the penalty was 45 shillings.  In the Normal Costumal, if people falsely called
another "thief" or "manslayer", they had to pay damages
and, holding their nose with their fingers, publicly confess themselves a liar.  112             With the separation of ecclesiastical and secular courts
by the decree of William I following the Norman conquest, the Church assumed
spiritual jurisdiction over defamatory language, which was regarded as a sin. 
The Church "stayed the tongue of the defamer at once pro custodia morum
of the community, and pro salute animae of the delinquent".  See V.
V. Veeder, "The History and Theory of the Law of Defamation" (1903),
3 Colum. L. Rev. 546, at p. 551.  113             By the 16th century, the common law action for defamation
became commonplace.  This was in no small measure due to the efforts of the
Star Chamber to eradicate duelling, the favoured method of vindication.  The
Star Chamber even went so far as to punish the sending of challenges.  However,
when  it proscribed this avenue of recourse to injured parties, the Star
Chamber was compelled to widen its original jurisdiction over seditious libel
to include ordinary defamation.  114             The modern law of libel is said to have arisen out of the
case De Libellis Famosis (1605), 5 Co. Rep. 125a, 77 E.R. 250.  There,
the late Archbishop of Canterbury and the then Bishop of London were alleged to
have been "traduced and scandalized" by an anonymous person.  As
reported by Coke, it was ruled that all libels, even those against private
individuals, ought to be sanctioned severely by indictment at common law or in
the Star Chamber.  The reasoning behind this was that the libel could incite "all
those of the same family, kindred, or society to revenge, and so tends per
consequens to quarrels and breach of the peace" (p. 251).  It was not
necessary to show publication to a third person and it made no difference
whether the libel was true or whether the plaintiff had a good or bad
reputation.  Eventually, truth was recognized as a defence in cases involving
ordinary defamation.  115             It was not until the late 17th century that the
distinction between libel and slander was drawn by Chief Baron Hale in King
v. Lake (1679), Hardres 470, 145 E.R. 552, where it was held that words
spoken, without more, would not be actionable, with a few exceptions.  Once
they were reduced to writing, however, malice would be presumed and an action
would lie.   "(N)o system of civil law can fail to take some
account of the right to have one's reputation remain untarnished by
defamation."  Some form of legal or social constraints on defamatory
publications "are to be found in all stages of civilization, however
imperfect, remote, and proximate to barbarism."  [Footnotes omitted.]    118             In the present case, consideration must be given to the
particular significance reputation has for a lawyer.  The reputation of a
lawyer is of paramount importance to clients, to other members of the
profession and to the judiciary.  A lawyer's practice is founded and maintained
upon the basis of a good reputation for professional integrity and
trustworthiness.  It is the cornerstone of a lawyer's professional life.  Even
if endowed with outstanding talent and indefatigable diligence, a lawyer cannot
survive without a good reputation.  In his essay entitled "The Lawyer's
Duty to Himself and the Code of Professional Conduct" (1993), 27 L.
Soc. Gaz. 119, David Hawreluk described the importance of a reputation for
integrity.  At page 121, he quoted
Lord Birkett on the subject:  The advocate has a duty to his client, a duty to the
Court, and a duty to the State; but he has above all a duty to himself and he
shall be, as far as lies in his power, a man of integrity.  No profession calls
for higher standards of honour and uprightness, and no profession, perhaps,
offers greater temptations to forsake them; but whatever gifts an advocate may
possess, be they never so dazzling, without the supreme qualification of an
inner integrity he will fall short of the highest . . .   The qualities required of a lawyer who
aspires to the highest level of his profession are various, but one is essential. 
That is a reputation for integrity.  The programs were a massive attack upon
that reputation.  The harm done to it can never be wholly undone, and therefore
the stigma so unfairly created will always be with the plaintiff.  When the details of the Vogel affair
have faded from memory, what will remain in the minds of many people throughout
Canada is a lurking recollection that he was the centre of a scandal which
arose out of his conduct in office.  120             Although it is not specifically mentioned in the Charter ,
the good reputation of the individual represents and reflects the innate
dignity of the individual, a concept which underlies all the Charter 
rights.  It follows that the protection of the good reputation of an individual
is of fundamental importance to our democratic society.   (c)   The
Proposed Remedy:  Adopting the New York Times v. Sullivan "Actual
Malice" Rule  122             In New York Times v. Sullivan, supra, the
United States Supreme Court ruled that the existing common law of defamation
violated the guarantee of free speech under the First Amendment of the
Constitution.  It held that the citizen's right to criticize government
officials is of such tremendous importance in a democratic society that it can
only be accommodated through the tolerance of speech which may eventually be
determined to contain falsehoods.  The solution adopted was to do away with the
common law presumptions of falsity and malice and place the onus on the
plaintiff to prove that, at the time the defamatory statements were made, the
defendant either knew them to be false or was reckless as to whether they were
or not.  123             At the outset, it is important to understand the social
and political context of the times which undoubtedly influenced the decision in
New York Times v. Sullivan, supra.  The impugned publication was
an editorial advertisement, placed in the appellant's newspaper, entitled
"Heed Their Rising Voices".  It criticized the widespread segregation
which continued to dominate life in the southern states in the late 1950s and
early 1960s.  Prominent and well respected individuals, including Mrs. Eleanor
Roosevelt, lent their name to the advertisement.  It communicated information,
recited grievances, protested abuses and sought financial support.  The group
or movement sponsoring the advertisement was characterized by Brennan J. as one
"whose existence and objectives are matters of the highest public interest
and concern" (p. 266).  Black
J. described the controversy at the heart of the suit in the following terms at
p. 294:    125             The Supreme Court, in overturning the verdict, clearly
perceived the libel action as a very serious attack not only on the freedom of
the press but, more particularly, on those who favoured desegregation in the
southern United States.  It was concerned that such a large damage award could
threaten the very existence of, in Black J.'s words, "an American press
virile enough to publish unpopular views on public affairs and bold enough to
criticize the conduct of public officials" (p. 294).  This concern was intensified by the fact that
a second libel verdict of $500,000 U.S. had already been awarded to another
Montgomery commissioner against the New York Times. In addition, 11 other
libel suits, arising out of the same advertisement, were pending against the
newspaper.  126             Another motivating factor for this radical change to the
common law was the American jurisprudence to the effect that the statements of
public officials which came "within the outer perimeter of their
duties" were privileged unless actual malice was proved.  The rationale
behind this privilege was that the threat of damage suits would "dampen
the ardor of all but the most resolute, or the most irresponsible, in the
unflinching discharge of their duties":  Barr v. Matteo, 360 U.S.
564 (1959), at p. 571.  The
Supreme Court in the Sullivan decision held that analogous
considerations supported the protection which it accorded to critics of the
government.  (d)  Critiques
of the "Actual Malice" Rule  (i)    Comments
on the Decision in the United States   128             Perhaps most importantly, it has been argued the decision
has shifted the focus of defamation suits away from their original, essential
purpose.  Rather than deciding upon the truth of the impugned statement, courts
in the U.S. now determine whether the defendant was negligent.  Several
unfortunate results flow from this shift in focus.  First, it may deny the
plaintiff the opportunity to establish the falsity of the defamatory statements
and to determine the consequent reputational harm.  This is particularly true
in cases where the falsity is not seriously contested.  See Bezanson, supra,
at p. 227.  129             Second, it necessitates a detailed inquiry into matters of
media procedure.  This, in turn, increases the length of discoveries and of the
trial which may actually increase, rather than decrease, the threat to speech
interests.  See D. A. Barrett, "Declaratory Judgments for Libel:  A Better
Alternative" (1986), 74 Cal. L. Rev. 847, at p. 855.       The New York Times rule thus
countenances two evils:  first, the stream of information about public
officials and public affairs is polluted and often remains polluted by false
information; and second, the reputation and professional life of the defeated
plaintiff may be destroyed by falsehoods that might have been avoided with a
reasonable effort to investigate the facts.  In terms of the First Amendment
and reputational interests at stake, these seem grossly perverse results. 
[Emphasis added.]   (ii)   Consideration
of the Actual Malice Rule in the United Kingdom  134             The courts in England have refused to adopt the
"actual malice" standard.  In Derbyshire County Council v. Times
Newspapers Ltd., [1993] 1 All E.R. 1011, the House of Lords considered an
action brought by a municipal council against the publisher of a Sunday
newspaper.  The claim for damages, which was denied, arose from articles
concerning the authority's management of its superannuation fund.  In his
reasons, Lord Keith stated that public interest considerations similar to those
underlying the New York Times v. Sullivan, supra, decision were
involved in that it was "of the highest public importance that a
democratically elected governmental body, or indeed any governmental body,
should be open to uninhibited public criticism" (p. 1017).  However, the
appropriateness of the "actual malice" standard was not considered
and it was not incorporated into the law of England.  In fact, Lord Keith
stated that if the individual reputation of any of the local councillors had
been wrongly damaged by the impugned publication, they could have brought an
action for defamation in their personal capacity.  (iii)  The
Australian Position on Actual Malice   Even assuming that, in conformity with
Sullivan, the test is confined to plaintiffs who are public officials,
in our view it gives inadequate protection to reputation. . . .  . . . the protection of free communication does not
necessitate such a subordination of the protection of individual reputation as
appears to have occurred in the United States.  (iv)  The
Position Taken by International Law Reform Commissions  136             International law reform organizations have also
criticized the New York Times v. Sullivan rule.  The Australian Law
Reform Commission's Report No. 11,
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy (the Kirby Committee Report)
(1979), criticized the concept of "public official" on the basis that
"a minor elected official or public servant [would be] in a more
vulnerable position than a prominent businessman" (p. 252).  The United Kingdom Report of the Committee
on Defamation (the Faulks Committee Report) (1975), held that the rule
"would in many cases deny a just remedy to defamed persons" (p. 169).  Finally, the Irish Law Reform Commission's Report
on the Civil Law of Defamation (the Keane Final Report) (1991), stated that
"while the widest possible range of criticism of public officials and
public figures is desirable, statements of fact contribute meaningfully to
public debate only if they are true" (p. 82).  (e)  Conclusion: 
Should the Law of Defamation be Modified by Incorporating the Sullivan
Principle?  137             The New York Times v. Sullivan decision has been
criticized by judges and academic writers in the United States and elsewhere. 
It has not been followed in the United Kingdom or Australia.  I can see no
reason for adopting it in Canada in an action between private litigants.  The
law of defamation is essentially aimed at the prohibition of the publication of
injurious false statements.  It is the means by which the individual may
protect his or her reputation which may well be the most distinguishing feature
of his or her character, personality and, perhaps, identity.  I simply cannot
see that the law of defamation is unduly restrictive or inhibiting.  Surely it
is not requiring too much of individuals that they ascertain the truth of the
allegations they publish.  The law of defamation provides for the defences of
fair comment and of qualified privilege in appropriate cases.  Those who
publish statements should assume a reasonable level of responsibility.   Freedom of speech, like the other fundamental
freedoms, is freedom under the law, and over the years the law has maintained a
balance between, on the one hand, the right of the individual . . .
whether he is in public life or not, to his unsullied reputation if he deserves
it, and on the other hand . . . the right of the public . . . to
express their views honestly and fearlessly on matters of public interest, even
though that involves strong criticism of the conduct of public people.  139             None of the factors which prompted the United States
Supreme Court to rewrite the law of defamation in America are present in the
case at bar.  First, this appeal does not involve the media or political
commentary about government policies.  Thus the issues considered by the High
Court of Australia in Theophanous, supra, are also not raised in
this case and need not be considered.  140             Second, a review of jury verdicts in Canada reveals that
there is no danger of numerous large awards threatening the viability of media
organizations.  Finally, in Canada there is no broad privilege accorded to the
public statements of government officials which needs to be counterbalanced by
a similar right for private individuals.  141             In conclusion, in its application to the parties in this
action, the common law of defamation complies with the underlying values of the
Charter  and there is no need to amend or alter it.  142             Consideration must now be given to the submission made on
behalf of Morris Manning that the defence of qualified privilege should be
expanded to include reports upon pleadings and court documents that have been
filed or are at the point of being filed.  (f)    Should
the Common Law Defence of Qualified Privilege be Expanded to Comply with
Charter  Values?  143             Qualified privilege attaches to the occasion upon which
the communication is made, and not to the communication itself.  As Lord
Atkinson explained in Adam v. Ward, [1917] A.C. 309 (H.L.), at p. 334:  . . . a privileged occasion is . . . an
occasion where the person who makes a communication has an interest or a duty,
legal, social, or moral, to make it to the person to whom it is made, and the
person to whom it is so made has a corresponding interest or duty to receive
it.  This reciprocity is essential.  This
passage was quoted with approval in McLoughlin v. Kutasy, [1979] 2
S.C.R. 311, at p. 321.  144             The legal effect of the defence of qualified privilege is
to rebut the inference, which normally arises from the publication of
defamatory words, that they were spoken with malice.  Where the occasion is
shown to be privileged, the bona fides of the defendant is presumed and
the defendant is free to publish, with impunity, remarks which may be
defamatory and untrue about the plaintiff.  However, the privilege is not
absolute and can be defeated if the dominant motive for publishing the
statement is actual or express malice.  See Horrocks v. Lowe, [1975]
A.C. 135 (H.L.), at p. 149.    . . . the fact that an occasion is privileged does not
necessarily protect all that is said or written on that occasion.  Anything
that is not relevant and pertinent to the discharge of the duty or the exercise
of the right or the safeguarding of the interest which creates the privilege
will not be protected.  147             In other words, the information communicated must be
reasonably appropriate in the context of the circumstances existing on the
occasion when that information was given.  For example, in Douglas v. Tucker,
[1952] 1 S.C.R. 275, the defendant, during an election campaign, stated that
the plaintiff, who was the officer of an investment company, had charged a
farmer and his wife an exorbitant rate of interest causing them to lose their
property.  The plaintiff maintained that the allegation was without
foundation.  In response, the defendant asserted that the plaintiff was facing
a charge of fraud which had been adjourned until after the election.  This
Court held that the defendant had an interest in responding to the plaintiff's
denial, thereby giving rise to an occasion of qualified privilege.  However, it
ruled that the occasion was exceeded because the defendant's comments went
beyond what was "germane and reasonably appropriate" (p. 286).  148             In Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada v. Dalrymple,
[1965] S.C.R. 302, the district manager of the defendant insurance company
threatened to resign and take the district agents with him.  This Court held
that it fell within the scope of the privilege for the company to make certain
defamatory comments about the plaintiff in order to dissuade its agents from
leaving.  149             The principal question to be answered in this appeal is
whether the recitation of the contents of the notice of motion by Morris
Manning took place on an occasion of qualified privilege.  If so, it remains to
be determined whether or not that privilege was exceeded and thereby defeated.  150             The traditional common law rule with respect to reports on
documents relating to judicial proceedings is set out in Gatley on Libel and
Slander (8th ed. 1981), at p. 252,
in these words:  The rule of law is that, where there are judicial
proceedings before a properly constituted judicial tribunal exercising its
jurisdiction in open court, then the publication without malice of a fair and
accurate report of what takes place before that tribunal is privileged.   151             The rationale behind this rule is that the public has a
right to be informed about all aspects of proceedings to which it has the right
of access.  This is why a news report referring to the contents of any document
filed as an exhibit, or admitted as evidence during the course of the
proceedings, is privileged.  However, the common law immunity was not extended
to a report on pleadings or other documents which had not been filed with the
court or referred to in open court.  Duff C.J. explained the reasoning for this
in Gazette Printing Co. v. Shallow (1909), 41 S.C.R. 339, at p. 360:  The publicity of proceedings involving the conduct
of a judicial authority serves the important purposes of impressing those
concerned in the administration of justice with a sense of public
responsibility, and of affording every member of the community an opportunity
of observing for himself the mode in which the business of the public tribunals
is carried on; but no such object would appear to be generally served by
applying the privilege to the publication of preliminary statements of claims
and defence relating only to private transactions; formulated by the parties
themselves; in respect of which no judicial action has been taken, and upon
which judicial action may never be invoked.  It is only when such preliminary
statements or the claims or defences embodied in them form the basis or the
subject of some hearing before, or some action  by, a court or a judicial
officer, that their contents can become the object of any real public concern
as touching the public administration of justice.   153             Both societal standards and the legislation have changed
with regard to access to court documents.  When the qualified privilege rule
was set out in Shallow, supra, court documents were not open to
the public.  Today, the right of access is guaranteed by legislative provision,
in this case s. 137(1) of the Courts
of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43. 
As well, s. 2 (b) of the Charter 
may in some circumstances provide a basis for gaining access to some court
documents.  However, just as s. 137(1)
provides for limitations on the right of access to court documents, so too is
the s. 2 (b) guarantee
subject to reasonable limits that can be demonstrably justified in a free and
democratic society.  This Court's reasons in Canadian Newspapers Co. v.
Canada (Attorney General), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 122, provide an illustration of
the kind of restriction that has been upheld in relation to information flowing
from court proceedings.  In that case, the constitutionality of s. 442(3)  of the Criminal Code  was upheld.  It
imposed a publication ban on the identity of a complainant in sexual assault
cases (or any information that might disclose her identity) upon the request of
that complainant.  There is no need to elaborate further on the scope of
access, however, since it does not arise on the facts of this case.  It is
sufficient to observe that, in appropriate circumstances, s. 2 (b) may provide the means to gain access to
court documents.  It follows that the concept of qualified privilege should be
modified accordingly.  154             The public interest in documents filed with the court is
too important to be defeated by the kind of technicality which arose in this
case.  The record demonstrates that, prior to holding the press conference,
Morris Manning had every intention of initiating the contempt action in
accordance with the prevailing rules, and had given instructions to this
effect.  In fact, the proper documents were served and filed the very next
morning.  The fact that, by some misadventure, the strict procedural requirement
of filing the documents had not been fulfilled at the time of the press
conference should not defeat the qualified privilege which attached to this
occasion.  155             This said, it is my conclusion that Morris Manning's
conduct far exceeded the legitimate purposes of the occasion.  The
circumstances of this case called for great restraint in the communication of
information concerning the proceedings launched against Casey Hill.  As an
experienced lawyer, Manning ought to have taken steps to confirm the
allegations that were being made.  This is particularly true since he should
have been aware of the Scientology investigation pertaining to access to the
sealed documents.  In those circumstances he was duty bound to wait until the
investigation was completed before launching such a serious attack on Hill's
professional integrity.  Manning failed to take either of these reasonable
steps.  As a result of this failure, the permissible scope of his comments was
limited and the qualified privilege which attached to his remarks was defeated.  156             The press conference was held on the steps of Osgoode Hall
in the presence of representatives from several media organizations.  This
constituted the widest possible dissemination of grievous allegations of
professional misconduct that were yet to be tested in a court of law.  His
comments were made in language that portrayed Hill in the worst possible
light.  This was neither necessary nor appropriate in the existing
circumstances.  While it is not necessary to characterize Manning's conduct as
amounting to actual malice, it was certainly high-handed and careless.  It
exceeded any legitimate purpose the press conference may have served.  His
conduct, therefore, defeated the qualified privilege that attached to the
occasion.  (B)  Damages  (1)  The
Standard of Appellate Review  157             The appellants do not contend that the trial judge made
any substantive error in his careful directions to the jury.  Thus, there is no
question of misdirection of the jury or of its acting upon an improper basis or
of any jury consideration given to wrongfully admitted or excluded evidence. 
The sole issue is whether the quantum of the jury's award can stand.  158             Jurors are drawn from the community and speak for their
community.  When properly instructed, they are uniquely qualified to assess the
damages suffered by the plaintiff, who is also a member of their community. 
This is why, as Robins J.A. noted in Walker v. CFTO Ltd. (1987), 59 O.R.
(2d) 104 (C.A.), at p. 110, it is
often said that the assessment of damages is "peculiarly the province of
the jury".  Therefore, an appellate court is not entitled to substitute
its own judgment as to the proper award for that of the jury merely because it
would have arrived at a different figure.  159             The basis upon which an appellate court can act was very
clearly enunciated by Robins J.A. in Walker, supra.  He stated at
p. 110 that the court should
consider:  . . . whether the verdict is so inordinately large as
obviously to exceed the maximum limit of a reasonable range within which the
jury may properly operate or, put another way, whether the verdict is so
exorbitant or so grossly out of proportion to the libel as to shock the court's
conscience and sense of justice.  160             The history of this action emphasizes the reasonableness
of the jury's verdict.  It was the appellants who had always insisted upon the
jury assessing damages for the libel.  When the jury had retired to consider
their verdict, they returned after four hours with the sagacious question:
"what if any are realistic maximums that have been assessed by society in
recent history?".  The trial judge prudently sought the advice of counsel
on the question.  Counsel for the appellants agreed with the trial judge that
no guidance could be given to the jury as to the quantum of damages.  The jury
was so advised.  They deliberated for another five hours and returned the verdict which is the subject
matter of this appeal.  161             There can be no doubt that the decision of the trial judge
on this issue, which was concurred in by counsel for the appellants, was
correct.  In Ontario, there is no statutory provision for giving guidelines to
a jury on this issue.  It is significant that in 1989, when the Courts of
Justice Act was amended (S.O. 1989, c. 67, s. 4) to permit trial
judges and counsel to give guidance to juries concerning damage awards in
personal injury actions, no provision was made in the Act pertaining to libel
actions or any other type of tort action.  It would appear, then, that the
legislators specifically left the assessment of damages in libel actions to the
jury.  162             The appellants relied upon the case of Rantzen v.
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) Ltd., [1993] 4 All E.R. 975 (C.A.), to
support their position that an appellate court should reduce this award.  In
that case, however, the English Court of Appeal was acting pursuant to newly
enacted legislation.  This legislation, passed in 1990, specifically provided
that, in cases where the court had the authority to order a new trial on the
ground that the damages awarded by a jury were excessive or inadequate, it
could, instead of ordering a new trial, substitute a sum for damages which it
considered to be proper.  This statutory provision led the court in Rantzen
to modify its approach to the review of a jury's assessment of damages. 
Therefore, this case is of little use.  163             If guidelines are to be provided to juries, then clearly
this is a matter for legislation.  In its absence, the standard which must be
applied remains that the jury's assessment should not be varied unless it
shocks the conscience of the court.  With this in mind, let us first consider
the jury's assessment of damages.  (2)  General
Damages  164             It has long been held that general damages in defamation
cases are presumed from the very publication of the false statement and are
awarded at large.  See Ley v. Hamilton (1935), 153 L.T. 384 (H.L.), at
p. 386.  They are, as stated,
peculiarly within the province of the jury.  These are sound principles that
should be followed. 165             The consequences which flow from the publication of an
injurious false statement are invidious.  The television report of the news
conference on the steps of Osgoode Hall must have had a lasting and significant
effect on all who saw it.  They witnessed a prominent lawyer accusing another
lawyer of criminal contempt in a setting synonymous with legal affairs and the
courts of the province.  It will be extremely difficult to correct the
impression left with viewers that Casey Hill must have been guilty of unethical
and illegal conduct.  166             The written words emanating from the news conference must
have had an equally devastating impact.  All who read the news reports would be
left with a lasting impression that Casey Hill has been guilty of misconduct. 
It would be hard to imagine a more difficult situation for the defamed person
to overcome.  Every time that person goes to the convenience store, or shopping
centre, he will imagine that the people around him still retain the erroneous
impression that the false statement is correct.  A defamatory statement can
seep into the crevasses of the subconscious and lurk there ever ready to spring
forth and spread its cancerous evil.  The unfortunate impression left by a
libel may last a lifetime.  Seldom does the defamed person have the opportunity
of replying and correcting the record in a manner that will truly remedy the
situation.  It is members of the community in which the defamed person lives
who will be best able to assess the damages.  The jury as representative of
that community should be free to make an assessment of damages which will
provide the plaintiff with a sum of money that clearly demonstrates to the
community the vindication of the plaintiff's reputation.  (a)  Should
a Cap be Imposed on Damages in Defamation Cases?    169             A very different situation is presented with respect to
libel actions.  In these cases, special damages for pecuniary loss are rarely
claimed and often exceedingly difficult to prove.  Rather, the whole basis for
recovery for loss of reputation usually lies in the general damages award. 
Further, a review of the damage awards over the past nine years reveals no pressing social concern similar to
that which confronted the courts at the time the trilogy was decided.  From
1987 to 1991, there were only 27 reported libel judgments in Canada, with an
average award of $30,000.  Subsequent to the decision in this case, from 1992
to 1995, there have been 24 reported libel judgments, with an average award of
less than $20,000.  This later figure does not include the award in Jill
Fishing Ltd. v. Koranda Management Inc., [1993] B.C.J. No. 1861 (S.C.),
which involved the assessment of damages for a number of different causes of
action.  Therefore, there is no indication that a cap is required in libel
cases.  170             There is a great difference in the nature of the tort of
defamation and that of negligence.  Defamation is the intentional
publication of an injurious false statement.  While it is true that an actual
intention to defame is not necessary to impose liability on a defendant, the
intention to do so is nevertheless inferred from the publication of the
defamatory statement.  This gives rise to the presumption of malice which may
be displaced by the existence of a qualified privilege.  Personal injury, on
the other hand, results from negligence which does not usually arise from any
desire to injure the plaintiff.  Thus, if it were known in advance what amount
the defamer would be required to pay in damages (as in the personal injury
context), a defendant might look upon that sum as the maximum cost of a licence
to defame.  A cap would operate in a manner that would change the whole
character and function of the law of defamation.  It would amount to a radical
change in policy and direction for the courts.    Awards in personal injury cases and defamation
actions serve different purposes, have different elements and different
histories.  They are not comparable.  I think that it is a mistake to believe
that the pain and suffering component of a personal injury award can be
isolated from the other components of that award and then compared to an award
of compensatory damages in a defamation action.  173             In any event, I would observe that, if the trilogy were to
be applied, the value of the cap in 1991 would be approximately $250,000.  It
follows that even if the appellants' contention on this issue was accepted, the
general damages of $300,000 assessed by the jury would come very close to the
range said to be reasonable by the appellants.  (b)  Joint
Liability for General Damages  174             Manning complains that the judge erred in refusing to
accept his request that the verdict in general damages be rendered separately. 
He argues that his liability should be limited to the statement he made at the
press conference and should not extend to the subsequent circulation of the
notice of motion.  The trial judge's error, he argues, contributed to the very
high award by the jury.  This position cannot be accepted.  175             It must be remembered that at trial:  a) it was the position of Manning's counsel that
Manning and Scientology should be jointly and severally liable for general
damages in respect of each of the defamatory statements published by them; b)
Scientology admitted that it published each of the defamatory statements at
issue in the action; c) Manning admitted that he published each of the
defamatory statements with the exception of the notice of motion; and d) the
jury specifically found that Manning published the notice of motion.   (c)   Application
of Principles to the Facts Established in this Case  177             It cannot be forgotten that at the time the libellous
statement was made, Casey Hill was a young lawyer in the Crown Law office
working in the litigation field.  For all lawyers their reputation is of
paramount importance.  Clients depend on the integrity of lawyers, as do
colleagues.  Judges rely upon commitments and undertakings given to them by
counsel.  Our whole system of administration of justice depends upon counsel's
reputation for integrity.  Anything that leads to the tarnishing of a
professional reputation can be disastrous for a lawyer.  It matters not that
subsequent to the publication of the libel, Casey Hill received promotions, was
elected a bencher and eventually appointed a trial judge in the General
Division of the Court of Ontario.  As a lawyer, Hill would have no way of
knowing what members of the public, colleagues, other lawyers and judges may
have been affected by the dramatic presentation of the allegation that he had
been instrumental in breaching an order of the court and that he was guilty of
criminal contempt.  178             This nagging doubt and sense of hurt must have affected
him in every telephone call he made and received in the course of his daily
work, in every letter that he sent and received and in every appearance that he
made before the courts of the province of Ontario.  He would never know who, as
a result of the libellous statement, had some lingering suspicion that he was
guilty of misconduct which was criminal in nature.  He would never know who
might have believed that he was a person without integrity who would act
criminally in the performance of his duties as a Crown counsel.  He could never
be certain who would accept the allegation that he was guilty of a criminal
breach of trust which was the essential thrust of the libel.  179             The publication of the libellous statement was very
carefully orchestrated.  Members of the press and the television media attended
at Osgoode Hall in Toronto to meet two prominent lawyers, Morris Manning and
Clayton Ruby.  Osgoode Hall is the seat of the Court of Appeal and the
permanent residence of the Law Society.  The building is used as the background
in a great many news reports dealing with important cases emanating from the
Court of Appeal.  In the minds of the public, it is associated with the law,
with the courts and with the justice system.  Manning went far beyond a simple
explanation of the nature of the notice of motion.  He took these very public
steps without investigating in any way whether the allegations made were true.  180             At the time this press conference was called, Scientology
members had been working with the sealed documents for some time and they had
not yet discovered any of the sealed documents to have been opened.  Yet,
Scientology persisted in the publication of this libel against Hill, who was
listed in their files as an "enemy".  181             Hill movingly described the effect the reading of the
press reports of the press conference had upon him and of viewing the
television broadcast.  He put it in this way:  I was sick.  I was shocked.  I
understood from reading it that it related to access to the documents.  The
type of thing that Mr. Ruby and I had been dealing with over many months, and I
was just incredulous.                                                                     . . .                                                                       . . .  And he was standing before the High
Court.  The indication that I had been involved in opening sealed documents and
giving permission was totally false.  For me, in seeing it, it was equivalent to
saying I was a cheat and that I had obstructed the course of justice.  It was
an attack on my professional reputation and I had no way of stopping it.                                                                     . . .  I also have no way of knowing whether
there are people in the community who would be in a position to place some
reliance on the fact that regardless of the outcome of the criminal case,
Manning, a prominent lawyer, and the Church of Scientology of Toronto, had still
expressed a view on September 17th.                                 Section 1 .  Assessment of Damages  1451.  Province of the jury.  In an action of libel "the assessment of
damages does not depend on any legal rule."  The amount of damages is
"peculiarly the province of the jury," who in assessing them will
naturally be governed by all the circumstances of the particular case.  They
are entitled to take into their consideration the conduct of the plaintiff, his
position and standing, the nature of the libel, the mode and extent of
publication, the absence or refusal of any retraction or apology, and "the
whole conduct of the defendant from the time when the libel was published down
to the very moment of their verdict.  They may take into consideration the
conduct of the defendant before action, after action, and in court at the trial
of the action," and also, it is submitted, the conduct of his counsel, who
cannot shelter his client by taking responsibility for the conduct of the
case.  They should allow "for the sad truth that no apology, retraction or
withdrawal can ever be guaranteed completely to undo the harm it has done or
the hurt it has caused."  They should also take into account the evidence
led in aggravation or mitigation of the damages.   1452.  Aggravated damages.  The conduct of the defendant, his conduct of the
case, and his state of mind are thus all matters which the plaintiff may rely
on as aggravating the damages.  "Moreover, it is very well established
that in cases where the damages are at large the jury (or the judge if the award
is left to him) can take into account the motives and conduct of the defendant
where they aggravate the injury done to the plaintiff.  There may be
malevolence or spite or the manner of committing the wrong may be such as to
injure the plaintiff's proper feelings of dignity and pride.  These are matters
which the jury can take into account in assessing the appropriate
compensation."  "In awarding `aggravated damages' the natural
indignation of the court at the injury inflicted on the plaintiff is a
perfectly legitimate motive in making a generous, rather than a more moderate
award to provide an adequate solatium. . . that is because the
injury to the plaintiff is actually greater, and, as the result of the conduct
exciting the indignation, demands a more generous solatium."  184             In considering and applying the factors pertaining to
general damages in this case it will be remembered that the reports in the
press were widely circulated and the television broadcast had a wide coverage. 
The setting and the persons involved gave the coverage an aura of credibility
and significance that must have influenced all who saw and read the accounts. 
The insidious harm of the orchestrated libel was indeed spread widely
throughout the community.  186             When all these facts are taken into account there is no
question that the award of $300,000 by way of general damages was justified in
this case.  (d)  Comparison
with Other Libel Cases  187             At the outset, I should state that I agree completely with
the Court of Appeal that each libel case is unique and that this particular
case is in a "class by itself".  The assessment of damages in a libel
case flows from a particular confluence of the following elements:  the nature
and circumstances of the publication of the libel, the nature and position of
the victim of the libel, the possible effects of the libel statement upon the
life of the plaintiff, and the actions and motivations of the defendants.  It
follows that there is little to be gained from a detailed comparison of libel
awards.  (3)  Aggravated
Damages  (a)  General
Principles      (b)  The
Application to the Facts of this Case    194             In summary, every aspect of this case demonstrates the
very real and persistent malice of Scientology.  Their actions preceding the
publication of the libel, the circumstances of its publication and their
subsequent actions in relation to both the search warrant proceedings and this
action amply confirm and emphasize the insidious malice of Scientology.  Much
was made of their apology tendered at the time of the hearing in the Court of
Appeal.  There is a hollow ring to that submission when it is remembered that
it was not until the fifth day of oral argument before the Court of Appeal that
the apology was tendered.  Scientology can gain little comfort from such a late
and meaningless apology.   (4)  Punitive
Damages  (a)  General
Principles   197             Unlike compensatory damages, punitive damages are not at
large.  Consequently, courts have a much greater scope and discretion on
appeal.  The appellate review should be based upon the court's estimation as to
whether the punitive damages serve a rational purpose.  In other words, was the
misconduct of the defendant so outrageous that punitive damages were rationally
required to act as deterrence?  198             This was the test formulated by Robins J.A. in Walker
v. CFTO Ltd., supra.  In that case, he found that the general
damages award of $908,000 was obviously sufficient to satisfy whatever need
there was for punishment and deterrence.  He found that, in those
circumstances, the $50,000 punitive damage award served no rational purpose. 
The Court of Appeal, in the case at bar, applied the same reasoning and upheld
the award of punitive damages.  199             Punitive damages can and do serve a useful purpose.  But
for them, it would be all too easy for the large, wealthy and powerful to
persist in libelling vulnerable victims.  Awards of general and aggravated
damages alone might simply be regarded as a licence fee for continuing a
character assassination.  The protection of a person's reputation arising from
the publication of false and injurious statements must be effective.  The most
effective means of protection will be supplied by the knowledge that fines in
the form of punitive damages may be awarded in cases where the defendant's
conduct is truly outrageous.  (b)  The
Application to the Facts of this Case  200             There can be no doubt that the conduct of Scientology in
the publication of the injurious false statement pertaining to its
"enemy" was malicious.  Its publication was carefully planned and
carried out in a manner which ensured its widest possible dissemination in the
most damaging manner imaginable.  The allegation made against Hill was
devastating.  It was said that he had been guilty of breach of trust, breach of
a court order and that his conduct and behaviour was criminal.  Scientology's
actions from the time of publication, throughout the trial, and after the trial
decision was rendered constituted a continuing attempt at character
assassination by means of a statement which it knew to be false.  It was such
outrageous conduct that it cried out for the imposition of punitive damages.  201             There might have been some concern that, in light of the
award of general and aggravated damages totalling $800,000, there might not be
a rational basis for punitive damages.  However any lingering doubt on that
score is resolved when Scientology's persistent misconduct subsequent to the
trial is considered.  On the very next day following the verdict, Scientology
republished the libel in a press release delivered to the media.  It then
brought a motion to adduce fresh evidence which it stated would have a bearing
"on the credibility and reputation of the plaintiff S. Casey Hill"
which, if presented at trial, "would probably have changed the
result".  Its actions were such that Hill was forced to bring an
application for an injunction enjoining Scientology from republishing the
libel.  In his reasons for granting the injunction, Carruthers J. stated that
he was forced to take that action because "no amount awarded on account of
punitive damages would have prevented or will prevent the Church of Scientology
from publishing defamatory statements about the plaintiff".  Even the injunction
did not deter Scientology which moved to set it aside.  Further, in its notice
of appeal of the libel judgment, Scientology alleged that the trial judge had
erred in ruling the decision of Cromarty J. in the contempt proceedings was res
judicata of the issues raised in the libel trial.  202             During the appeal, it was conceded and the evidence and
events confirmed that in all likelihood, no amount of general or aggravated
damages would have deterred Scientology.  Clearly then, this was an appropriate
case for an award of punitive damages.  Scientology did not withdraw its plea
of justification until the first day of the oral argument in the Court of
Appeal.  Nor was any apology tendered by Scientology until the fifth day of
oral argument before the Court of Appeal.  203             The award of punitive damages, therefore, served a
rational purpose in this case.  Further, the circumstances presented in this
exceptional case demonstrate that there was such insidious, pernicious and
persistent malice that the award for punitive damages cannot be said to be
excessive.  Scientology has alleged that the size of the award of punitive
damages had a chilling effect on its right to freedom of expression.  However
as stated earlier, in spite of the slow and methodical progress of this case to
trial and appeal, and despite the motion brought six years before the trial
which drew attention to the need for evidence, Scientology adduced no evidence
as to the chilling effect of the award.  In its absence, this argument should
not be considered.  It may be that different factors will have to be taken into
consideration where evidence is adduced and where a member of the media is a
party to the action.  However, those are considerations for another case on
another day.  IV.  Disposition  204             The appeal is dismissed with costs.  APPENDIX A                                                    CFTO
BROADCAST  The Toronto Church of Scientology has
filed charges of contempt of court against two provincial lawyers.  The Church
believes the lawyers violated a court order by opening sealed documents which
were seized last year in a raid on the Church's headquarters.  A report from
CFTO's Tim Webber:  Webber:  Eighteen months ago, more than one
hundred O.P.P. officers stormed out of three buses and into the offices of the
Church of Scientology.  They seized hundreds of thousands of documents in two
days of searching.  Police said they were looking for evidence of tax fraud,
consumer fraud and other indictable offences.  Many of these seized documents
were deemed confidential by the Church.  Some they said were confessions
between priests and penitents and they convinced a judge to order about two
hundred of the documents sealed.  Today, lawyers for the Church filed charges
alleging that the sealing order has been violated.  Manning:  The documents were ordered sealed by
Mr. Justice Osler, pursuant to a request by counsel, in a very serious matter,
and they were opened and revealed to persons whom we say were unauthorized to
so do.  Webber:  The charges are against Jerome Cooper,
a lawyer for Consumer and Commercial Relations, and Crown Attorney S. Casey
Hill.  The documents filed today alleged that the two convinced another Supreme
Court Justice to allow the Ministry of Consumer and Commercial Relations to
view the sealed documents in the company of O.P.P. officers.  One of the
lawyers being charged, Jerome Cooper, today told us he had absolutely no
comment on the matter.  The trial date has already been set for the 17th of
January, but lawyers for the Church of Scientology are hoping to convince the
defendants and the Court so start even sooner.    APPENDIX B                                                     CBC
BROADCAST   The Church of Scientology has filed a
suit against two Toronto based Crown Attorneys.  The Church had its offices
raided by police and documents seized in March of 1983.  Lawyers for the Church
say those documents were opened and read by persons not authorized to do so.  Manning:  They were confidential documents which
have been ordered sealed by Supreme Court of Ontario Justices which were opened
with the permission of counsel for the Crown.  And this constitutes, in the
opinion of the Church, a contempt of court.  We've had a date set in January. 
But hopefully, we can get a date set earlier with the consent of the Chief
Justice of the Trial Division, or the Chief Justice of Ontario on the basis
that it's a very important matter.  It's important to the administration of
justice.     APPENDIX C                                                      GLOBE
AND MAIL   The Church of Scientology of Toronto
is asking the Supreme Court of Ontario to find a Crown prosecutor and a lawyer
with the Ontario Ministry of Consumer and Commercial Relations in contempt of
court.    The motion says Judge Sirois was not
told that many of the documents had been ordered sealed by another Ontario
Supreme Court judge while the Church contests the legality of the search
warrant used by the O.P.P. in the raid last year.   A hearing on the motion has been set
for January 17.  The following are the reasons
delivered by  205             L'Heureux-Dubé J. -- I have
had the advantage of reading the reasons of my colleague Justice Cory and,
except on one point, generally agree with them as well as with his disposition
of this appeal.  206                    First, however, in order to
dispel any possible confusion regarding the applicability of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  to the common law, I note that this issue
can be easily summarized in the following two principles, both of which were
first articulated by McIntyre J. in RWDSU v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd.,
[1986] 2 S.C.R. 573:  1.    The Charter 
does not directly apply to the common law unless it is the basis of some
governmental action.  2.    Even though
the Charter  does not directly apply to the common law absent government
action, the common law must nonetheless be developed in accordance with Charter 
values.  (To the same effect, see R. v. Salituro, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 654, Dagenais
v. Canadian Broadcasting Corp., [1994] 3 S.C.R. 835, and R. v. Park,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 836, per L'Heureux-Dubé J.)  In other words, the basic rule is that, absent
government action, the Charter  only applies indirectly to the common
law.  207                    In light of the above, I agree
with Cory J. that where the common law is "challenged" on Charter 
grounds, a traditional s. 1  analysis will generally not be appropriate. 
Instead, "Charter  values, framed in general terms, should be
weighed against the principles which underlie the common law.  The Charter 
values will then provide the guidelines for any modification to the common law
which the court feels is necessary" (para. 97).  As well, I agree with
Cory J. that "the party who is alleging that the common law is inconsistent
with the Charter  should bear the onus of proving both that the common
law fails to comply with Charter  values and that, when these values are
balanced, the common law should be modified" (para. 98).  Such an approach
is, in my view, consistent with the fact that, absent government action, the Charter 
only applies indirectly to the common law.  208                    Applying this approach in the
case at hand, I agree with Cory J.'s conclusion that the common law of
defamation, as it is applied to the parties in this action, is consistent with
the values enshrined in the Charter .  Accordingly, I agree with my
colleague that there is no need to amend or alter the common law.  In
particular, I agree that the "actual malice" rule adopted by the U.S.
Supreme Court in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964), should
not be adopted into the Canadian common law of defamation.  209                    Second, the one issue on which I
part company with my colleague concerns the scope of the defence of qualified
privilege.  Traditionally, this Court has held that the defence of qualified
privilege is available with respect to reports of judicial proceedings, but not
with respect to reports of pleadings in purely private litigation upon which no
judicial action has yet been taken: Gazette Printing Co. v. Shallow
(1909), 41 S.C.R. 339.  The appellants, however, argue that Shallow is
no longer good law as it had been overtaken by this Court's more recent
decision in Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General), [1989] 2
S.C.R. 1326.  My colleague appears to accept this argument.  Accordingly, he
broadens the scope of the defence of qualified privilege, making it available
with respect to reports of pleadings upon which no judicial action has yet been
taken.  I disagree.  In my view, Shallow and Edmonton Journal are
entirely consistent.  In this respect, I adopt the following statement from the
judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case at hand ((1994), 18 O.R. (3d) 385,
at p. 427):  We were urged to
extrapolate from Edmonton Journal the proposition that the common law of
defamation should respect such constitutional forms of expression as the
reporting of information pertaining to intended court proceedings by conferring
qualified privilege on the occasion of the publication of such reports.  With
respect, we do not agree.  Edmonton Journal struck down, in the name of
freedom of expression, statutory provisions which sought to inhibit the
publication of the details of pending matrimonial and other civil actions.  But
it by no means follows that the publication of such details should be accorded
the mantle of qualified privilege if they are defamatory.  Edmonton
Journal and Gazette Printing
stand together without conflict: there is a right to publish details of
judicial proceedings before they are heard in open court, but such publication
does not enjoy the protection of qualified privilege if it is defamatory.  As
Duff J. noted in the extract from p. 364 of Gazette Printing set out
above, no such privilege is necessary if the statements published are true, and
no such privilege is desirable if they are not true.  210                    Subject to the above, I would
dispose of this appeal as does my colleague Cory J.  Appeal dismissed with costs.  Solicitors for the appellant Morris
Manning:  Weir
& Foulds, Toronto.  Solicitors for the appellant the
Church of Scientology of Toronto:  Gowling, Strathy & Henderson, Kitchener.  Solicitors for the respondent:  Tory Tory DesLauriers & Binnington, Toronto.  Solicitor for the intervener the
Attorney General for Ontario:  The Ministry of the Attorney General, Toronto.  Solicitors for the intervener the
Canadian Civil Liberties Association:  Robert Sharpe and Kent Roach, Toronto.  Solicitors for the interveners the
Writers' Union of Canada, PEN Canada, the Canadian Association of Journalists,
the Periodical Writers Association of Canada, and the Book and Periodical
Council:  Davies,
Ward & Beck, Toronto.    