                                                   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA   Citation:  Quan v. Cusson,
  2009 SCC 62, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 712  Date:  20091222 Docket:  32420  Between: Douglas
Quan, Kelly Egan, Don Campbell, Ottawa Citizen, Ottawa
Citizen Group Inc. and Southam Publications (A CanWest Company) Appellants and Danno Cusson Respondent Globe
and Mail, Toronto Star Newspapers Limited, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation,
Canadian Civil Liberties Association, Canadian Newspaper Association, Ad
IDEM/Canadian Media Lawyers’ Association, RTNDA Canada/Association of
Electronic Journalists, Canadian Publishers’ Council, Magazines Canada,
Canadian Association of Journalists, Canadian Journalists for Free Expression,
Writers’ Union of
Canada, Professional Writers Association of Canada, Book and Periodical
Council, PEN
Canada, Peter Grant and Grant Forest Products Inc. Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Abella, Charron, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.   Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 51)  Concurring
  Reasons: (para. 52)   McLachlin C.J. (Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Charron,
  Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. concurring)  Abella J.  ______________________________ Quan v.
Cusson, 2009 SCC 62, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 712  Douglas Quan,
Kelly Egan, Don Campbell, Ottawa
Citizen, Ottawa Citizen Group Inc. and Southam
Publications (A CanWest Company)                                                         Appellants  v.  Danno Cusson                                                                                                                 Respondent  and  Globe and
Mail, Toronto Star Newspapers Limited, Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, Canadian Civil Liberties
Association, Canadian Newspaper Association, Ad
IDEM/Canadian Media Lawyers Association, RTNDA
Canada/Association of Electronic Journalists, Canadian
Publishers’ Council, Magazines Canada, Canadian
Association of Journalists, Canadian
Journalists for Free Expression, Writers’
Union of Canada, Professional Writers Association
of Canada, Book and Periodical Council, PEN Canada,
Peter Grant and Grant Forest Products Inc.                                          Interveners  Indexed
as:  Quan v. Cusson  Neutral
citation:  2009 SCC 62.  File
No.:  32420.  2009:  February 17;
2009:  December 22.  Present:  McLachlin C.J.
and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Charron, Rothstein and
Cromwell JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario  Torts — Defamation — Defences — Responsible communication on matters
of public interest — Police constable suing newspaper and reporters for libel
after articles were published alleging that he had misrepresented himself and
possibly interfered with rescue operations at Ground Zero — Court of Appeal
recognizing new responsible journalism defence but denying  defendants its
protection because they had not advanced it at trial — Whether common law of
defamation should be modified to accord stronger protection to defamatory
statements of fact published responsibly — If so, whether defendants should be
able to avail themselves of new defence of responsible communication on matters
of public interest at a new trial.  C was an Ontario police constable who, shortly after the events of
September 11, 2001 and without permission from his employer, travelled to
New York City to assist with the search and rescue effort at Ground Zero.  A
newspaper published articles alleging that C had misrepresented himself to the
authorities in New York and possibly interfered with the rescue operation.  C
brought a libel action against the newspaper and the reporters.  At trial, the
defendants pleaded qualified privilege and did not rely on the defence known in
England as “responsible journalism” which, at the time, had not yet been
recognized as a distinct defence by any Canadian court.  The trial judge
rejected the defendants’ claim of qualified privilege and put the case to the
jury to decide whether the defence of truth had been made out.  The jury found
that many but not all of the factual imputations in the articles had been
proven true, and awarded C general damages.  The Court of Appeal upheld that
decision.  The court took the opportunity to establish a responsible journalism
defence in Ontario law, but held that the defendants were not entitled to a new
trial and the protection of the new defence because they had not advanced the
defence at trial.  Held:  The appeal should be allowed and
a new trial ordered.  Per McLachlin C.J. and Binnie,
LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Charron, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.:  The defence
of responsible communication on matters of public interest recognized in Grant
v. Torstar Corp. is applicable where the publication is on a matter of
public interest and, having regard to the relevant factors, the publisher was
diligent in trying to verify the allegations.  The public interest test is
clearly met here, as the Canadian public has a vital interest in knowing about
the professional misdeeds of those who are entrusted by the state with
protecting public safety.  The defendants’ liability therefore hinges on
whether they were diligent in trying to verify the allegations prior to
publication, and it will be for the jury at a new trial to decide whether the
articles met this standard of responsibility.  [28] [31-32]  An appellate court may depart from the general rule and entertain a
new issue where the interests of justice require it and where the court has a
sufficient evidentiary record and findings of fact to do so.  In this case, it
is open to question whether the issue argued on appeal was genuinely “new” in
the sense of being legally and factually distinct from the issues litigated at
trial.  The arguments on qualified privilege and responsible journalism were
both directed toward the same fundamental question: whether the newspaper and
its reporters enjoyed a privilege to publish the impugned material on grounds
of public interest and due diligence.  In any event, the deficiencies in the
evidentiary foundation are largely immaterial in this case because the ultimate
determination of responsibility is a matter for the jury, and a proper
evidentiary record can be established at a new trial.  [37] [39-41]  The interests of justice favour allowing the defendants the
opportunity to avail themselves of the change in the law brought about by this
litigation on a new trial.  Under s. 134(6) of the Ontario Courts of
Justice Act, a court hearing an appeal of a civil matter may only order a
new trial if “some substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice has occurred”. 
This test is met.  The plaintiff will suffer no undue prejudice from a new
trial other than costs.  The defendants, on the other hand, would be seriously
disadvantaged by being deprived of the opportunity to avail themselves of the
responsible communication defence which their appeal was responsible for
developing.  If it turns out that the defence is found to apply to the articles
in question, such a deprivation would amount to an injustice.  Furthermore, the
defendants’ conduct did not exhibit the absence of due diligence that the “no
new issues on appeal” rule is meant to discourage.  At the time of trial, it
was by no means clear that the new defence of responsible communication would
emerge as a “different jurisprudential creature” in English or Canadian law. 
It was therefore not unreasonable for the defendants to argue qualified
privilege at trial, and later, on appeal, to contend for a broader elaboration
of a responsible communication defence.  [42-44] [47]  Per Abella J.:  As stated in the
concurring reasons in the companion case of Grant v. Torstar Corp., both
steps in the responsible communication defence should be determined by the
judge, with the jury determining factual disputes.  Subject to those
views, the Chief Justice’s reasons and her decision to order a new trial were
agreed with.  [52]  Cases Cited  By McLachlin C.J.  Applied: Grant v. Torstar Corp.,
2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640; referred to: Hill v. Church of
Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1130; Reynolds v. Times
Newspapers Ltd., [1999] 4 All E.R. 609; Jameel v. Wall Street Journal
Europe Sprl, [2006] UKHL 44, [2007] 1 A.C. 359; Danyluk v. Ainsworth
Technologies Inc., 2001 SCC 44, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 460; Lamb v. Kincaid (1907),
38 S.C.R. 516; R. v. Warsing, [1998] 3 S.C.R. 579; Performance
Industries Ltd. v. Sylvan Lake Golf & Tennis Club Ltd., 2002 SCC 19,
[2002] 1 S.C.R. 678; Wasauksing First Nation v. Wasausink Lands Inc. (2004),
184 O.A.C. 84; Pereira v. Hamilton Township Farmers’ Mutual Fire Insurance
Co. (2006), 267 D.L.R. (4th) 690; Loutchansky v. Times Newspapers Ltd.,
[2001] EWCA Civ 1805, [2002] 1 All E.R. 652.  By Abella J.  Referred to:  Grant v. Torstar Corp.,
2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 134(6). Libel and Slander Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. L.12, s. 14.  APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Weiler,
Sharpe  and Blair JJ.A.), 2007 ONCA 771, 87 O.R. (3d) 241, 231 O.A.C. 277, 286
D.L.R. (4th) 196, 53 C.C.L.T. (3d) 122, 164 C.R.R. (2d) 284, [2007] O.J.
No. 4348 (QL), 2007 CarswellOnt 7310, upholding a decision of
Maranger J. and the jury award.  Appeal allowed and new trial ordered.  Richard G. Dearden and Wendy J.
Wagner, for the appellants.  Ronald F. Caza, Jeff
G. Saikaley and Mark C. Power, for the respondent.  Peter M. Jacobsen and Adrienne
Lee, for the intervener the Globe and Mail.  Paul B. Schabas, Iris
Fischer and Erin Hoult, for the intervener the Toronto Star
Newspapers Limited.  Daniel J. Henry, for the
intervener the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.  Patricia D. S. Jackson,
Andrew E. Bernstein and Jennifer A. Conroy, for the
intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association.  Brian MacLeod Rogers and Blair
Mackenzie, for the interveners the Canadian Newspaper Association, Ad
IDEM/Canadian Media Lawyers Association, RTNDA Canada/Association of Electronic
Journalists, the Canadian Publishers’ Council, Magazines Canada, the Canadian
Association of Journalists, the Canadian Journalists for Free Expression, the
Writers’ Union of Canada, the Professional Writers Association of Canada, the
Book and Periodical Council, and PEN Canada.  Peter A. Downard, Catherine
M. Wiley and Dawn K. Robertson, for the interveners Peter
Grant and Grant Forest Products Inc.  The judgment
of McLachlin C.J. and Binnie, LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Charron, Rothstein and
Cromwell JJ. was delivered by  The Chief Justice —  I.       Overview  [1]     This
appeal, along with its companion case Grant v. Torstar Corp., 2009 SCC
61, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 640 (released concurrently), requires the Court to consider
whether the common law of defamation should be modified to accord stronger
protection to defamatory statements of fact published responsibly.  [2]     As
explained in Grant, the time has come to recognize a new defence — the
defence of responsible communication on matters of public interest. The
question on this appeal is whether the defendants should be able to avail
themselves of it.  [3]     The respondent
in this Court, Danno Cusson, was a constable with the Ontario Provincial Police
(“OPP”) who, shortly after the events of September 11, 2001, and without
permission from his employer, travelled to New York City to assist with the
search and rescue effort at Ground Zero. Initially, he was portrayed in the
press as a hero, while the OPP was pilloried for demanding that he return to
his duties in Ottawa. The Ottawa Citizen subsequently published three
articles alleging that Cst. Cusson had misrepresented himself to the
authorities in New York and possibly interfered with the rescue operation. Cst.
Cusson brought this libel action against the newspaper, the reporters (the
“Citizen defendants”), and OPP Staff Sgt. Penny Barager, who was a quoted
source of information for the articles.  [4]     At trial,
the defendants pleaded qualified privilege. They disclaimed any separate
reliance on the defence known in England as “responsible journalism” or “Reynolds
privilege” — which, at the time, had not yet been recognized as a distinct
defence by any Canadian court.  With respect to two of the articles, the trial
judge rejected the claim of privilege and put the case to the jury to decide
whether the defence of truth had been made out. Answering a long list of
factual questions which parsed the allegedly defamatory statements in
considerable detail, the jury found that many, but not all, of the factual
imputations in the articles had been proven true.  It awarded Cst. Cusson
$100,000 in general damages against the Citizen defendants and $25,000 against
Staff Sgt. Barager. However, the jury also found no malice on the part of any
of the defendants and declined to award any special, aggravated or punitive
damages.  [5]     The Court
of Appeal, per Sharpe J.A., took the opportunity to establish a
responsible journalism defence in Ontario law. However, it denied the
defendants the protection of the defence in this case because they had not
advanced it at trial.  [6]     For the
reasons that follow, in my view, the Citizen defendants should have an
opportunity to avail themselves of the new defence. I would allow the appeal
and order a new trial.  II.      Facts  [7]     The facts
of this case are unusual. In the course of two weeks in September, 2001, OPP
Cst. Danno Cusson went from being lauded as a hero for his post-9/11 rescue
efforts to being derided in the press as a dishonest attention-seeker. The
accuracy of these competing characterizations was hotly contested at trial. In
view of my disposition of this case, I will say no more than is necessary to
provide context for the legal issues that arise.  [8]     This much
is uncontroversial. Following the attacks of September 11, the OPP had
volunteered its assistance to New York authorities through official channels,
but the offer had been declined. Nonetheless, Cst. Cusson made his way from
Ottawa to Manhattan with his pet dog Ranger, presenting himself as a search and
rescue volunteer to the police authorities at Ground Zero. When the OPP ordered
him to return to his post near Ottawa, Cst. Cusson tendered his resignation to
the force (he later withdrew his resignation and went on medical leave).  [9]     Cst.
Cusson gave a number of media interviews and was portrayed as a hero for his
efforts. There were reports that he had helped find and rescue two businessmen
from the rubble. However, as the Citizen would later report, at some point Cst.
Cusson was barred from the World Trade Center site by the New York authorities.
With this yet unknown, the OPP was widely criticized for its apparent
callousness in failing to support his initiative and insisting that he return
to work. Cst. Cusson received public support from a variety of media outlets
and at least one provincial politician.  [10] On September 25, the Citizen
published an article by Douglas Quan headlined “‘Renegade’ OPP officer under
fire”. It began:    [11] In the article, Sgt. Tim Fischer
of the New York State Police described how Cst. Cusson had identified himself
as a member of the RCMP and tried to explain why his business card said OPP.
Sgt. Fischer was quoted as saying, “The next time I see him, I’m going to
arrest him”. Other New York officials described how they had become suspicious
of Cst. Cusson’s qualifications and eventually banned him from the site. Cst.
Cusson was reportedly angry at having his access revoked.  [12] The article also quoted Cst. Cusson’s
supervisor, Staff Sgt. Penny Barager, confirming that Cusson had never been a
member of the RCMP nor had he been trained in K-9 rescue operations. She called
his actions “heroic” but cautioned that officers cannot be permitted to go on
“renegade missions”. She said that Cusson had violated two OPP policies when he
took his uniform and service pistol out of the country without prior
authorization.  [13] Mr. Quan had contacted Cst. Cusson
prior to publication to get his side of the story. In the article, Cst. Cusson
was quoted as denying that he had ever worn an RCMP uniform or otherwise
misrepresented himself to the New York authorities. Referring to his military
background, he said, “I have army blood in me. I guess it took over my police
responsibility”. While admitting no wrongdoing, he expressed the hope that he
had not “tarnished the image of my force”.  [14] The article concluded by referring
to media reports that Cst. Cusson and his dog Ranger had discovered two men in
business suits alive in the debris.  [15] The following day, September 26,
the Citizen published a follow-up article by Kelly Egan headlined “OPP
apologizes for Cusson ‘fiasco’”.  It revealed that Staff Sgt. Barager had
spoken to Sgt. Fischer and apologized to New York police for Cst. Cusson’s
behaviour.  The remainder of the piece covered much the same ground as the
previous article — most importantly, that he had “misrepresented himself and
may have hampered early rescue efforts”.  [16] Finally, on October 11, the
Citizen published an article by Don Campbell entitled “OPP’s Cusson faces
internal investigation”. Besides repeating the earlier allegations, it reported
that Staff Sgt. Barager planned to file a complaint over Cst. Cusson’s
conduct. Cusson, it said, was not available for further comment.  III.    Judicial History  A.     Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Maranger J. sitting with
a jury)  [17] After both sides had called their
evidence at trial, the defendants asked the judge to rule that the three
articles were protected by qualified privilege. Reviewing the Canadian and
English authorities, the trial judge observed that the law in this area was in
a state of flux and that the door had been opened to extending qualified
privilege to media publications in limited circumstances. With respect to the
Quan and Egan articles, he held that there was no “compelling, moral or social
duty to publish” them. In the trial judge’s view, they were “certainly of
public interest”, but not “to the extent that they needed to be heard”. He
therefore held that qualified privilege did not apply.  [18] The trial judge reached a
different conclusion with respect to the Don Campbell article.  Drawing an
analogy to the qualified privilege for reports of pending court proceedings
elaborated in Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto, [1995] 2 S.C.R.
1130, he held that the privilege must also cover the Citizen’s report of the pending
disciplinary action against Cst. Cusson. The part of the action dealing with
the Campbell article was therefore dismissed.  [19] The case went to the jury,
primarily on the basis of fair comment and justification, with respect to the
first two articles. The jury was provided with a detailed special verdict form
comprising 151 questions.  This questionnaire went through each impugned
statement in the Quan and Egan articles, asking the jury to rule on their
meaning, defamatory content, truth, and status as fact or opinion. The jury was
also provided with a general verdict form, presumably in order to comply with
s. 14 of the Ontario Libel and Slander Act,  R.S.O. 1990, c. L.12, which
provides that a jury in a defamation action “may give a general verdict upon
the whole matter in issue in the action”. The jury chose to render a special
verdict, ruling on each of the identified statements.  [20] The jury found that the lead
paragraph of the September 25 article, quoted above, was fair comment.  [21] Asked to rule on the truth of each
of the impugned factual statements and imputations, the jury found that the
defendants had proven the following facts:  ·      the plaintiff had failed in his duties as an OPP officer and
abandoned his responsibilities without justification;  ·      neither the plaintiff nor his dog had received formal training
in search and rescue operations;  ·      Sgt. Fischer or someone else intended to arrest the plaintiff;  ·      the plaintiff misled Sgt. Fischer into thinking he was an RCMP
officer;  ·      the plaintiff was trying to give the impression that he was an
RCMP officer.  [22] However, the jury also found that
the following imputations had not been proven:  ·      the plaintiff may have compromised the World Trade Center
rescue effort;   ·      the plaintiff had no search and rescue training;  ·      the plaintiff told Sgt. Fischer that he was an RCMP officer
and his dog had received training;  ·      the plaintiff had concealed his true identity;  ·      the plaintiff asked to be told about the most elementary dog
handling techniques and could not carry out even the simplest manoeuvres with
his dog;  ·      the plaintiff was responsible for a supposed “fiasco”;  ·      the plaintiff’s actions embarrassed the OPP and may have
harmed the force’s reputation.  [23] As can be seen, these findings are
somewhat difficult to reconcile with one another. On the one hand, the jury
found that Cst. Cusson misled Sgt. Fischer into thinking he was an RCMP
officer; on the other, it declined to find that Cst. Cusson told the New York
authorities that he was an RCMP officer who had received the necessary
training. Overall, the jury seems to have taken the view that Cst. Cusson
misled the authorities in New York, but that he did not act as deliberately or
mendaciously as the articles suggested.  [24] The jury found that there was no
“actual malice” on the part of any of the defendants. It awarded the plaintiff
$100,000 in general damages against the Ottawa Citizen and $25,000
against Penny Barager.  It declined to award any special, aggravated or
punitive damages.  B.      Court of Appeal for Ontario (Weiler, Sharpe and Blair
JJ.A.) (2007 ONCA 771, 231 O.A.C. 277)  [25] The Court of Appeal, per Sharpe
J.A., undertook an extensive review of the Canadian law of qualified privilege
as well as the more recent developments in other common law jurisdictions (its
reasons for judgment are discussed more fully in Grant).  The court
concluded that the existing law should be developed in order to give
“appropriate recognition and weight to the Charter values of freedom of
expression and freedom of the media without unduly minimizing the value of
protecting individual reputation” (para. 140).  Drawing particularly on the
House of Lords’ decisions in Reynolds v. Times Newspapers Ltd., [1999] 4
All E.R. 609, and Jameel v. Wall Street Journal Europe Sprl, [2006] UKHL
44, [2007] 1 A.C. 359, it determined that a new defence of responsible
journalism on matters of public interest should be recognized in Ontario.  [26] However, in light of the position
taken by the defendants at trial, Sharpe J.A. considered it inappropriate
either to apply the defence or to order a new trial. In his view, it would be
unjust to allow the defendants a second “bite at the cherry”, citing Danyluk
v. Ainsworth Technologies Inc., 2001 SCC 44, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 460, at para.
18. The court therefore dismissed the appeal.  [27] The defendants (appellants in this
Court) now appeal, asking this Court to enter judgment in their favour based on
the new defence recognized below. The plaintiff Mr. Cusson, contends that the
introduction of a new defence is unwarranted, but in the result asks this Court
to dismiss the appeal and confirm the trial judgment in his favour.  IV.    Analysis  A.     The Defence of Responsible Communication on Matters of
Public Interest  [28] In Grant, at para. 126, we
hold that the defence of responsible communication on matters of public
interest applies where:  A.   The publication is on a matter of public interest, and  B.    The publisher was diligent in trying to verify the allegation,
having regard to:  (a)       the seriousness of the allegation;  (b)       the public importance of the matter;  (c)       the urgency of the matter;  (d)       the status and reliability of the source;  (e)       whether the plaintiff's side of the story was sought and
accurately reported;  (f) whether the inclusion of the defamatory statement was
justifiable;  (g)       whether the defamatory statement’s public interest lay in
the fact that it was made rather than its truth (“reportage”); and  (h)       any other relevant circumstances.   [29] The judge decides whether the
publication was on a matter of public interest.  If so, the jury then decides
whether the standard of responsibility has been met.  [30] When determining responsibility,
the jury must consider the broad thrust of the publication as a whole rather
than minutely parsing individual statements. However, where, as here, the
publication arguably includes statements of both fact and opinion, the trial
judge may deem it necessary to isolate individual statements for the jury’s
consideration so it can decide in turn on the applicability of fair comment and
responsible communication. While the special verdict form given to the jury in
this case was arguably too long and complex, some itemization of individual
statements in the judge’s charge to the jury and (if there is one) the special
verdict form may be the preferable course to follow in applying the different
defences. That said, as was done here, an Ontario libel jury must have the
option of rendering a general verdict by virtue of the Libel and Slander Act,
s. 14.  [31] In this case, the public interest
test is clearly met. The Canadian public has a vital interest in knowing about
the professional misdeeds of those who are entrusted by the state with
protecting public safety.  While the subject of the Ottawa Citizen articles
was not political in the narrow sense, the articles touched on matters close to
the core of the public’s legitimate concern with the integrity of its public
service. When Cst. Cusson represented himself to the New York authorities and
the media as an OPP or RCMP officer, he sacrificed any claim to be engaged in a
purely private matter. News of his heroism was already a matter of public
record; there is no reason that legitimate questions about the validity of this
impression should not have been publicized too.  [32] That being the case, the
defendants’ liability hinges on whether they were diligent in trying to verify
the allegations prior to publication. As explained below, it will be for the
jury at a new trial to decide whether the articles met the standard of
responsibility articulated in Grant. Further evidence of the steps taken
by Quan and Egan may have to be adduced in order to provide a satisfactory
record upon which their conduct can be judged.  B.      Should the Defendants Have the Opportunity to Avail
Themselves of the New Defence?  [33] The Court of Appeal deemed the
responsible journalism or responsible communication defence to be a “new issue”
raised on appeal for the first time. Applying the jurisprudence on when such an
argument should be entertained, it concluded that allowing the defendants to
benefit from the new defence would be to give them an impermissible second
“bite at the cherry”.  [34] I have some difficulty with how
the Court of Appeal characterized the problem arising from the defendants’ new
argument on appeal. First, from a procedural point of view, it seems to me that
the Court of Appeal did in fact allow the “new issue” of responsible
journalism to be raised on appeal. Indeed, it broke new jurisprudential ground
on precisely this issue.  And, as will be explained, it is open to question how
“new” this issue really was, considering the defences pleaded at trial.  [35] Second, from a substantive
perspective, the new defence was properly before the Court of Appeal and, in
principle, available to the defendants.  [36]                        
The general rule, applied by the Court of Appeal, is that a new issue
may not be raised on appeal. However, the authorities shed light on the
circumstances in which appellate courts should make an exception to the rule. 
In Lamb v. Kincaid (1907), 38 S.C.R. 516, at p. 539, Duff J. (as he then
was) observed:  A court of
appeal, I think, should not give effect to such a point taken for the first
time in appeal, unless it be clear that, had the question been raised at the
proper time, no further light could have been thrown upon it.  [37]                        
Further guidance as to the appropriate test is provided by Wasauksing
First Nation v. Wasausink Lands Inc. (2004), 184 O.A.C. 84, relied on by
Sharpe J.A. below. There, the Ontario Court of Appeal explained the
circumstances in which an exception will be made to the rule:  An appellate
court may depart from this ordinary rule and entertain a new issue where the
interests of justice require it and where the court has a sufficient
evidentiary record and findings of fact to do so. [para. 102]  [38]                        
Applying this test, the preliminary question is whether the Citizen
defendants in fact raised a “new issue” in arguing responsible journalism on
appeal. If so, then the question becomes whether the evidentiary record and the
interests of justice support granting an exception to the general rule.  [39]                        
In this case it was much less clear than in Wasauksing First Nation that
the issue argued on appeal was genuinely “new” in the sense of being legally
and factually distinct from the issues litigated at trial. Though Sharpe J.A.
is right that the focus of the inquiry under the new defence is different from
the focus under qualified privilege, there is considerable overlap. Much of the
evidence adduced to demonstrate qualified privilege and malice would also be
relevant to responsible communication. For example, in attempting to refute any
suggestion of malice, the defendants led evidence from Douglas Quan which
showed some of the steps he took to verify the allegations.  Importantly, he
talked to Cst. Cusson and gave him the opportunity to tell his side of the
story.  Cusson’s  denials were included in the article.  [40]                        
All this is to say that the issue on appeal — responsible journalism —
did not raise entirely new factual matters without any basis in the evidence.
The arguments on qualified privilege and responsible journalism were both
directed toward the same fundamental question: whether the Citizen enjoyed a
privilege to publish the impugned material on grounds of public interest and
due diligence.  [41]                        
In any event, the deficiencies in the evidentiary foundation are largely
immaterial because, as held in Grant, the ultimate determination of
responsibility is a matter for the jury. Since Sharpe J.A. took the view
(following Reynolds and Jameel) that the new defence would be a
matter for the judge, he did not consider ordering a new trial so that a jury
could entertain the new defence. However, the gaps in the evidentiary record
with respect to responsible communication are of less concern if the relevant
option is a new trial rather than appellate application of the defence. A
proper evidentiary record can be established at a new trial.  [42]                        
The remaining question is whether the interests of justice favour allowing
the defendants the opportunity to avail themselves of the change of the law
brought about by this litigation on a new trial.  [43]                        
In my opinion, they do. In Ontario, a court hearing an appeal of a civil
matter may only order a new trial if “some substantial wrong or miscarriage of
justice has occurred”: Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s.
134(6). This is arguably a higher standard than that for raising a new issue on
appeal, but similar considerations apply. The appellant must demonstrate that
“the case was not fairly put to the jury, as, for example, where the charge
leaves the jury with a misapprehension as to the applicable legal principles”,
that the jury charge was “materially deficient”, or that “the law was not
clearly stated on a critical issue”: Pereira v. Hamilton Township Farmers’
Mutual Fire Insurance Co. (2006), 267 D.L.R. (4th) 690 (Ont. C.A.), at
paras. 75-76, per Borins J.A.  [44]                        
In this case, this test is met.  The plaintiff will suffer no undue
prejudice from a new trial other than costs, addressed below.  The defendants,
on the other hand, would be seriously disadvantaged by being deprived of the
opportunity to avail themselves of the responsible communication defence which
their appeal was responsible for developing. If it turns out that the defence
is found to apply to the articles in question, such a deprivation would amount
to an injustice.  [45]                        
As background, it is necessary to recap the approach of the courts
below. Applying earlier cases that were loathe to extend qualified privilege to
the media, the trial judge applied a stringent duty/interest test that required
the publisher to show a “compelling” public interest in publication amounting
to a “moral or social duty” (C.A. reasons, at para. 5).  Not surprisingly, he
found that the Quan and Egan articles fell short of this standard.  The jury returned its verdict in favour of the plaintiff on the
basis that the defence of qualified privilege was not available.  The
defendants appealed, arguing that the trial judge’s formulation of qualified
privilege was too narrow and, in the alternative, arguing for a broad
responsible journalism defence.  The Court of Appeal affirmed the existence of
a separate responsible journalism defence, but held that the defendants were
not entitled to a new trial, given that they had not pleaded this defence
initially.  [46]                      
The plaintiff supports the Court of Appeal’s conclusion,
arguing that the defendants are not entitled to a new trial on the basis of the
new defence of responsible communication on matters of public interest, because
they did not raise that defence at the first trial.  He argues that the
defendants made a strategic decision to rely on traditional qualified
privilege, declining to stake their case on the riskier prospect that the trial
judge might extend the law to provide a distinct responsible communication
defence. Instead, they chose to remain on the more familiar terrain of
qualified privilege. On appeal, the plaintiff contends, they should have to lie
in the bed they made.   [48]                        
Second, had the Court of Appeal and this Court endorsed a broadened
defence of qualified privilege as pleaded by the defendants, a new trial would
have been required in any event, because the trial judge applied an extremely
narrow conception of public interest.  The defendants had argued for a broader
privilege.  That was the bed they sought to make; the trial judge, however,
required them to lie in a narrower one.  The problem was compounded when the
Court of Appeal opted for a new and different defence than the broadened
qualified privilege defence pleaded.  The trial judge cannot be faulted for
failing to undertake a development of the law that the defendants did not ask
for — i.e. the establishment of a new responsible communication defence.
However, in my view, his restrictive approach to the pleaded defence of
qualified privilege occasioned an injustice by effectively removing any
realistic prospect that statements on matters of public interest to the world at
large could be protected. The defendants deserve an opportunity to make their
case to a jury properly instructed on the law as it now stands. A new trial is
therefore warranted.  [49]                        
Because the ultimate determination of responsibility is a matter for the
jury, I make no comment on whether or not the defence should apply on the new
trial.  V.  Conclusion  [50]                        
I would allow the appeal and order a new trial.  [51]                        
Success on this appeal has been divided. In the circumstances, each side
should bear its own costs in this Court. While the appellants deserve the
opportunity to avail themselves of the new defence, they must also live with
the consequences of their own strategic decisions at trial.  I would therefore
not disturb the costs orders made in the courts below.  The following
are the reasons delivered by  [52]                        
Abella J. — As in the
companion case of Grant v. Torstar Corp., 2009 SCC 61, [2009] 3 S.C.R.
640, in my view both steps in the responsible communication defence should be
determined by the judge, with the jury determining factual disputes.  Subject
to those views I agree with the Chief Justice’s reasons and with her decision
to order a new trial.  Appeal
allowed and new trial ordered.  Solicitors
for the appellants:  Gowling Lafleur Henderson, Ottawa.  Solicitors
for the respondent:  Heenan Blaikie, Ottawa.  Solicitors
for the intervener the Globe and Mail:  Bersenas Jacobsen Chouest
Thomson Blackburn, Toronto.  Solicitors
for the intervener the Toronto Star Newspapers Limited:  Blake,
Cassels & Graydon, Toronto.  Solicitor
for the intervener the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation:  Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, Toronto.  Solicitors
for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association:  Torys,
Toronto.  Solicitors
for the interveners the Canadian Newspaper Association, Ad IDEM/Canadian Media
Lawyers Association, RTNDA Canada/Association of Electronic Journalists, the
Canadian Publishers’ Council, Magazines Canada, the Canadian Association of
Journalists, the Canadian Journalists for Free Expression, the Writers’ Union
of Canada, the Professional Writers Association of Canada, the Book and
Periodical Council, and PEN Canada:  Brian MacLeod Rogers, Toronto.  Solicitors
for the interveners Peter Grant and Grant Forest Products Inc.:  Fasken
Martineau DuMoulin, Toronto.     