Winnipeg Condominium Corporation No. 36  v. Bird
Construction Co., [1995] 1 S.C.R. 85  Winnipeg Condominium Corporation No. 36                                    Appellant  v.  Bird Construction Co. Ltd.                                                                Respondent  and  Smith Carter Partners Intervener  Indexed as:  Winnipeg Condominium
Corporation No. 36  v. Bird Construction Co.  File No.:  23624.  1994:  October 12;
1995:  January 26.   on appeal from the court of appeal for manitoba                      A land developer contracted
with respondent to build an apartment building in accordance with plans and
specifications prepared by the intervener (an architectural firm).  Respondent
subcontracted the masonry portion of the work.  The building was converted into
a condominium in October, 1978, when appellant became the registered subsequent
owner of the land and building.  In 1982, the appellant's directors became
concerned about the masonry work on the exterior cladding of the building. 
They retained the architects (the intervener) and a firm of consulting
engineers to inspect the building.  The architects and engineers offered the
opinion that the building was structurally sound.  In 1989, a storey-high
section of the cladding fell from the ninth storey level of the building.  The
appellant had further inspections undertaken which revealed structural defects
in the masonry work.  Following these inspections, the entire cladding was
replaced at the appellant's expense.                     Appellant commenced an action
in negligence against the respondent, the intervener and the subcontractor. 
The statement of claim detailed alleged inadequacies in design and workmanship,
without assigning specific blame to one defendant or another.  Respondent and
the subcontractor filed notices of motion for summary judgment and notices of
motion to strike the claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action with the
Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench.  Both motions were dismissed.  Respondent
appealed to the Court of Appeal but the subcontractor did not.  The appeal was
dismissed with respect to the motion for summary judgment but allowed with
respect to the motion to strike, and the statement of claim was struck out as
against respondent.  At issue in this appeal is whether a general contractor
responsible for the construction of a building may be held tortiously liable
for negligence to a subsequent purchaser of the building, who is not in
contractual privity with the contractor, for the cost of repairing defects in
the building arising out of negligence in its construction.                     Held:  The appeal should be allowed.                     The Court of
Appeal erred in deciding that the costs of repair claimed by appellant are not
recoverable economic loss under the law of tort in Canada.  The law has now
progressed to the point where contractors (as well as subcontractors,
architects and engineers) who take part in the design and construction of a
building will owe a duty in tort to subsequent purchasers of the building if it
can be shown that it was foreseeable that a failure to take reasonable care in
constructing the building would create defects that pose a substantial danger
to the health and safety of the occupants.  Where negligence is established and
such defects manifest themselves before any damage to persons or property
occurs, they can be held liable for the reasonable cost of repairing the
defects and putting the building back into a non-dangerous state.                     In coming to its conclusion
that the losses claimed by the appellant were not recoverable in tort, the
Court of Appeal followed the reasoning of the House of Lords in D & F
Estates Ltd. v. Church Commissioners for England.  That decision should no
longer be seen as having strong persuasive authority in Canadian tort law. 
First, it is inconsistent with recent Canadian decisions recognizing the
possibility of concurrent contractual and tortious duties.  Second, it is
inconsistent with the continued application in Canada of the principles with
respect to the recoverability of economic loss in tort established in Anns
v. Merton London Borough Council and adopted by this Court in City of
Kamloops v. Nielsen.                     The losses claimed by
appellant satisfy the two-part test for recoverability of economic loss
established in Anns and Kamloops.  First, it is reasonably
foreseeable to contractors that, if they design or construct a building negligently
and if that building contains latent defects as a result of that negligence,
subsequent purchasers of the building may suffer personal injury or damage to
other property when those defects manifest themselves.  The reasonable
likelihood that a defect in a building will cause injury to its inhabitants is
also sufficient to ground a contractor's duty in tort to subsequent purchasers
of the building for the cost of repairing the defect if that defect is
discovered prior to any injury and if it poses a real and substantial danger to
the inhabitants of the building.  In coming to this conclusion, this Court
adopts the reasoning of Laskin J. in Rivtow Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron
Works.  If a contractor can be held liable in tort where he or she constructs
a building negligently and, as a result of that negligence, the building causes
damage to persons or property, it follows that the contractor should also be
held liable in cases where the dangerous defect is discovered and the owner of
the building wishes to mitigate the danger by fixing the defect and putting the
building back into a non-dangerous state.  In both cases, the duty in tort
serves to protect the bodily integrity and property interests of the
inhabitants of the building.                     Apart from the logical force
of holding contractors liable for the cost of repair of dangerous defects, a
strong underlying policy justification also exists for imposing liability in
these cases.  Maintaining a bar against recoverability for the cost of repair
of dangerous defects provides no incentive for plaintiffs to mitigate potential
losses and tends to encourage economically inefficient behaviour.  Allowing
recovery against contractors in tort for the cost of repair of dangerous
defects thus serves an important preventative function by encouraging socially
responsible behaviour.                      Second, there are no policy
considerations which are sufficiently compelling to negate the duty.  There is
no risk of liability to an indeterminate class because the potential class of
claimants is limited to the very persons for whom the building is constructed: 
the inhabitants of the building.  There is no risk of liability in an
indeterminate amount because the amount of liability will always be limited by
the reasonable cost of repairing the dangerous defect in the building and
restoring that building to a non-dangerous state.  There is little risk of
liability for an indeterminate time because the contractor will only be liable
for the cost of repair of dangerous defects during the useful life of the
building.  Practically speaking, the period in which the contractor may be
exposed to liability for negligence will be much shorter than the full useful
life of the building.  With the passage of time, it will become increasingly
difficult for owners of a building to prove at trial that any deterioration in
the building is attributable to the initial negligence of the contractor and
not simply to the inevitable wear and tear suffered by every building. 
Finally, given the fact that a subsequent purchaser is not the best placed to
bear the risk of the emergence of latent defects, the doctrine of caveat
emptor should not serve to negate a contractor's duty in tort to subsequent
purchasers.  Cases Cited   Statutes and Regulations Cited   Court of
Queen's Bench Rules, Man. Reg.
553/88, Rules 20.01, 25.11.  Authors Cited  Barrett, Sidney
R., Jr.  "Recovery of Economic Loss in Tort for Construction Defects:  A
Critical Analysis" (1989), 40 S.C. L. Rev. 891.  Cooke, Sir
Robin.  "An Impossible Distinction" (1991), 107 L.Q. Rev. 46.                        APPEAL from a judgment of the
Manitoba Court of Appeal (1993), 85 Man. R. (2d) 81, 41 W.A.C. 81, 101 D.L.R.
(4th) 699, 15 C.C.L.T. (2d) 1, 6 C.L.R. (2d) 1, [1993] 5 W.W.R. 673, striking
out a statement of claim on allowing an appeal from a judgment of
Galanchuk J. (1992), 84 Man. R. (2d) 23, dismissing an application to
strike out or alternatively for summary judgment.  Appeal allowed.                     Kevin T. Williams and Paul Forsyth, for the appellant.                     Sidney Green, Q.C., and Murdoch MacKay, Q.C.,
for the respondent.                     David I. Marr and Roger B. King, Q.C., for
the intervener Smith Carter Partners.                     The judgment of the Court was
delivered by  1                 La Forest J. -- May a
general contractor responsible for the construction of a building be held
tortiously liable for negligence to a subsequent purchaser of the building, who
is not in contractual privity with the contractor, for the cost of repairing
defects in the building arising out of negligence in its construction?  That is
the issue that was posed by a motion for summary judgment and a motion to
strike out a claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action argued before
Galanchuk J. of the Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench pursuant to Rules 20.01 and
25.11 of the Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench Rules, Man. Reg. 553/88. 
Galanchuk J. dismissed the motions, but the Court of Appeal of Manitoba allowed
an appeal from this decision and struck out the claim against the contractor on
the grounds that the damages sought were for economic loss, which were not
recoverable in the circumstances, and hence that the claim did not disclose a
reasonable cause of action.  2                 For
reasons that will appear, I do not, with respect, share the views of the Court
of Appeal; I agree with Galanchuk J. that the action should proceed to trial. 
The facts as set out before Galanchuk J. are contained in the appellant's
amended statement of claim, the respondent's statement of defence and notice of
motion.  These facts are as follows.  Facts  3                 On
April 19, 1972, a Winnipeg land developer, Tuxedo Properties Co. Ltd.
("Tuxedo"), entered into a contract ("the General
Contract") with a general contractor, Bird Construction Co. Ltd.
("Bird"), for the construction of a 15-storey, 94-unit apartment
building.  In the General Contract, Bird undertook to construct the building in
accordance with plans and specifications prepared by the architectural firm of
Smith Carter Partners ("Smith Carter"), with whom Tuxedo also had a
contract.  On June 5, 1972, Bird entered into a subcontract with a masonry
subcontractor, Kornovski & Keller Masonry Ltd. ("Kornovski &
Keller"), under which the latter undertook to perform the masonry portion
of the work specified under the General Contract.  The work called for by the
General Contract commenced in April, 1972 and the building was substantially
completed by December, 1974.  4                 The
building was initially built and used as an apartment block, but was converted
into a condominium in October, 1978, when Winnipeg Condominium Corporation No.
36 ("the Condominium Corporation") became the registered owner of the
land and building.  The facts surrounding the conversion were a subject of
dispute between the parties, but during oral argument the appellant conceded
for the purposes of this appeal that the Condominium Corporation was a
subsequent owner of the building and was not the alter ego of the original
owner.  I shall accordingly deal with the appeal on the assumption that this
was indeed the case.  5                 In
1982, the Board of Directors of the Condominium Corporation became concerned
about the state of the exterior cladding of the building (consisting of 4-inch
thick slabs of stone), which had been installed by the subcontractor, Kornovski
& Keller.  The directors observed that some of the mortar had broken away
and that cracks were developing in the stone work.  As a result of these
concerns, the Condominium Corporation retained a firm of structural engineers
and the original architects, Smith Carter, to inspect the building.  The
engineers and Smith Carter recommended some minor remedial work but offered the
opinion that the stonework on the building was structurally sound.  The
remedial work, costing $8,100, was undertaken at the Condominium Corporation's
expense in 1982.  6                 On
May 8, 1989, a storey-high section of the cladding, approximately twenty feet
in length, fell from the ninth storey level of the building to the ground
below.  The Condominium Corporation retained engineering consultants who
conducted further inspections.  Following these inspections, the Condominium
Corporation had the entire cladding removed and replaced at a cost in excess of
$1.5 million.  7                 An
action was commenced in negligence by the Condominium Corporation against Bird,
Smith Carter and Kornovski & Keller.  The Condominium Corporation, in its
statement of claim, detailed alleged inadequacies in design and workmanship,
without assigning specific blame to one defendant or another.  Bird responded
by filing a notice of motion for summary judgment and a motion to strike the
Condominium Corporation's claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action
with the Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench.  Galanchuk J. heard the motions,
along with a similar one by the subcontractor.  Smith Carter did not bring a
motion of its own, but appeared and was allowed to support the motions of its
co-defendants.  Both motions were dismissed.  Bird appealed to the Court of
Appeal but the subcontractor did not.  The appeal was dismissed with respect to
the motion for summary judgment but allowed with respect to the motion to
strike and the statement of claim was struck out as against Bird.      Judgments Below  Court of Queen's Bench for Manitoba (1992), 84 Man. R. (2d) 23 (Galanchuk J.)  8                 Galanchuk
J. dismissed Bird's motion for summary judgment and its motion to strike the
Condominium Corporation's claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action on
the grounds that the Condominium Corporation's claim disclosed a reasonable
cause of action and that the issues raised before him were genuine.  He
observed that the parties had raised real issues of credibility and had
introduced conflicting evidence of sufficient complexity to warrant a trial. 
With respect to Bird's argument that the Condominium Corporation's loss was
pure economic loss and therefore not recoverable against Bird, he held that
that issue had to be dealt with by a trial judge and that the following
question (at p. 28) would have to be answered at trial:  Is there a
sufficient degree of foreseeability of harm and proximity of the parties to
impose liability in all of the circumstances of this case to warrant the
plaintiff's claim for recovery?  Court of Appeal (1993), 85 Man. R. (2d) 81 (Huband J.A., Scott C.J. and Philp J.A.
concurring)  9                 The
Court of Appeal, we saw, allowed the appeal and struck out the Condominium
Corporation's claim as against Bird.  Huband J.A., writing for a unanimous
court, decided that the expenses incurred by the Condominium Corporation in
repairing the building were pure economic loss and not recoverable against Bird
in tort.  In reaching this decision, he found the decision by the House of
Lords in D & F Estates Ltd. v. Church Commissioners for England,
[1988] 2 All E.R. 992, to be directly on point.  In that case, the House of
Lords ruled that, in the absence of a contractual relationship, the cost of
repairing a defective structure, where the defect is discovered before it
causes personal injury or physical damage to other property, is not recoverable
in negligence by a remote buyer of real property against the original
contractor or builder.  Applying this reasoning, Huband J.A. observed that,
even if Bird's employees, rather than the subcontractor Kornovski & Keller,
had affixed the exterior cladding, the Condominium Corporation would not have
had a claim in negligence because the damages claimed for the cost of repairing
the cladding would still have been purely economic in nature.  In support of
this conclusion, he quoted with approval the following passage from the reasons
of Lord Bridge in D & F Estates, at p. 1006:  . . .
liability can only arise if the defect remains hidden until the defective
structure causes personal injury or damage to property other than the structure
itself.  If the defect is discovered before any damage is done, the loss
sustained by the owner of the structure, who has to repair or demolish it to
avoid a potential source of danger to third parties, would seem to be purely
economic.  Thus, if I acquire a property with a dangerously defective garden
wall which is attributable to the bad workmanship of the original builder, it
is difficult to see any basis in principle on which I can sustain an action in
tort against the builder for the cost of either repairing or demolishing the
wall.  No physical damage has been caused.  All that has happened is that the
defect in the wall has been discovered in time to prevent damage occurring.  10               Huband
J.A. found that the law as stated in D & F Estates was consistent
with Canadian law.  He expressed some concern about the fact that Lord Bridge
and Lord Oliver in D & F Estates had expressly criticized the
earlier decision of the House of Lords in Anns v. Merton London Borough
Council, [1978] A.C. 728, in which Lord Wilberforce had set down a
two-stage negligence test and had suggested, in an obiter passage, that
liability might fall upon a contractor in similar circumstances to the case at
bar.  Huband J.A. observed that the application of the reasoning in D &
F Estates by Canadian courts may be problematic because D & F
Estates paved the way for the full repudiation of Anns by the Law
Lords in Murphy v. Brentwood District Council, [1990] 2 All E.R. 908
(H.L.).  By contrast, he noted, this Court explicitly declined, in Canadian
National Railway Co. v. Norsk Pacific Steamship Co., [1992] 1 S.C.R. 1021,
to abandon Anns.  11               However,
Huband J.A. resolved the problem by deciding that the result in this case would
be the same under either the Anns or the Murphy approach.  First,
Huband J.A., at p. 90, found that the concept of caveat emptor negated
any relationship of proximity as defined under the first stage of Lord
Wilberforce's two-stage Anns approach:  The maxim,
caveat emptor, operates as between purchaser and vendor.  But the very
existence of the principle instructs the potential purchaser to rely upon his
own investigations, inspections and inquiries, and not to rely upon the fact
that the vendor had retained Smith Carter Partners as architects, Bird as
general contractor, and that Kornovski & Keller was one of the
subcontractors, and since they are reputable firms, the integrity of the
building can be safely assumed.  The concept of "buyer beware" tells
the potential purchaser that if it seeks greater protection than its own
investigations, inspections and inquiries provide, it should seek appropriate
warranties from the vendor or, if that cannot be bargained, to seek out an
insurer to cover anticipated future risks.  Second, Huband J.A., at p. 86, found that the
House of Lords in D & F Estates had set forth sufficiently
compelling policy concerns to justify precluding recovery under the second
branch of the Anns test:                     The
great debate as to whether the Anns case was correctly decided and
should be followed, or whether the reasoning in Murphy should be
preferred will rage on.  But in certain cases, I do not think that the
difference in approach will yield a difference in result.  In the D & F
Estates case, the House of Lords did in fact consider whether there were
factors which should negative, reduce or limit the scope of a duty of care owed
by a building contractor to the subsequent lessee of the building, or a
limitation on the damages to which a breach of that duty may give rise.  The
court found that considerations did exist which should limit the remedy.  Lord
Bridge observed that with respect to defective chattels, economic loss is
recoverable in contract by a buyer or hirer of the chattel entitled to the
benefit of a relevant warranty of quality, but economic loss is "not
recoverable in tort by a remote buyer or hirer of the chattel".  Lord
Bridge concluded that the same law should apply in the field of real property
and this need for consistency should indeed limit the breadth of a remedy for a
breach of a duty of care.  Analysis  12               This
case gives this Court the opportunity once again to address the question of
recoverability in tort for economic loss.  In Norsk, supra, at p.
1049, I made reference to an article by Professor Feldthusen in which he
outlined five different categories of cases where the question of
recoverability in tort for economic loss has arisen ("Economic Loss in the
Supreme Court of Canada:  Yesterday and Tomorrow" (1990-91), 17 Can.
Bus. L.J. 356, at pp. 357-58), namely:  1. The
Independent Liability of Statutory Public Authorities; 2. Negligent
Misrepresentation; 3. Negligent
Performance of a Service; 4. Negligent Supply
of Shoddy Goods or Structures; 5. Relational
Economic Loss.  I stressed in Norsk that the question of
recoverability for economic loss must be approached with reference to the
unique and distinct policy issues raised in each of these categories.  That is
because ultimately the issues concerning recovery for economic loss are
concerned with determining the proper ambit of the law of tort, an exercise
that must take account of the various situations where that question may
arise.  This case raises issues different from that in Norsk, which fell
within the fifth category.  The present case, which involves the alleged
negligent construction of a building, falls partially within the fourth
category, although subject to an important caveat.  The negligently supplied
structure in this case was not merely shoddy; it was dangerous.  In my view,
this is important because the degree of danger to persons and other property
created by the negligent construction of a building is a cornerstone of the
policy analysis that must take place in determining whether the cost of repair
of the building is recoverable in tort.  As I will attempt to show, a
distinction can be drawn on a policy level between "dangerous"
defects in buildings and merely "shoddy" construction in buildings
and that, at least with respect to dangerous defects, compelling policy reasons
exist for the imposition upon contractors of tortious liability for the cost of
repair of these defects.  13               Traditionally,
the courts have characterized the costs incurred by a plaintiff in repairing a
defective chattel or building as "economic loss" on the grounds that
costs of those repairs do not arise from injury to persons or damage to
property apart from the defective chattel or building itself; see Rivtow
Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron Works, [1974] S.C.R. 1189, at p. 1207.  For
my part, I would find it more congenial to deal directly with the policy
considerations underlying that classification as was done in an analogous
situation in Dutton v. Bognor Regis Urban District Council, [1972] 1
Q.B. 373 (C.A.), per Denning M.R. (aux pp. 396-98), and Sachs L.J. (aux
pp. 403-4).  However, I am content to deal with the issues in the terms in
which the arguments were formulated.  Adopting this traditional
characterization as a convenient starting point for my analysis, I observe that
the losses claimed by the Condominium Corporation in the present case fall
quite clearly under the category of economic loss.  In their statement of
claim, the Condominium Corporation claim damages in excess of $1.5 million from
the respondent Bird, the subcontractor Kornovski & Keller and the
architects Smith Carter, representing the cost of repairing the building
subsequent to the collapse of the exterior cladding on May 8, 1989.  The
Condominium Corporation is not claiming that anyone was injured by the
collapsing exterior cladding or that the collapsing cladding damaged any of its
other property.  Rather, its claim is simply for the cost of repairing the
allegedly defective masonry and putting the exterior of the building back into
safe working condition.  14               Although
most of the Condominium Corporation's submissions before this Court were
directed toward establishing that the costs of repair were recoverable economic
loss, counsel for the Condominium Corporation made a subsidiary claim that the
losses in question could, in fact, be characterized as damage to property as
opposed to pure economic loss.  In D & F Estates, supra, at
pp. 1006-7, Lord Bridge observed, in obiter, that:  . . .
it may well be arguable that in the case of complex structures, . . .
one element of the structure should be regarded for the purpose of the
application of the principles under discussion as distinct from another
element, so that damage to one part of the structure caused by a hidden defect
in another part may qualify to be treated as damage to `other
property'. . . .  Counsel for the Condominium Corporation argued
that the collapse of the cladding may have been attributable to the negligent
installation of certain metal ties.  Following the logic suggested by Lord
Bridge, counsel argued that the loss suffered was not, in fact, economic loss
but, rather, damage to "other property" and thus recoverable under
the principles established in Donoghue v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562
(H.L.).  In other words, he sought to localize the defect in one part of the
structure and to claim that the damage to the rest of the structure was
"caused" in some manner by the defect.  15               I
note at the outset that I do not find the Condominium Corporation's argument on
this subsidiary point persuasive.  In Murphy, supra, at pp.
926-28, Lord Bridge reconsidered and rejected the "complex structure"
theory he had suggested in D & F Estates, criticizing the theory on
the following basis (at p. 928):  The reality is
that the structural elements in any building form a single indivisible unit of
which the different parts are essentially interdependent.  To the extent that
there is any defect in one part of the structure it must to a greater or lesser
degree necessarily affect all other parts of the structure.  Therefore any
defect in the structure is a defect in the quality of the whole and it is quite
artificial, in order to impose a legal liability which the law would not
otherwise impose, to treat a defect in an integral structure, so far as it
weakens the structure, as a dangerous defect liable to cause damage to `other
property'.                     A
critical distinction must be drawn here between some part of a complex
structure which is said to be a `danger' only because it does not perform its
proper function in sustaining the other parts and some distinct item
incorporated in the structure which positively malfunctions so as to inflict
positive damage on the structure in which it is incorporated.  Thus, if a
defective central heating boiler explodes and damages a house or a defective
electrical installation malfunctions and sets the house on fire, I see no
reason to doubt that the owner of the house, if he can prove that the damage
was due to the negligence of the boiler manufacturer in the one case or the
electrical contractor in the other, can recover damages in tort on Donoghue
v. Stevenson principles.  I am in full agreement with Lord Bridge's
criticisms of the "complex structure" theory.  In cases involving the
recoverability of economic loss in tort, it is preferable for the courts to
weigh the relevant policy issues openly.  Since the use of this theory serves
mainly to circumvent and obscure the underlying policy questions, I reject the
use of the "complex structure" theory in cases involving the
liability of contractors for the cost of repairing defective buildings.  16               Proceeding
on the assumption, then, that the losses claimed in this case are purely
economic, the sole issue before this Court is whether the losses claimed by the
Condominium Corporation are the type of economic losses that should be
recoverable in tort.  In coming to its conclusion that the losses claimed by
the Condominium Corporation are not recoverable in tort, the Manitoba Court of
Appeal, we saw, followed the reasoning of the House of Lords in D & F
Estates.  In that case, the House of Lords found that the cost of repairing
a defect in a building is not recoverable in negligence by a successor in title
against the original contractor in the absence of a contractual relationship or
a special relationship of reliance.  I should say that the Court of Appeal
might well have come to the same conclusion on the basis of the majority
opinion in Rivtow, supra, an issue I will take up later.  Here I shall
dispose of the arguments relating to D & F Estates.  17               The
facts in D & F Estates were as follows.  The defendants were the
main contractors hired by the owner of a piece of land to construct a block of
flats between 1963 and 1965.  The contractors hired a sub-contractor to carry
out plastering work on the building which, it was later discovered, was
performed negligently.  In 1965, after the block was completed, the plaintiffs
took a 98 year lease on a flat from the owner of the block.  In 1980, the
plaintiffs discovered that the plaster on the ceilings and on one wall was
loose and that some of the plaster had fallen down.  The plaintiffs had the
remaining plaster hacked off and the areas affected were replastered and redecorated
at the plaintiff's expense.  The plaintiff sued the original contractor in tort
for the cost of the repairs and the estimated cost of future remedial work.  At
trial, the judge awarded damages against the contractors in respect of cost of
the remedial work on the grounds that the contractors had been negligent in
supervising the plastering work.  The Court of Appeal reversed the trial
judge's decision, and the plaintiff appealed to the House of Lords.  18               The
House of Lords dismissed the appeal on two principal grounds.  First, they
decided that any duty owed by a contractor to a home owner with respect to the
quality of construction in a building must arise in contract, and not in tort. 
They based this conclusion upon a concern that allowing recoverability for the
cost of repairing defects in buildings would have the effect of creating a
non-contractual warranty of fitness; see D & F Estates, at p. 1007.  19               Second,
they decided that a contractor can only be held liable in tort to subsequent
purchasers of a building when the contractor's negligence causes physical
injury to the purchasers, damage to their other property, or where a special
relationship of reliance has developed between the contractor and the
purchasers along the lines suggested in Hedley Byrne & Co. v. Heller
& Partners Ltd., [1964] A.C. 465.  See D & F Estates, at p.
1014.  20               There
was no contract between the plaintiff and the defendants in D & F
Estates, and the Law Lords found no special relationship of reliance on the
facts of the case.  Accordingly, they reasoned that the cost of repairing
defective plaster fell under the category of "pure economic loss". 
Since the negligence in that case did not result in damage to persons or
property, they concluded that the plaintiff could not claim that expense
against the contractor.  Lord Bridge expressed the conclusion as follows, at p.
1006:  . . .
liability can only arise if the defect remains hidden until the defective
structure causes personal injury or damage to property other than the structure
itself.  If the defect is discovered before any damage is done, the loss
sustained by the owner of the structure, who has to repair or demolish it to
avoid a potential source of danger to third parties, would seem to be purely
economic.  Lord Oliver came to a similar conclusion, at p.
1014:  . . .
such loss is not in principle recoverable in tort unless the case can be
brought within the principle of reliance established by Hedley Byrne. 
In the instant case the defective plaster caused no damage to the remainder of
the building and in so far as it presented a risk of damage to other property
or to the person of any occupant that was remediable simply by the process of
removal.  21               Huband
J.A. found the reasoning in D & F Estates to be compelling and of
strong persuasive authority and, on that basis, came to the conclusion that the
cost of repair of the defects in the building were not recoverable in tort by
the Condominium Corporation against Bird.  With respect, I come to a different
conclusion.  In my view, where a contractor (or any other person) is negligent
in planning or constructing a building, and where that building is found to
contain defects resulting from that negligence which pose a real and
substantial danger to the occupants of the building, the reasonable cost of
repairing the defects and putting the building back into a non-dangerous state
are recoverable in tort by the occupants.  The underlying rationale for this
conclusion is that a person who participates in the construction of a large and
permanent structure which, if negligently constructed, has the capacity to
cause serious damage to other persons and property in the community, should be
held to a reasonable standard of care.  Sir Robin Cooke expressed the rationale
for this conclusion as follows ("An Impossible Distinction" (1991),
107 L.Q. Rev. 46, at p. 70):                     The
point is simply that, prima facie, he who puts into the community an apparently
sound and durable structure, intended for use in all probability by a
succession of persons, should be expected to take reasonable care that it is
reasonably fit for that use and does not mislead.  He is not merely exercising
his freedom as a citizen to pursue his own ends.  He is constructing,
exploiting or sanctioning something for the use of others.  Unless compelling
grounds to the contrary can be made out, and subject to reasonable limitations
as to time or otherwise, the natural consequences of failure to take due care
should be accepted.  22               My
conclusion that the type of economic loss claimed by the Condominium
Corporation is recoverable in tort is therefore based in large part upon what
seem to me to be compelling policy considerations.  I shall elaborate in more
detail upon these later in my reasons.  However, before doing so, I think it
important to clarify why the D & F Estates case should not, in my
view, be seen as having strong persuasive authority in Canadian tort law as
that law is currently developing.  My reasons for coming to this conclusion are
twofold:  first, to the extent that the decision of the House of Lords in D
& F Estates rests upon the assumption that liability in tort for the
cost of repair of defective houses represents an unjustifiable intrusion of
tort into the contractual sphere, it is inconsistent with recent Canadian
decisions recognizing the possibility of concurrent contractual and tortious duties;
second, to the extent that the D & F Estates decision formed part of
a line of English cases leading ultimately to the rejection of Anns, it
is inconsistent with this Court's continued application of the principles
established in Anns.  23               Turning
to the first of these reasons, I observe that it is now well-established in
Canada that a duty of care in tort may arise coextensively with a contractual
duty.  In Central Trust Co. v. Rafuse, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 147, Le Dain J.
explained the relationship between tort and contractual duties as follows, at
pp. 204-5:                     1.
The common law duty of care that is created by a relationship of sufficient
proximity, in accordance with the general principle affirmed by Lord Wilberforce
in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, is not confined to
relationships that arise apart from contract.  Although the relationships in Donoghue
v. Stevenson, Hedley Byrne and Anns were all of a
non-contractual nature and there was necessarily reference in the judgments to
a duty of care that exists apart from or independently of contract, I find
nothing in the statements of general principle in those cases to suggest that
the principle was intended to be confined to relationships that arise apart from
contract. . . . [T]he question is whether there is a relationship of
sufficient proximity, not how it arose.  The principle of tortious liability is
for reasons of public policy a general one.  This is not say, of course, that a duty in tort
arises out of a duty in contract.  In Rafuse, Le Dain J. made it clear
that, although duties in tort and contract may arise concurrently, the duty in
tort must arise independently of the contractual duty.  He stated, at p. 205:                     2.
What is undertaken by the contract will indicate the nature of the relationship
that gives rise to the common law duty of care, but the nature and scope of the
duty of care that is asserted as the foundation of the tortious liability must
not depend on specific obligations or duties created by the express terms of
the contract.  It is in that sense that the common law duty of care must be
independent of the contract.  For the similar situation under Quebec law, see Houle
v. Canadian National Bank, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 122, per L'Heureux-Dubé
J., at pp. 165-67.  24               I
emphasize the fact that contractual and tortious duties can arise concurrently
in Canadian law because, in my view, the decision in D & F Estates
was based at least in part upon the assumption that a duty on the part of
contractors to take reasonable care in the construction of buildings can only
arise in contract.  In deciding that the contractor in that case could not be
held liable in tort for the cost of repairing the defective plaster, Lord
Bridge expressed a concern that the imposition of a tort duty upon a contractor
to third parties would be to impose, in effect, a contractual duty in tort.  He
stated, at p. 1007:  To make [the
contractor] so liable would be to impose on him for the benefit of those with
whom he had no contractual relationship the obligation of one who warranted the
quality of the plaster as regards materials, workmanship and fitness for
purpose.  I am glad to reach the conclusion that this is not the law.  25               However,
in light of this Court's decision in Rafuse, I do not believe that Lord
Bridge's concern should preclude conceptualizing Bird's duty in tortious
terms.  In my view, a contractor's duty to take reasonable care arises
independently of any duty in contract between the contractor and the original
property owner.  The duty in contract with respect to materials and workmanship
flows from the terms of the contract between the contractor and home owner.  By
contrast, the duty in tort with respect to materials and workmanship flows from
the contractor's duty to ensure that the building meets a reasonable and safe
standard of construction.  For my part, I have little difficulty in accepting a
distinction between these duties.  The duty in tort extends only to reasonable
standards of safe construction and the bounds of that duty are not defined by
reference to the original contract.  Certainly, for example, a contractor who
enters into a contract with the original home owner for the use of high-grade materials
or special ornamental features in the construction of the building will not be
held liable to subsequent purchasers if the building does not meet these
special contractual standards.  However, such a contract cannot absolve the
contractor from the duty in tort to subsequent owners to construct the building
according to reasonable standards.  This is important because, in my view, the
unfortunate result of the reasoning in D & F Estates is that it
leaves subsequent purchasers with no remedy against a contractor who constructs
a building with substandard materials or substandard workmanship, and thereby
puts subsequent purchasers at considerable risk.  26               Thus,
the fact that Bird negotiated a contract with Tuxedo, the original owner of the
building, does not insulate Bird from a separate duty to the current owners of
the building.  This duty arises out of the danger created by the work and not
the specifications contained in the contract.  An analogy can be drawn, in this
respect, with this Court's decision in Edgeworth Construction Ltd. v. N. D.
Lea & Associates Ltd., [1993] 3 S.C.R. 206.  In that case, an
engineering firm had contracted with the province of British Columbia for the
drawing up of specifications for a road building project.  There were errors in
the specifications and a construction company, which had entered into a
contract with the province for the building of the road, sued the engineering
firm in tort, alleging negligent misrepresentation.  This Court decided that
the engineering firm could be held liable to the construction company in the
absence of a contract.  In so ruling, McLachlin J., at pp. 217-18, had the
following to say about the effect of a duty in contract upon any duty owed to
third persons in tort:                     Another
way of putting the argument that the contract terminates the duty of care
between the contractor and the engineers, is to say that once the contractor
enters into a contract with the province which deals with the matter of design,
the contract ousts all tort duties.  Where the parties to the contract have
themselves defined their obligations by contract, it may be argued that the
contract must prevail over a different duty which tort law might impose, on the
principle that people are free to determine their own civil rights and
responsibilities.  Subject to this limitation, however, the presence of a
contract does not bar the right to sue in tort:  BG Checo International Ltd.
v. British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 12.  In this
case, the contract is not between the plaintiff and the defendant.  Moreover,
for the reasons given above, it does not purport to limit the tort duty which
is owed by the defendant engineering firm to the contractor.  Accordingly, the
argument that the parties have defined their obligations by the contract,
thereby ousting tort obligations, cannot succeed.  27               The
second reason that the D & F Estates decision should not be regarded
as strong persuasive authority in the Canadian context is that the approaches
taken by English and Canadian courts with respect to the recoverability of
economic loss have, in recent years, diverged significantly.  The decision by
the House of Lords in D & F Estates was the penultimate step in a
path of reasoning followed by the Law Lords culminating in Murphy, where
they overruled their earlier decision in Anns and re-established a broad
bar against recovery for pure economic loss in tort.  This is a path this Court
has chosen not to follow.  28               The
divergence in approach between this Court and the House of Lords relates in
large part to the question whether courts should impose what, in Norsk,
I called a "broad exclusionary rule" against recovery for economic
loss in tort.  In Norsk, I discussed the development of the rule against
recovery for economic loss in tort at common law and observed that, in its
broad formulation, that rule was said to exclude all claims in negligence for
pure economic loss in the absence of property loss or personal injury loss (at
pp. 1054-61).  I then made the following observation, at pp. 1060-61:                     A
new stage in the development of the law on economic loss opened with the great
case of Hedley Byrne v. Heller, supra.  The speeches of the Law
Lords were principally concerned with the problem of liability for negligent
words, rather than with the issue of economic loss itself. . . .                     Only
two of the Lords in Hedley Byrne, Lord Hodson and Lord Devlin, dealt
specifically with the issue of economic loss.  Both rejected the broad
exclusionary rule.  It was clear that henceforth economic loss was recoverable
at least in some circumstances.  With Hedley Byrne to guide the way, the
broad rule came increasingly under attack in a variety of situations during
this third phase.  The divergent attacks upon the broad rule after Hedley
Byrne were synthesized in Lord Wilberforce's well-known and influential
decision in Anns, supra, where the House of Lords found a local
council liable in negligence to a successor in title for a failure to inspect
the negligently constructed foundations of a building to ensure that it
complied with local by-laws.  In his reasons, at pp. 751-52, Lord Wilberforce
rejected the traditional broad exclusionary rule and instead proposed the
following general approach to cases involving economic loss in tort:  . . .
the position has now been reached that in order to establish that a duty of
care arises in a particular situation, it is not necessary to bring the facts
of that situation within those of previous situations in which a duty of care
has been held to exist.  Rather the question has to be approached in two
stages.  First one has to ask whether, as between the alleged wrongdoer and the
person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient relationship of proximity
or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable contemplation of the former,
carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage to the latter -- in
which case a prima facie duty of care arises.  Secondly, if the first question
is answered affirmatively, it is necessary to consider whether there are any
considerations which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of the
duty or the class of person to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach
of it may give rise. . . .  29               Applying
this test, Lord Wilberforce came to the conclusion in Anns, at pp.
759-60, that the cost of repairing a dangerous defect in a building and putting
the building back into a non-dangerous state could, in principle, be
characterized as recoverable economic loss in tort.  In coming to this
conclusion, Lord Wilberforce was influenced by the dissenting opinion of Laskin
J. (as he then was) in Rivtow, supra.  In Rivtow, a barge
charterer who had purchased several defective barge cranes through a
distributor brought a claim in negligence against the manufacturer for the cost
of repair of two defective cranes installed on one of its barges.  The
charterer had decided to repair the cranes after one of the cranes on another
barge collapsed owing to a failure in the rear legs, killing the crane
operator.  As a result, the barge had to be taken out of service for repairs in
the busiest part of the logging season.  The majority in Rivtow found
that the plaintiff had a valid claim because the manufacturer, having knowledge
of the defects in the cranes, had failed to warn the plaintiff about the
defects prior to the accident.  Accordingly, the majority found the
manufacturer liable in tort for the loss of extra profit caused by the
manufacturer's failure to warn promptly in a slack period, but explicitly
rejected the plaintiff's claim for the cost of repairing the damage to the
defective cranes themselves.  However, Laskin J., in dissent, took a different
approach.  While agreeing with the majority that there had been a breach of a
duty to warn, Laskin J. observed that he would also have found the manufacturer
liable for the cost of repairing the defective article.  He noted that, if the
defective crane had caused personal injury or damage to property, then, under
the traditional Donoghue analysis, the manufacturer would have been
liable.  He then made the following argument, at p. 1217:  Should it then
be any less liable for the direct economic loss to the appellant resulting from
the faulty crane merely because the likelihood of physical harm, either by way
of personal injury to a third person or property damage to the appellant, was
averted by the withdrawal of the crane from service so that it could be
repaired?  Lord Wilberforce in Anns found Laskin J.'s
reasoning persuasive in coming to his own conclusions that the cost of repair
for a dangerous defect in a building could be recoverable in tort.  He stated,
at pp. 759-60:  If
classification is required, the relevant damage is in my opinion material,
physical damage, and what is recoverable is the amount of expenditure necessary
to restore the dwelling to a condition in which it is no longer a danger to the
health or safety of persons occupying and possibly (depending on the
circumstances) expenses arising from necessary displacement.  On the question
of damages generally I have derived much assistance from the judgment
(dissenting on this point, but of strong persuasive force) of Laskin J. in the
Canadian Supreme Court case of Rivtow Marine Ltd. v. Washington Iron Works.  30               It
appears, however, that the decision in Anns was the high water mark for
recovery of economic loss in tort in England.  Subsequently, the Law Lords have
retreated from the broad approach to recoverability in tort for economic loss
suggested by Lord Wilberforce.  It is clear that the D & F Estates
decision played an important part in this retreat.  In D & F Estates,
Lord Oliver, at pp. 1011-12, made the following criticism of the approach
adopted by Lord Wilberforce in Anns:  . . .
it is, I think now entirely clear that the vendor of a defective building who
is also the builder enjoys no immunity from the ordinary consequences of his
negligence in the course of constructing the building, but beyond this and so
far as the case was concerned with the extent of or limitations on his
liability for common law negligence divorced from statutory duty, Lord
Wilberforce's observations were, I think, strictly obiter.  My Lords, so far as
they concern such liability in respect of damage which has actually been caused
by the defective structure other than by direct physical damage to persons or
other property, I am bound to say that, with the greatest respect to their
source, I find them difficult to reconcile with any conventional analysis of
the underlying basis of liability in tort for negligence.  A cause of action in
negligence at common law which arises only when the sole damage is the mere
existence of the defect giving rise to the possibility of damage in the future,
which crystallises only when that damage is imminent, and the damages for which
are measured, not by the full amount of the loss attributable to the defect but
by the cost of remedying it only to the extent necessary to avert a risk of
physical injury, is a novel concept.  Regarded as a cause of action arising not
from common law negligence but from breach of a statutory duty, there is a
logic in so limiting it as to conform with the purpose for which the statutory
duty was imposed, that is to say the protection of the public from injury to
health or safety.  But there is, on that footing, no logic in extending
liability for a breach of statutory duty to cases where the risk of injury is a
risk of injury to property only, nor, as it seems to me, is there any logic in
importing into a pure common law claim in negligence against a builder the
limitations which are directly related only to breach of a particular statutory
duty.  For my part, therefore, I think the correct analysis, in principle, to
be simply that, in a case where no question of breach of statutory duty arises,
the builder of a house or other structure is liable at common law for
negligence only where actual damage, either to person or to property, results
from carelessness on his part in the course of construction.  In D & F Estates, Lord Bridge also
expressed doubts about the Anns decision and explicitly rejected Laskin
J.'s dissenting reasoning in Rivtow in favour of the majority reasoning
(at p. 1006).  31               The
reasons given by Lord Oliver and Lord Bridge in D & F Estates were a
signal that the days of the Anns test in England were numbered.  This
became apparent in Murphy, supra, where the Law Lords explicitly
rejected the two-part test suggested by Lord Wilberforce in Anns and
restored the traditional broad exclusionary rule against recovery, in the
absence of a special relationship of reliance, for pure economic loss in tort. 
In their reasons in Murphy, Lord Keith and Lord Bridge both made it
clear that the reasoning in the 1988 D & F Estates decision played
an influential role in their Lordships' decision to overrule Anns.  In Murphy,
Lord Bridge noted, at p. 925, that "the reasoning of the speeches in D
& F Estates . . . has gone far to question the principles on
which the [Anns] doctrine rests".  Similarly, Lord Keith stated, at
p. 923:                     In
my opinion there can be no doubt that Anns has for long been widely
regarded as an unsatisfactory decision.  In relation to the scope of the duty
owed by a local authority it proceeded on what must, with due respect to its
source, be regarded as a somewhat superficial examination of principle and
there has been extreme difficulty, highlighted most recently by the speeches in
the D & F Estates case, in ascertaining on exactly what basis of principle
it did proceed.  32               By
contrast, in respect of both the appropriate test with regard to the
recoverability of economic loss and the recoverability of the cost for
repairing dangerous defects, this Court has chosen not to take the path
followed by the House of Lords in D & F Estates and Murphy. 
In the first place, this Court has not followed the House of Lords in
repudiating the two-part test established by Lord Wilberforce in Anns. 
The approach proposed by Lord Wilberforce in Anns was adopted by this
Court in City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2, where Wilson
J., at pp. 10-11, suggested the following slightly modified version of the Anns
test:  (1)is there a
sufficiently close relationship between the parties . . . so that, in
the reasonable contemplation of [one person], carelessness on its part might
cause damage to [the other] person?  If so,  (2)are there
any considerations which ought to negative or limit (a) the scope of the duty
and (b) the class of persons to whom it is owed or (c) the damages to which a
breach of it may give rise?  Subsequently, the Anns approach was
employed by this Court in Rothfield v. Manolakos, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1259,
at pp. 1266, 1285 and, most recently, in Norsk, supra, where this
Court chose not to follow the Law Lords in retreating from the approach adopted
in Anns and Kamloops.  I made this clear in Norsk, at p.
1054:  . . .
I fully support this Court's rejection of the broad bar on recovery of pure
economic loss in Rivtow and Kamloops.  I would stress again the
need to take into account the specific characteristics of each case.  Similarly, McLachlin J., at p. 1155, stated the
following in Norsk:                     I
conclude that, from a doctrinal point of view, this Court should continue on the
course charted in Kamloops rather than reverting to the narrow
exclusionary rule as the House of Lords did in Murphy.  33               Secondly,
in recent years, members of this Court have, in dicta, expressed
considerable sympathy for Laskin J.'s reasoning in Rivtow.  In Kamloops,
Wilson J. observed that the reasoning in Anns was more compatible with
the reasoning in Laskin J.'s dissent in Rivtow than with the majority
reasoning.  At page 33, she stated:  In any event,
the majority judgment of this Court in Rivtow stands until such time as
it may be reconsidered by a full panel of the Court.  Shortly thereafter, in Attorney General for
Ontario v. Fatehi, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 536, at pp. 544-45, the Court observed
that the law as stated in Rivtow was "uncertain" and that
"Rivtow has been variously applied or rejected by the courts of
this country".  Finally, in Norsk, I had occasion to comment upon
Laskin J.'s dissent and stated, at pp. 1067-1068, that "Laskin J.'s
concern with safety and the prevention of further damage is justified",
and at p. 1065, that:  In Laskin J.'s
view, the courts must be careful to avoid giving redress in tort for "safe
but shoddy" products.  Where the products are unsafe, however, tort may
have a role:  prevention of threatened harm resulting directly in economic loss
should not be treated differently from post-injury treatment.  McLachlin J. made a similar observation, at p.
1161:   34               I
conclude, therefore, that the D & F Estates decision is not of
strong persuasive authority in the Canadian context.  Accordingly, the question
arising in this appeal must be resolved with reference to the test developed in
Anns and Kamloops.  I will now proceed, applying this test, to
discuss whether the costs of repair claimed by the Condominium Corporation are
the type of economic loss that should be recoverable in tort.  Was There a Sufficiently Close Relationship
Between the Parties so that, in the Reasonable Contemplation of Bird,
Carelessness on its Part Might Cause Damage to a Subsequent Purchaser of the
Building such as the Condominium Corporation?  35               In
my view, it is reasonably foreseeable to contractors that, if they design or
construct a building negligently and if that building contains latent defects
as a result of that negligence, subsequent purchasers of the building may
suffer personal injury or damage to other property when those defects manifest
themselves.  A lack of contractual privity between the contractor and the
inhabitants at the time the defect becomes manifest does not make the potential
for injury any less foreseeable.  Buildings are permanent structures that are
commonly inhabited by many different persons over their useful life.  By
constructing the building negligently, contractors (or any other person
responsible for the design and construction of a building) create a foreseeable
danger that will threaten not only the original owner, but every inhabitant
during the useful life of the building.  As noted by the Supreme Court of South
Carolina, in Terlinde v. Neely, 271 S.E.2d 768 (1980), at p. 770:  The key inquiry
is foreseeability, not privity.  In our mobile society, it is clearly
foreseeable that more than the original purchaser will seek to enjoy the fruits
of the builder's efforts.  The plaintiffs, being a member of the class for
which the home was constructed, are entitled to a duty of care in construction
commensurate with industry standards.  In the light of the fact that the home
was constructed as speculative, the home builder cannot reasonably argue he
envisioned anything but a class of purchasers.  By placing this product into
the stream of commerce, the builder owes a duty of care to those who will use
his product, so as to render him accountable for negligent workmanship.  36               In
my view, the reasonable likelihood that a defect in a building will cause
injury to its inhabitants is also sufficient to ground a contractor's duty in
tort to subsequent purchasers of the building for the cost of repairing the
defect if that defect is discovered prior to any injury and if it poses a real
and substantial danger to the inhabitants of the building.  In coming to this
conclusion, I adopt the reasoning of Laskin J. in Rivtow, which I find
highly persuasive.  If a contractor can be held liable in tort where he or she
constructs a building negligently and, as a result of that negligence, the
building causes damage to persons or property, it follows that the contractor
should also be held liable in cases where the dangerous defect is discovered
and the owner of the building wishes to mitigate the danger by fixing the
defect and putting the building back into a non-dangerous state.  In both
cases, the duty in tort serves to protect the bodily integrity and property
interests of the inhabitants of the building.  See Dutton, supra,
at p. 396, per Lord Denning M.R.  37               Apart
from the logical force of holding contractors liable for the cost of repair of dangerous
defects, there is also a strong underlying policy justification for imposing
liability in these cases.  Under the law as developed in D & F Estates
and Murphy, the plaintiff who moves quickly and responsibly to fix a
defect before it causes injury to persons or damage to property must do so at
his or her own expense.  By contrast, the plaintiff who, either intentionally
or through neglect, allows a defect to develop into an accident may benefit at
law from the costly and potentially tragic consequences.  In my view, this
legal doctrine is difficult to justify because it serves to encourage, rather
than discourage, reckless and hazardous behaviour.  Maintaining a bar against
recoverability for the cost of repair of dangerous defects provides no incentive
for plaintiffs to mitigate potential losses and tends to encourage economically
inefficient behaviour.  The Fourth District Court of Appeal for Florida in Drexel
Properties, Inc. v. Bay Colony Club Condominium, Inc., 406 So.2d 515
(1981), at p. 519, explained the problem in the following manner:  Why should a
buyer have to wait for a personal tragedy to occur in order to recover damages
to remedy or repair defects?  In the final analysis, the cost to the developer
for a resulting tragedy could be far greater than the cost of remedying the
condition.  Woodhouse J. in Bowen v. Paramount Builders
(Hamilton) Ltd., [1977] 1 N.Z.L.R. 394, at p. 417, described the problem in
similar terms:  It would seem
only common sense to take steps to avoid a serious loss by repairing a defect
before it will cause physical damage; and rather extraordinary if the greater
loss when the building fall down could be recovered from the careless builder
but the cost of timely repairs could not.  Allowing recovery against contractors in tort for
the cost of repair of dangerous defects thus serves an important preventative
function by encouraging socially responsible behaviour.   39               Counsel
for Bird submitted that, although the Condominium Corporation behaved
reasonably in fixing the defects in the masonry, Bird should not be held liable
for the cost of repairs the Corporation incurred in fixing the defective
masonry.  In support of this submission, counsel for Bird relied upon Lord
Keith's argument in Murphy, supra, that the decision to repair a
dangerous defect in a building is analogous to a decision to discard a
defective article.  In either case, Lord Keith noted, at p. 918, the cost of
repair cannot be characterized as a recoverable loss because the owner of the
defective article may simply discard it and thereby remove the danger:  It is difficult
to draw a distinction in principle between an article which is useless or
valueless and one which suffers from a defect which would render it dangerous
in use but which is discovered by the purchaser in time to avert any possibility
of injury.  The purchaser may incur expense in putting right the defect, or,
more probably, discard the article.  In either case the loss is purely
economic.  40               While
Lord Keith's argument has some appeal on the basis of abstract logic, I do not
believe it is sufficient to preclude imposing liability on contractors for the
cost of repairing dangerous defects.  The weakness of the argument is that it
is based upon an unrealistic view of the choice faced by home owners in
deciding whether to repair a dangerous defect in their home.  In fact, a choice
to "discard" a home instead of repairing the dangerous defect is no
choice at all:  most home owners buy a home as a long term investment and few
home owners, upon discovering a dangerous defect in the home, will choose to
abandon or sell the building rather than to repair the defect.  Indeed, in most
cases, the cost of fixing a defect in a house or building, within the
reasonable life of that house or building, will be far outweighed by the cost
of replacing the house or buying a new one.  This was certainly demonstrated in
this case by the fact that the Condominium Corporation incurred costs of over
$1.5 million in repairing the building rather than choosing to abandon or sell
the building.  I conclude therefore that contractors ought reasonably to
foresee that subsequent purchasers of the building will incur expenses to
repair dangerous defects created by their negligence during the useful life of
the building.  41               Given
the clear presence of a real and substantial danger in this case, I do not find
it necessary to consider whether contractors should also in principle be held
to owe a duty to subsequent purchasers for the cost of repairing non-dangerous
defects in buildings.  It was not raised by the parties.  I note that appellate
courts in New Zealand (in Bowen, supra), Australia (Bryan v.
Moloney, Sup. Ct. Tasmania, No. A77/1993, October 6, 1993) and in numerous
American states (e.g., Lempke v. Dagenais, 547 A.2d 290 (N.H. Sup. Ct.
1988); Richards v. Powercraft Homes, Inc., 678 P.2d 427 (Ariz. Sup. Ct.
1984) (en banc); Terlinde, supra) have all recognized some
form of general duty of builders and contractors to subsequent purchasers with
regard to the reasonable fitness and habitability of a building.  In Quebec, it
is also now well-established that contractors, subcontractors, engineers and
architects owe a duty to successors in title in immovable property for economic
loss suffered as a result of faulty construction, design and workmanship (see
arts. 1442, 2118-2120 of the Civil Code of Quebec, S.Q. 1991, c. 64;
Pierre-Gabriel Jobin, La vente dans le Code civil du Québec (1993), at
pp. 79 and 142).  However, it is right to note that from the tone of Dickson
J.'s reasons in Fraser-Reid v. Droumtsekas, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 720, at pp.
729-31, he would appear to be cool to the idea, though he found it unnecessary
to canvass the point.  For my part, I would require argument more squarely
focused on the issue before entertaining this possibility.  42               Without
entering into this question, I note that the present case is distinguishable on
a policy level from cases where the workmanship is merely shoddy or substandard
but not dangerously defective.  In the latter class of cases, tort law serves
to encourage the repair of dangerous defects and thereby to protect the bodily
integrity of inhabitants of buildings.  By contrast, the former class of cases
bring into play the questions of quality of workmanship and fitness for
purpose.  These questions do not arise here.  Accordingly, it is sufficient for
present purposes to say that, if Bird is found negligent at trial, the
Condominium Corporation would be entitled on this reasoning to recover the
reasonable cost of putting the building into a non-dangerous state, but not the
cost of any repairs that would serve merely to improve the quality, and not the
safety, of the building.  43               I
conclude that the law in Canada has now progressed to the point where it can be
said that contractors (as well as subcontractors, architects and engineers) who
take part in the design and construction of a building will owe a duty in tort
to subsequent purchasers of the building if it can be shown that it was
foreseeable that a failure to take reasonable care in constructing the building
would create defects that pose a substantial danger to the health and safety of
the occupants.  Where negligence is established and such defects manifest
themselves before any damage to persons or property occurs, they should, in my
view, be liable for the reasonable cost of repairing the defects and putting
the building back into a non-dangerous state.  Are There Any Considerations that Ought to Negate
(a) the Scope of the Duty and (b) the Class of Persons to Whom it is Owed or
(c) the Damages to which a Breach of it May Give Rise?  44               There
are two primary and interrelated concerns raised by the recognition of a
contractor's duty in tort to subsequent purchasers of buildings for the cost of
repairing dangerous defects.  The first is that warranties respecting quality
of construction are primarily contractual in nature and cannot be easily
defined or limited in tort.  Sidney Barrett, in "Recovery of Economic Loss
in Tort for Construction Defects:  A Critical Analysis" (1989), 40 S.C.
L. Rev. 891, at p. 941, makes this argument in the following terms:   45               The
second concern is that the recognition of such a duty interferes with the
doctrine of caveat emptor which, as this Court affirmed in Fraser-Reid,
supra, at p. 723, "has lost little of its pristine force in the
sale of land".  The doctrine of caveat emptor dictates that, in the
absence of an express warranty, there is no implied warranty of fitness for
human habitation upon the purchase of a house already completed at the time of
sale.  Huband J.A. of the Manitoba Court of Appeal relied on this doctrine in
concluding that no duty in tort could be owed to subsequent purchasers of a
building.  He presented the argument, at p. 90, as follows:  The maxim,
caveat emptor, operates as between purchaser and vendor.  But the very
existence of the principle instructs the potential purchaser to rely upon his
own investigations, inspections and inquiries . . . .  The concept of
"buyer beware" tells the potential purchaser that if it seeks greater
protection than its own investigations, inspections and inquiries provide, it
should seek appropriate warranties from the vendor or, if that cannot be
bargained, to seek out an insurer to cover anticipated future risks.  46               In
my view, these concerns are both merely versions of the more general and
traditional concern that allowing recovery for economic loss in tort will
subject a defendant to what Cardozo C.J. in Ultramares Corp. v. Touche,
174 N.E. 441 (N.Y.C.A. 1931), at p. 444, called "liability in an
indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate
class."  In light of the fact that most buildings have a relatively long
useful life, the concern is that a contractor will be subject potentially to an
indeterminate amount of liability to an indeterminate number of successive owners
over an indeterminate time period.  The doctrines of privity of contract and caveat
emptor provide courts with a useful mechanism for limiting liability in
tort.  But the problem, as I will now attempt to demonstrate, is that it is
difficult to justify the employment of these doctrines in the tort context in
any principled manner apart from their utility as mechanisms for limiting
liability.  The Concern with Overlap Between Tort and
Contract Duties  47               Turning
to the first concern, a duty on the part of contractors to take reasonable care
in the construction of buildings can, in my view, be conceptualized in the
absence of contract and will not result in indeterminate liability to the
contractor.  As I mentioned earlier, this Court has recognized that a tort duty
can arise concurrently with a contractual duty, so long as that tort duty
arises independently of the contractual duty; see Rafuse, supra; Edgeworth,
supra.  As I see it, the duty to construct a building according to
reasonable standards and without dangerous defects arises independently of the
contractual stipulations between the original owner and the contractor because
it arises from a duty to create the building safely and not merely according to
contractual standards of quality.  It must be remembered that we are speaking
here of a duty to construct the building according to reasonable standards of
safety in such a manner that it does not contain dangerous defects.  As
this duty arises independently of any contract, there is no logical reason for
allowing the contractor to rely upon a contract made with the original owner to
shield him or her from liability to subsequent purchasers arising from a
dangerously constructed building.  This point was forcefully made by Richmond
P. in Bowen, supra, at p. 407:                     It
is clear that a builder or architect cannot defend a claim in negligence made
against him by a third person by saying that he was working under a contract
for the owner of the land.  He cannot say that the only duty which he owed was
his contractual duty to the owner.  Likewise he cannot say that the nature of
his contractual duties to the owner sets a limit to the duty of care which he
owes to third parties.  As regards this latter point it is, for example,
obvious that a builder who agreed to build a house in a manner which he knows
or ought to know will prove a source of danger to third parties cannot say, in
answer to a claim by third parties, that he did all that the owner of the land
required him to do.  In the same case, Woodhouse J., at p. 419, made a
similar point in the following terms:  . . .
I do not consider the courts need be astute to protect those prepared to
undertake jerry-building or shoddy work against the reasonable claims of
innocent third parties merely because their bad work was done to a deliberate
pattern or by arrangement.  The recognition of a duty situation does not depend
upon overcoming some initial bias in favour of excluding it.  Instead, the
principle described by Lord Atkin ". . . ought to apply unless
there is some justification or valid explanation for its exclusion":  Dorset
Yacht Co Ltd v Home Office [1970] AC 1004, 1027. . . . I do not
regard a private contractual arrangement for an inefficient design or for an
unworkmanlike or inadequate type of construction as any sort of
"justification or valid explanation" for releasing the builder from
his duty to those who otherwise could look to him for relief.  48               The
tort duty to construct a building safely is thus a circumscribed duty that is
not parasitic upon any contractual duties between the contractor and the
original owner.  Seen in this way, no serious risk of indeterminate liability
arises with respect to this tort duty.  In the first place, there is no risk of
liability to an indeterminate class because the potential class of claimants is
limited to the very persons for whom the building is constructed:  the
inhabitants of the building.  The fact that the class of claimants may include
successors in title who have no contractual relationship with the contractors
does not, in my view, render the class of potential claimants indeterminate. 
As noted by the New Jersey Supreme Court in Aronsohn v. Mandara, 484
A.2d 675 (1984), at p. 680, "[t]he contractor should not be relieved of
liability for unworkmanlike construction simply because of the fortuity that
the property on which he did the construction has changed hands".  49               Secondly,
there is no risk of liability in an indeterminate amount because the amount of
liability will always be limited by the reasonable cost of repairing the
dangerous defect in the building and restoring that building to a non-dangerous
state.  Counsel for Bird advanced the argument that the cost of repairs claimed
for averting a danger caused by a defect in construction could, in some cases,
be disproportionate to the actual damage to persons or property that might be
caused if that defect were not repaired.  For example, he expressed concern
that a given plaintiff could claim thousands of dollars in damage for a defect
which, if left unrepaired, would cause only a few dollars damage to that
plaintiff's other property.  However, in my view, any danger of indeterminacy
in damages is averted by the requirement that the defect for which the costs of
repair are claimed must constitute a real and substantial danger to the
inhabitants of the building, and the fact that the inhabitants of the building
can only claim the reasonable cost of repairing the defect and mitigating the
danger.  The burden of proof will always fall on the plaintiff to demonstrate
that there is a serious risk to safety, that the risk was caused by the
contractor's negligence, and that the repairs are required to alleviate the
risk.  50               Finally,
there is little risk of liability for an indeterminate time because the
contractor will only be liable for the cost of repair of dangerous defects
during the useful life of the building.  Practically speaking, I believe that
the period in which the contractor may be exposed to liability for negligence
will be much shorter than the full useful life of the building.  With the
passage of time, it will become increasingly difficult for owners of a building
to prove at trial that any deterioration in the building is attributable to the
initial negligence of the contractor and not simply to the inevitable wear and
tear suffered by every building; for a similar view, see Sachs L.J. in Dutton,
supra, at p. 405.  The Caveat Emptor Concern  51               Turning
to the second concern, caveat emptor cannot, in my view, serve as a
complete shield to tort liability for the contractors of a building.  In Fraser-Reid,
supra, this Court relied on the doctrine of caveat emptor in
rejecting a claim by a buyer of a house for the recognition of an implied
warranty of fitness for human habitation.  However, the Court explicitly
declined to address the question of whether caveat emptor serves to
negate a duty in tort (pp. 726-27).  Accordingly, the question remains at large
in Canadian law and must be resolved on the level of principle.  52               In
Fraser-Reid, Dickson J. (as he then was) observed that the doctrine of caveat
emptor stems from the laissez-faire attitudes of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries and the notion that purchasers must fend for themselves in
seeking protection by express warranty or by independent examination of the premises
(at p. 723).  The assumption underlying the doctrine is that the purchaser of a
building is better placed than the seller or builder to inspect the building
and to bear the risk that latent defects will emerge necessitating repair
costs.  However, in my view, this is an assumption which (if ever valid) is
simply not responsive to the realities of the modern housing market.  In Lempke,
supra, at p. 295, the Supreme Court of New Hampshire made reference to a
number of policy factors that strongly militate against the rigid application
of the doctrine of caveat emptor with regard to tort claims for
construction defects:                     First,
"(c)ommon experience teaches that latent defects in a house will not
manifest themselves for a considerable period of time . . . after the
original purchaser has sold the property to a subsequent unsuspecting
buyer." . . .                     Second,
our society is rapidly changing.                     "We
are an increasingly mobile people; a builder-vendor should know that a house he
builds might be resold within a relatively short period of time and should not
expect that the warranty will be limited by the number of days that the
original owner holds onto the property."  . . .
Furthermore, "the character of society has changed such that the original
buyer is not in a position to discover hidden defects. . . ."                     Third,
like an initial buyer, the subsequent purchaser has little opportunity to
inspect and little experience and knowledge about construction.  "Consumer
protection demands that those who buy homes are entitled to rely on the skill
of a builder and that the house is constructed so as to be reasonably fit for
its intended use." . . .                     Fourth,
the builder/contractor will not be unduly taken unaware by the extension of the
warranty to a subsequent purchaser.  "The builder already owes a duty to
construct the home in a workmanlike manner. . . ." 
. . .  And extension to a subsequent purchaser, within a reasonable
time, will not change this basic obligation.                     Fifth,
arbitrarily interposing a first purchaser as a bar to recovery "might
encourage sham first sales to insulate builders from liability."  Philip H. Osborne makes the further point in
"A Review of Tort Decisions in Manitoba 1990-1993", [1993] Man.
L.J. 191, at p. 196, that contractors and builders, because of their
knowledge, skill and expertise, are in the best position to ensure the
reasonable structural integrity of buildings and their freedom from latent
defect.  In this respect, the imposition of liability on builders provides an
important incentive for care in the construction of buildings and a deterrent
against poor workmanship.  53               My
conclusion that a subsequent purchaser is not the best placed to bear the risk
of the emergence of latent defects is borne out by the facts of this case.  It
is significant that, when cracking first appeared in the mortar of the building
in 1982, the Condominium Corporation actually hired Smith Carter, the original
architect of the building, along with a firm of structural engineers, to assess
the condition of the mortar work and exterior cladding.  These experts failed
to detect the latent defects that appear to have caused the cladding to fall in
1989.  Thus, although it is clear that the Condominium Corporation acted with
diligence in seeking to detect hidden defects in the building, they were
nonetheless unable to detect the defects or to foresee the collapse of the
cladding in 1989.  This, in my view, illustrates the unreality of the
assumption that the purchaser is better placed to detect and bear the risk of
hidden defects.  For this Court to apply the doctrine of caveat emptor
to negate Bird's duty in tort would be to apply a rule that has become
completely divorced, in this context at least, from its underlying rationale.  Conclusion  54               I
conclude, then, that no adequate policy considerations exist to negate a
contractor's duty in tort to subsequent purchasers of a building to take
reasonable care in constructing the building, and to ensure that the building
does not contain defects that pose foreseeable and substantial danger to the
health and safety of the occupants.  In my view, the Manitoba Court of Appeal
erred in deciding that Bird could not, in principle, be held liable in tort to
the Condominium Corporation for the reasonable cost of repairing the defects
and putting the building back into a non-dangerous state.  These costs are
recoverable economic loss under the law of tort in Canada.  55               The
Manitoba Court of Appeal affirmed the trial judge's dismissal of the motion for
summary judgment but allowed the appeal from the trial judge's decision with
respect to the motion to strike on the grounds that Bird's claim did not
disclose a reasonable cause of action.  As I have decided that Bird's claim
discloses a reasonable cause of action, I would accordingly order the case to
proceed to trial.  I am also in agreement with both the trial judge and the
Court of Appeal that this matter should not be resolved on a motion for summary
judgment.  In Podkriznik v. Schwede, [1990] 4 W.W.R. 220 (Man. C.A.),
Twaddle J.A. made it clear, at p. 224, that a court considering a motion for
summary judgment under Rule 20 of the Manitoba Queen's Bench Rules must take a
"hard look at the merits of an action" (quoting from Vaughan v.
Warner Communications Inc. (1986), 56 O.R. (2d) 242 (H.C.), at p. 247) and
determine whether there is a "real chance" that the action will be
successful.  In my view, Galanchuk J. was correct in concluding that there are
genuine issues for trial in this case.  In particular, there are conflicting
allegations regarding Bird's participation in the construction and planning of
the building, which disposes of the principal argument made on behalf of the
respondent at the hearing.  Issues such as whether the work on the building was
negligently performed, or whether Bird was negligent in the hiring of suitable
subcontractors, or whether the danger was substantial and foreseeable can be
considered at trial.  This Court is not in a position to resolve these
questions at this stage in the proceedings.  Nor, despite the respondent's
argument, is it necessary to reconsider the well-established principles
regarding the vicarious liability of contractors for the work of
sub-contractors.  The appellant at no time raised this issue in this Court. 
The issue it raised was whether the Court of Appeal erred in its conclusion
that the appellant's action in tort failed because the damages sought were not
recoverable economic loss.  56               I
would allow the appeal, reverse the decision of the Court of Appeal and make
the following orders:  that the losses alleged in the statement of claim, to
the extent that they may be found to constitute pure economic loss flowing from
the negligence of the respondent, be recoverable from the respondent, and that
the order of the learned motions judge, that the within action proceed to trial
against the respondent Bird Construction Co. Ltd. with respect to the remaining
issues raised in the statement of claim, be reinstated.  The appellant is
entitled to its costs throughout.                     Appeal allowed.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Taylor, McCaffrey, Winnipeg.                     Solicitors for the
respondent:  Inkster, Christie, Hughes, MacKay, Winnipeg.                     Solicitors for the
intervener:  Campbell, Marr, Winnipeg.   