Ingles v. Tutkaluk Construction Ltd., [2000] 1 S.C.R. 298  James Ingles                                                                                     Appellant  v.  The Corporation of the City of Toronto                                           Respondent  Indexed as:  Ingles v. Tutkaluk Construction Ltd.  Neutral citation:  2000 SCC 12.  File No.:  26634.  1999:  October 8; 2000:  March 2.   on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario  Negligence -- Duty of care -- Municipalities --
Building inspection -- Homeowner engaging contractor to renovate house -- Owner
aware that building permit required in order to obtain inspection of work --
Owner accepting contractor’s advice to commence construction prior to obtaining
building permit -- Construction partially completed when permit obtained --
Building inspectors unable to inspect critical aspect of construction and
relying on contractor’s assurances that it conformed to building code  -- Work
proving defective -- Owner paying for extensive repairs and suing municipality
for negligent inspection -- Whether municipality owed duty of care to owner in
conducting inspection -- Whether owner’s conduct absolved municipality of all
or part of its liability.  Municipal law -- Building inspection -- Negligence
-- Municipal liability -- Duty of care -- Homeowner engaging contractor to
renovate house -- Owner aware that building permit required in order to obtain
inspection of work -- Owner accepting contractor’s advice to commence
construction prior to obtaining building permit -- Construction partially
completed when permit obtained -- Building inspectors unable to inspect
critical aspect of construction and relying on contractor’s assurances that it
conformed to building code -- Work proving defective -- Owner paying for
extensive repairs and suing municipality for negligent inspection -- Whether
municipality owed duty of care to owner in conducting inspection -- Whether
owner’s conduct absolved municipality of all or part of its liability.  The appellant hired a contractor to renovate his
basement.  This project required the installation of underpinnings under the
existing foundation to prevent the walls from cracking and the home from
collapsing.  Although the contract specified that the contractor would obtain a
building permit prior to commencing construction, and the appellant wanted the
permit obtained and inspection made, the contractor convinced him that
construction should commence before the building permit was obtained. 
By the time the permit was issued, the underpinnings had been completed, but
were concealed by subsequent construction. It was impossible to determine with
a visual inspection whether the underpinnings conformed to the building code.
Because it was raining the day of the first inspection, the inspector could not
dig a hole next to the underpinnings to determine their depth. He relied
instead upon the contractor’s assurances that the underpinnings were properly
constructed, without verifying this information, except for an examination of
the concrete.  The appellant began to experience flooding in the basement
shortly after the construction had been completed.  He hired another
contractor, who determined that the underpinnings were completely inadequate
and failed to meet the standard prescribed in the Building Code Act, and
who made the repairs.   The appellant sued the first contractor in contract and
the respondent city for negligence.  The trial judge allowed the action and,
after deducting an amount to reflect the appellant’s contributory negligence,
held  the contractor and the city jointly and severally liable, and apportioned
damages of $49,368.80 between them.  The Court of Appeal set aside the
decision, holding that by allowing the construction to proceed without a
permit,  the appellant had removed himself from the class of persons to whom
the city owed a duty of care.  Held:  The appeal should be allowed.  The Anns/Kamloops test should be applied to
determine whether a public body owes a duty of care toward individuals.  Under
the first branch of the test, a prima facie duty of care will be
established if it can be shown that a relationship of proximity existed between
the parties such that it was reasonably foreseeable that carelessness on the
part of the public actor would result in injury to the individual.  Under the
second branch of the test, the court must examine the legislation which governs
the public authority to determine whether a private law duty should be imposed
in the circumstances.  Such legislation includes statutes which confer a power
but leave the scale on which it is to be exercised to the discretion of the
public authority, so that where the authority elects to perform the authorized
act, and does so negligently, there is a duty at the operational level to use
due care.  Inspection schemes fall within this category of legislation, and in
order to subject the local authority to a private law duty of care, it must be
determined whether the inspection scheme represents a policy decision reached
by the local authority which is exempt from civil liability, or whether that
policy has been implemented at the operational level.  Once the policy decision
is made to inspect, in certain circumstances, the authority owes a duty of care
to all who may be injured by the negligent implementation of that policy. 
Municipalities are created by statute and have clear responsibility for health
and safety. Any policy decision as to whether or not to inspect must accord
with this statutory purpose.  Once it is determined that an inspection has
occurred and that a duty of care is owed by the public actor to all who might
be injured by a negligent inspection, a traditional negligence analysis will be
applied.  To avoid liability, the government agency must exercise the standard
of care in its inspection that would be expected of an ordinary, reasonable and
prudent person in the circumstances.  The first step in the Anns/Kamloops test is
met. A prima facie duty of care arose by virtue of the sufficient
relationship of proximity between the appellant and the city, such that it was
foreseeable that a deficient inspection of the construction could result in
damage to the property or injury to the owners.  Under the second arm of the
test, the Building Code Act was enacted to ensure the imposition
of uniform standards of construction safety.  In this case, a policy decision
was made to inspect construction even if it had commenced prior to the issuance
of a building permit.  Once the city chose to implement this decision, and
exercised its power to enter upon the premises to inspect the renovations at
the appellant’s home, it owed a duty of care to all who it is reasonable to
conclude might be injured by the negligent exercise of that power.  The Court of Appeal erred in concluding that the
appellant, through his own negligence, removed himself from the class of
persons to whom a duty of care was owed.  The negligent conduct of an
owner-builder does not absolve a municipality of its duty to take reasonable
care in exercising its power of inspection.  A municipality will only be
absolved completely of the liability which flows from an inspection which does
not meet the standard of reasonable care in rare circumstances, when the
conduct of the owner-builder is such as to make it impossible for the inspector
to do anything to avoid the danger.  To avoid liability, a municipality must show that its
inspectors exercised the standard of care that would be expected of an
ordinary, reasonable and prudent inspector in the same circumstances.  The
measure of what constitutes a reasonable inspection will vary, depending on the
facts of each case, including the likelihood of a known or foreseeable harm,
the gravity of that harm, and the burden or cost which would be incurred to
prevent the injury.  Municipalities will not be held to the standard of
insurers for the work; nor are they required to discover every latent defect. 
A reasonable inspection in light of the circumstances is required.  The Building
Code Act delineates that a city can only be held liable for those defects
which the municipal inspector could reasonably be expected to have detected and
had the power to have remedied.  Whether an inspection has met the standard of
care is a question of fact, and once it is determined that a trial judge has
applied the correct standard, an appeal court can only reverse the finding of
whether the standard has been met if it can be established that a palpable or
overriding error was made which affected the assessment of the facts.  Here,
the trial judge concluded that in light of the contractor’s failure to apply
for the permit until after the underpinnings were put in, his failure to post the
permit as required, and his failure to notify the inspector that the
underpinnings were being installed, it would have been reasonable to conduct a
more thorough inspection.  The legislation authorized a more vigilant
inspection as was required in the circumstances.  By failing to exercise those
powers to ensure that the underpinnings were compliant with the Code, the
inspector failed to meet the standard of care that would have been expected of
a reasonable and prudent inspector in the circumstances, and was therefore
negligent.  While it is clear that the appellant was negligent in
relying on the contractor’s advice that it was appropriate to proceed with
construction before the permit was obtained, in order to avail itself of the
defence set out in Rothfield, the city must show that the appellant’s
conduct was such as to make him the sole source of his loss.  His conduct must
amount to a flouting of the inspection scheme.  Here, the Court of Appeal erred
in concluding that the appellant had flouted the inspection regulations, and in
absolving the city of all liability.  The concept of “flouting” denotes conduct
which extends far beyond mere negligence on the part of the owner-builder.  The apportionment of liability is primarily a matter within
the province of the trial judge and appellate courts should not interfere with
a trial judge’s apportionment unless there is demonstrable error in his
appreciation of the facts or applicable legal principles.  No such demonstrable
error was shown in this case and the trial judge’s apportionment of fault
should be restored.  Further, prejudgment interest at the rate prescribed by
the trial judge is also restored, there being no reason to interfere with his
discretion under the Courts of Justice Act.  Cases Cited  Applied:  Anns v.
Merton London Borough Council, [1977] 2 All E.R.
492; Kamloops (City of) v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Ryan v.
Victoria (City), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 201; Stein v. The Ship “Kathy K”,
[1976] 2 S.C.R. 802; Bow Valley Husky (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Saint John
Shipbuilding Ltd., [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1210; considered:  Rothfield
v. Manolakos, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1259; distinguished:  McCrea v.
White Rock, [1975] 2 W.W.R. 593; Leischner v. West Kootenay Power
& Light Co. (1986), 24 D.L.R. (4th) 641; Hospitality
Investments Ltd. v. Everett Lord Building Construction Ltd., [1996]
3 S.C.R. 605; referred to:  Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2
S.C.R. 1228; Acrecrest Ltd. v. Hattrell & Partners, [1983] 1 All
E.R. 17; Hall v. Hebert, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 159; Fitzgerald v. Lane,
[1988] 2 All E.R. 961; Colonial Coach Lines Ltd. v. Bennett, [1968] 1
O.R. 333; Menow v. Honsberger Ltd., [1970] 1 O.R. 54, aff’d [1971] 1
O.R. 129, aff’d [1974] S.C.R. 239 (sub nom. Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow);
Hospitality Investments Ltd. v. Lord (Everett) Building Construction Ltd.
(1993), 143 N.B.R. (2d) 258.  Statutes and Regulations Cited  Building
Code Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 51.  Building Code Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B.13, ss. 3, 5(1), 6, 8, 9, 10, 11.  Building Code Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 23, s. 13(6).  Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 130.  Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 298, s. 2(c).  Negligence Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1, ss. 1, 3.  Rules of the Supreme Court of
Canada, SOR/83-74, Rule 29 [rep. & sub.
SOR/93-488; am. SOR/95-325].   APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal
(1998), 38 O.R. (3d) 384, 158 D.L.R. (4th) 147, 107 O.A.C. 310, 37 C.L.R. (2d)
192, 46 M.P.L.R. (2d) 1, [1998] O.J. No. 1126 (QL), setting aside a judgment
of the Ontario Court, General Division (1994), 18 C.L.R. (2d) 67 and 82, 24
M.P.L.R. (2d) 293 and 308, [1994] O.J. No. 1714 (QL) and [1995] O.J. No.
231 (QL), allowing in part the plaintiff’s claim for damages for negligence. 
Appeal allowed.  Philip Anisman and Barbara
J. Murchie, for the appellant.  Diana W. Dimmer and Naomi
Brown, for the respondent.   The judgment of the Court was delivered by  Bastarache J. --  I.  Introduction  1                                  
The issue to be resolved in this appeal is the liability of a public
authority for breach of its duty of care in the exercise of a function that it
has undertaken pursuant to a policy decision to that effect.  II.  Factual
Background  2                                  
The appellant Mr. Ingles and his wife own an 80-year-old home in Toronto. 
In 1990, they decided to renovate the basement of the home, lowering it by18
inches, and to build a patio at the rear of the house.  Lowering the basement
would necessitate installing underpinnings under the existing foundations of
the house to keep the walls from cracking and the house from falling down. 
They hired a contractor, Tutkaluk Construction Limited (“Tutkaluk”) to do the
work.  The contract specified that the contractor would apply for and obtain a
building permit and offered him an extra $500 for doing so.  Mr. Ingles knew
that a building permit was required to ensure that an inspection of the
renovations would take place.  He wanted such an inspection to ensure that the
construction was being done properly.  3                                  
Tutkaluk informed Mr. Ingles and his wife that the work would be delayed
if it had to obtain a building permit before starting the renovations.  Mr.
Ingles reluctantly agreed that the work should begin as soon as possible,
without the permit.  Both Mr. Ingles and his wife asked the contractor several
times in the following weeks to apply for the permit.  The respondent, City of
Toronto, received and approved the application for the permit two weeks after
construction had begun.  At this point, the underpinning work had already been
completed, but the concrete for the new basement floor had not yet been poured.  4                                  
The respondent added the following conditions to the permit before
approving the application:  first, that the underpinning be carried out to the
satisfaction of the building inspector; second, that the building inspector be
notified before proceeding with the underpinning and pouring of the concrete;
and third, that the underpinning be at least as wide as the existing footings.  5                                  
The morning after the permit was issued, Mr. Tecson, a building
inspector with the city, noticed that there was construction under way at the
Ingles’ residence, and that the permit was not posted.  After asking to see the
permit, Mr. Tecson began to inspect the construction.  He conducted a 30-minute
inspection of the visible portions of the work.  Because the underpinning had
already been installed, it was not possible to determine visually whether the
underpinning continued for the full width of the footing as required by the
building permit.  It was also not possible to determine visually the depth of
the underpinning.  Therefore, the inspector looked at the colour of the
concrete and struck it with a hammer to see if it had set.  It was raining the
day of the inspection, and hence it was not possible to dig a hole next to the
underpinning to determine its depth.  With respect to the width of the
underpinning, Mr. Tecson relied on Tutkaluk’s assurances that everything was
done in accordance with the drawings attached to the building plan.  Mr. Tecson
noted on his building card that the underpinning had been done prior to his
inspection.  This was contrary to the specifications on the permit, which
required that an inspector be notified before starting the underpinning work.  6                                  
Approximately two weeks later, Mr. Grimaldi, the regular building
inspector for the area, also visited the site.  By this time, the basement
floor had been laid and visual inspection of the underpinning as a whole was
even less possible than it had been at the time of Mr. Tecson’s inspection. 
Mr. Grimaldi carried out the same inspection as had Mr. Tecson.  In addition he
noticed that the concrete was smooth and without voids, an indication that it
had been packed down adequately.  On the job card he wrote that the
underpinning appeared to be complete.  7                                  
Within weeks of the completion of the project, the appellant began to
experience flooding in his basement.  He hired another contracting company to
remedy the drainage problems.  In the course of their work, the contractors
discovered that the initial underpinning construction was completely inadequate. 
The underpinning was only 6 inches wide, instead of the 24 inches specified in
the permit.  In several places, the underpinning had not been installed to the
depth stated in the plans.  In fact, neither the width, nor the depth of the
underpinning was in accordance with the specifications, and neither met the
requirements of the Building Code Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 51.  III.  Judicial
History  8                                  
Conant J. of the Ontario Court (General Division) examined the basic
duties and responsibilities for the regulation and inspection of construction
in Ontario as set out in the Building Code Act ((1994), 24 M.P.L.R. (2d)
293).  He found that it was clear from the statutory provisions that
municipalities have a duty to appoint inspectors as are necessary to enforce
the Act.  The purpose of conducting inspections before issuing building permits
was to ensure that permits were issued only for those plans that would conform
with the building code.  The purpose of conducting inspections after the
permits were issued was to ensure that all construction was carried out in
conformity with the plans.  Conant J. concluded that the province had made a
policy decision that cities inspect building plans and construction, and, as a
result, that cities owe a duty of care to all who it is reasonable to conclude
might be injured by the negligent exercise of those powers.  9                                  
Having found that the city owed a duty of care to Mr. Ingles, Conant J.
proceeded to determine the appropriate standard of care for a municipal
inspector.  Following the decision of La Forest J. in Rothfield v.
Manolakos, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1259, he found that the city must show
reasonable care in the exercise of its powers of inspection.  The standard
would not hold the city to the standard of an insurer, bound to discover every
latent defect in the project and every derogation from the building code
requirements.  Instead, the city would be liable for those defects which it
could reasonably be expected to have detected and to have ordered remedied.  10                              
Conant J. found that the city failed to meet the standard of care in its
inspection of the construction at Mr. Ingles’ home for two reasons.  First, he
found that it was not reasonable for Mr. Tecson to rely on Tutkaluk’s assurance
that the construction met the specifications.  Mr. Tecson should have been wary
of the contractor’s assurances for the following reasons:  the contractor did
not apply for the permit until after the underpinning had been put in; the
contractor did not give notice as to the status of the project, despite the
requirements on the building permit; the permit was not posted outside the
home; and Mr. Tecson did not know the contractor or his work.  Second, he found
that a more thorough inspection was reasonable because the underpinning was a major
structural element.  A defect in that element could lead to a collapse of the
entire house.  Conant J. concluded that the inspector could have used his
investigatory powers to determine the width and depth of the underpinnings and
was negligent in failing to do so.  11                              
As for the appellant’s negligence, Conant J. found that he knew, or
should have known, what he was doing in agreeing to a delay in obtaining a
building permit.  As such, he was required to bear some of the responsibility
for the damage.  However, Conant J. also found that the appellant and his wife
did not participate in a conscious effort to prevent the building inspector
from examining the underpinnings.  They were not disentitled from recovering
against the city, which failed to discharge its obligations.  Tutkaluk was
found 80 percent liable for the damage and the city was found to be 20 percent
liable.  The city’s liability was reduced by a further 30 percent to account
for the appellant’s contributory negligence.  12                              
In a subsequent addendum to the original judgment ((1995), 24 M.P.L.R.
(2d) 308), Conant J. clarified the apportionment of liability as between the
co-defendants, and the effect of the reduction on the award against the
respondent city.  He found that the respondent and the contractor were jointly
and severally liable for the damages.  The net effect of this finding was that
the $52,520 in damages was apportioned 6 percent to the appellant, 14 percent
to the city and 80 percent to Tutkaluk, with a judgment against both the city
and Tutkaluk for $49,368.80 representing 94 percent of the damages.  In a
second addendum, he also awarded prejudgment interest fixed at the statutory
rate of 12.9 percent.  13                              
Sharpe J. (ad hoc), writing for the Ontario Court of Appeal,
allowed the appeal, solely on the ground that the trial judge erred in failing
to address whether the appellant had removed himself from the scope of the
city’s duty of care:  (1998), 38 O.R. (3d) 384.  14                              
Sharpe J. applied the test set out in Kamloops (City of ) v. Nielsen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 2, and agreed with the trial judge that the city had made a
policy decision to inspect building plans and construction, and thus that it
owed a duty of care to any person reasonably within its contemplation as
someone to be injured by a breach of its duty.  Sharpe J. then proceeded to
apply the two-step analysis of the duty of care as set out in Kamloops v.
Nielsen.  Namely, he asked whether the city was in a relationship of
proximity with the appellant such that it could contemplate that carelessness
in its inspection would harm the appellant.  Second, he asked whether there
were any policy considerations which would negate the duty in these
circumstances.  15                              
Sharpe J. answered both questions in the affirmative.  Although there
was a relationship of proximity between the city and the appellant, the Court
of Appeal also found that there were considerations that removed the appellant
from the class of persons to whom the city owed a duty of care.  Sharpe J.
based this finding on the remarks of La Forest J. in Rothfield v.
Manolakos, supra, followed in Hospitality Investments Ltd. v.
Lord (Everett) Building Construction Ltd. (1993), 143 N.B.R. (2d) 258
(Q.B.), to the effect that an owner-builder could exclude himself from the
municipality’s duty of care when he knowingly flouted the applicable building
regulations.  In his view, the appellant “[went] along with Tutkaluk’s scheme”
to proceed with the underpinning work without a permit.  The appellant knew
that this would preclude inspections while the underpinning work was being done
and that it would make the inspection much more difficult afterwards.  In the
opinion of the Court of Appeal, this course of action was simply incompatible
with the appellant attempting to recover from the city.  IV.  Analysis  A.  Duty of
Care  16                              
This Court recently affirmed in Ryan v. Victoria (City), [1999] 1
S.C.R. 201, that the test set in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council,
[1977] 2 All E.R. 492 (H.L.), adopted by this Court in Kamloops v. Nielsen
(the “Anns/Kamloops” test) is the appropriate test for determining
whether a private or public actor owes a duty of care.  These cases provide the
basis for determining whether the law can impose on a public authority a
private law duty towards individuals, enabling individuals to sue the authority
in a civil suit, and for determining whether a duty of care is owed by a public
authority in particular circumstances.  To determine whether a private law duty
of care exists, two questions must be asked.  These questions are set out by
Wilson J. at pp. 10-11 of the decision in Kamloops v. Nielsen as
follows:  (1)   is there a sufficiently close relationship
between the parties (the local authority and the person who has suffered the
damage) so that, in the reasonable contemplation of the authority, carelessness
on its part might cause damage to that person?  If so,  (2)   are there any considerations which ought to
negative or limit (a) the scope of the duty and (b) the class of persons to
whom it is owed or (c) the damages to which a breach of it may give rise?  17                              
The first step of the Anns/Kamloops test presents a relatively
low threshold.  A prima facie duty of care will be established if it can
be shown that a relationship of proximity existed between the parties such that
it was reasonably foreseeable that carelessness on the part of the public actor
would result in injury to the other party; see, for example, Ryan v.
Victoria, supra, at para. 22.  However, as Lord Wilberforce
recognized in Anns, only in certain circumstances will a public
authority owe a private law duty of care towards individuals.  Thus, under the
second step of the test, the court must examine the legislation which governs
the public authority to determine whether a private law duty should be imposed
in the circumstances.  Wilson J. summarized the types of legislation identified
by Lord Wilberforce, at p. 11 of Kamloops v. Nielsen, supra, as
follows: (1)   statutes conferring powers to interfere with
the rights of individuals in which case an action in respect of damage caused
by the exercise of such powers will generally not lie except in the case where
the local authority has done what the legislature authorized but has done it
negligently;  (2)    statutes conferring powers but leaving the
scale on which they are to be exercised to the discretion of the local
authority.  Here there will be an option to the local authority whether or not
to do the thing authorized but, if it elects to do it and does it negligently,
then the policy decision having been made, there is a duty at the operational
level to use due care in giving effect to it.  18                              
Inspection schemes fall within the second type of legislation identified
by Lord Wilberforce.  To determine whether an inspection scheme by a local
authority will be subject to a private law duty of care, the court must
determine whether the scheme represents a policy decision on the part of the
authority, or whether it represents the implementation of a policy decision, at
the operational level.  True policy decisions are exempt from civil liability
to ensure that governments are not restricted in making decisions based upon
political or economic factors.  It is clear, however, that once a government
agency makes a policy decision to inspect, in certain circumstances, it owes a
duty of care to all who may be injured by the negligent implementation of that
policy; see, for example, Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R.
1228, at p. 1243, per Cory J.; Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra,
at p. 1266, per La Forest J.  19                              
While I have stated above that a government agency will not be liable
for those decisions made at the policy level, I must emphasize that, where
inspection is provided for by statute, a government agency cannot immunize itself
from liability by simply making a policy decision never to inspect.  The
decisions in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, supra, and Kamloops
v. Nielsen, supra, establish that in reaching a policy decision
pertaining to inspection, the government agency must act in a reasonable manner
which constitutes a bona fide exercise of discretion.  In the context of
a municipal inspection scheme, we must bear in mind that municipalities are
creatures of statute which have clear responsibilities for health and safety in
their area.  A policy decision as to whether or not to inspect must accord with
this statutory purpose; see, for example, Kamloops v. Nielsen, at
p. 10.  20                              
Once it is determined that an inspection has occurred at the operational
level, and thus that the public actor owes a duty of care to all who might be
injured by a negligent inspection, a traditional negligence analysis will be
applied.  To avoid liability, the government agency must exercise the standard
of care in its inspection that would be expected of an ordinary, reasonable and
prudent person in the same circumstances.  Recently, in Ryan v. Victoria,
supra, at para. 28, Major J. reaffirmed that the measure of what is
reasonable in the circumstances will depend on a variety of factors, including
the likelihood of a known or foreseeable harm, the gravity of that harm and the
burden or cost which would be incurred to prevent the injury.  The same standard
of care applies to a municipality which conducts an inspection of a
construction project.  While the municipal inspector will not be expected to
discover every latent defect in a project, or every derogation from the
building code standards, it will be liable for those defects that it could
reasonably be expected to have detected and to have ordered remedied; see, for
example, Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra, at pp. 1268-69.  (1)  Did the City Owe the Appellant a Duty of Care?  21                              
Both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal found that the city owed
the appellant a prima facie duty of care in these circumstances.  I
agree with their finding in this respect.  It is certainly foreseeable that a
deficient inspection of the underpinnings of a home could result in damage to
the property of the homeowners, or injury to the homeowners or others.  As a
result, I agree that there was a sufficient relationship of proximity between
the appellant and the city such that the city owed the appellant a prima
facie duty to conduct an inspection of the renovations of the appellant’s
home and to do so with reasonable care.  The first stage of the Anns/Kamloops
test has been met.  22                              
Having found that the city owed the appellant a prima facie duty
of care, I now turn to the legislative scheme which governs municipal
inspections in Ontario to determine whether there is any policy reason to limit
the prima facie duty of care.  The relevant provisions of the Building
Code Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. B.13, are as follows:  3.–(1)  The council of each municipality is
responsible for the enforcement of this Act in the municipality.  (2)  The council of each municipality shall appoint
a chief building official and such inspectors as are necessary for the purposes
of the enforcement of this Act in the areas in which the municipality has
jurisdiction.   5.–(1)  No person shall construct or
demolish or cause to be constructed or demolished a building in a municipality
unless a permit has been issued therefor by the chief official.   6.–(1)  The chief official shall issue a
permit except where,  (a)       the proposed building or the proposed
construction or demolition will not comply with this Act or the building code
or will contravene any other applicable law;                                                                     .
. .  (3)  No person shall make a material change or
cause a material change to be made to a plan, specification, document or other
information on the basis of which a permit was issued without notifying the
chief official and filing details of such change with him or her for the purpose
of obtaining his or her authorization.                                                                     .
. .  (5)  No person shall construct or cause to be
constructed a building in a municipality except in accordance with the plans,
specifications, documents and any other information on the basis of which a
permit was issued or any changes thereto authorized by the chief official.  8.--(1)  Subject to section 11, an inspector
may, for the purpose of inspecting a building or site in respect of which a
permit is issued or an application for a permit is made, enter in or upon any
land or premises at any time without a warrant.  (2)  Where an inspector finds that any provision of
this Act or the building code is being contravened, the inspector may give to
the person whom he or she believes to be the contravener an order in writing
directing compliance with such provision and may require the order to be
carried out forthwith or within such time as he or she specifies.  (3)  Where an inspector gives an order under this
section, the order shall contain sufficient information to specify the nature
of the contravention and its location.                                                                     .
. .  (5)  Where an order of an inspector made under this
section is not complied with within the time specified therein, or where no
time is specified, within a reasonable time in the circumstances, the chief
official may order that all or any part of the construction or demolition
respecting the building cease and such order shall be served on such persons
affected thereby as the chief official specifies and a copy thereof shall be
posted on the site of the construction or demolition and no person except an
inspector or the chief official shall remove such copy unless authorized by an
inspector or the chief official.  (6)  Where an order to cease construction or
demolition is made under subsection (5), no person shall perform any act in the
construction or demolition of the building in respect of which the order is
made other than such work as is necessary to carry out the order of the
inspector made under subsection (2).  9.--(1)  An inspector or chief official may
issue an order prohibiting the covering or enclosing of any part of a building
pending inspection and where such an order is issued, an inspection shall be
made within a reasonable time after notice is given by the person to whom the
order is issued that the person is ready for the inspection.  (2)  Where a chief official has reason to believe
that any part of a building has not been constructed in compliance with this
Act and such part has been covered or enclosed, contrary to an order made by an
inspector or chief official under subsection (1), the chief official may order
any person responsible for the construction to uncover the part at the person’s
own expense for the purpose of an inspection.   10.--(1)  Subject to section 11, an
inspector may enter in or upon any land or premises at any time without a
warrant for the purpose of inspecting any building to determine whether such
building is unsafe. (2)  Where an inspector finds that a building is
unsafe, he or she may serve upon the assessed owner and each person apparently
in possession of the building an order in writing setting out the reasons why
the building is unsafe and the remedial steps that the inspector requires to be
taken to render the building safe and may require the order to be carried out
within such time as the inspector specifies in the order.  (3)  Where an order of an inspector under
subsection (2) is not complied with within the time specified therein, or where
no time is specified, within a reasonable time in the circumstances, the chief
official may by order prohibit the use or occupancy of the building and such
order shall be served on the assessed owner and each person apparently in
possession and such other persons affected thereby as the chief official
specifies and a copy thereof shall be posted on the building, and no person
except an inspector or the chief official shall remove such copy unless
authorized by an inspector or the chief official.  (4)  Where the chief official has made an order
under subsection (2) and considers it necessary for the safety of the public,
the chief official may cause the building to be renovated, repaired or
demolished for the purpose of removing the unsafe condition or take such other
action as he or she considers necessary for the protection of the public and,
where the building is in a municipality, the cost of the renovation, repair,
demolition or other action may be added by the clerk to the collector's roll
and collected in like manner as municipal taxes.  11.--(1)  For the purposes of an inspection
under section 8 or 10, the inspector may,  (a)       require the production of the drawings
and specifications of a building or any part thereof, including any drawings
prescribed by the regulations, for his or her inspection and may require
information from any person concerning any matter related to a building or part
thereof;  (b)       be accompanied by any person who has
special or expert knowledge of any matter in relation to a building or part
thereof;  (c)       alone or in conjunction with such other
person or persons possessing special or expert knowledge, make such
examinations, tests, inquiries, or, subject to subsections (2) and (3), take
such samples or photographs as are necessary for the purposes of the
inspection;  (d)       order any person responsible for the
construction to take and supply at the person's own expense such tests and
samples as are specified in the order.  23                              
The legislative scheme is designed to ensure that uniform standards of
construction safety are imposed and enforced by the municipalities.  Sections 5
and 6 of the Act require that building plans and specifications be inspected
before a permit is issued to ensure that they conform with the building code. 
Sections 8 to 11 set out the powers of the inspector to ensure that all work
that is being completed conforms with the permit and, as a result, with the
building code.  Inspectors are given a broad range of powers to enforce the
safety standards set out in the code, from ordering tests at the owners’
expense, to ordering that all work cease in general.  Section 9 grants
inspectors the power to order builders not to cover work pending inspection, or
to uncover work when there is reason to believe that any part of the building
has not been constructed in compliance with the Act.  The purpose of the
building inspection scheme is clear from these provisions:  to protect the
health and safety of the public by enforcing safety standards for all
construction projects.  The province has made the policy decision that the
municipalities appoint inspectors who will inspect construction projects and
enforce the provisions of the Act.  Therefore, municipalities owe a duty of
care to all who it is reasonable to conclude might be injured by the negligent
exercise of their inspection powers.  24                              
It would appear from the use of the word “may” in ss. 8 to 11 that
municipalities have the discretion under the Act to decide whether to inspect
and enforce the safety standards after construction has begun.  Therefore, it
may be open to the municipalities to make policy decisions as to whether to
inspect in certain circumstances.  Of course, all such policy decisions must be
made in good faith and in a way that is consistent with the overall purpose of
ensuring the health and safety of the public.  Such decisions can only be
immune from civil action when they accord with the overall purpose of the
statutory scheme.  Here, the evidence is that the city had made a policy
decision to inspect construction, even if the permit was issued after the
construction had begun.  At trial, Fred Breeze, the city’s Director of
Inspections, testified as follows:  Q.  Well, if the inspector is not in the position to do proper
inspection because of the lateness of the building permit, can you tell me why
the city doesn’t simply refuse to do such inspections and insist that the owner
get an inspection from an independent engineer, for instance?  A.  Well, that’s not our policy.  Our policy is to inspect once a
permit has been issued, and we will inspect to the best the inspector can do at
the time on what they can see while they are there.  [Emphasis added.]  This policy
has since been codified in the Building Code Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c.
23, s. 13(6), which grants powers to the chief building official to order work
to be uncovered when notice to inspect is not given in a timely fashion.  While
the Act gave the city the discretion to decide when to inspect, the city made a
policy decision to inspect even when a permit was received late.  Once the city
chose to implement this decision, and exercised its power to enter upon the
premises to inspect the renovations at Mr. Ingles’ home, it owed a duty of care
to all who it is reasonable to conclude might be injured by the negligent
exercise of that power.  25                              
Following the Anns/Kamloops test, the city owed Mr. Ingles a duty
of care to conduct an inspection of the renovations on their home and to
exercise reasonable care in doing so, despite the fact that the building permit
was obtained late.  Therefore, the city could be found negligent if it ignored
its own scheme and chose not to inspect the renovations.  It could also be
found negligent for conducting an inspection of the renovations without
adequate care.  (2)  The Negligent Owner-Builder  26                              
The Ontario Court of Appeal found that, despite the fact that the
inspection scheme was operational, there were considerations that removed the
appellant from the class of persons to whom the city owed a duty of care. 
Relying on the decision of La Forest J. in Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra,
the court found that owner-builders could be excluded from the ambit of a
municipality’s duty of care regarding building inspections if they are seen as
the sole source of their loss.  After reviewing the appellant’s negligence, the
Ontario Court of Appeal concluded that the appellant had knowingly flouted the
building code by agreeing with Tutkaluk’s scheme to apply for the permit late. 
In doing so, the court found, the appellant removed himself from the ordinary inspection
scheme and from the scope of the city’s duty of care.  27                              
With respect, the Ontario Court of Appeal erred in its interpretation of
the meaning of the decision in Rothfield v. Manolakos.  While there may
be some ambiguity in the language of that decision, Rothfield v. Manolakos stands
for the proposition that an owner’s negligence may, in very rare circumstances,
be considered as a complete defence to a finding of negligence on the part of
municipal inspectors.  The decision does not stand for the proposition that an
owner’s negligence can remove him or her from the scope of a municipality’s duty
of care.  28                              
The facts of the case of Rothfield v. Manolakos were quite
similar to the facts of the case at bar.  The plaintiffs were owners of a home
who hired contractors to build a retaining wall in their backyard.  The
contractors applied for a building permit and presented the building inspector
with a rough sketch of the project.  The inspector exercised his discretion and
granted a permit despite the fact that the plans had not been certified by an
engineer.  Neither the owners, nor the contractors, advised the city, as
required by the by-law, that the project had come to a stage where inspection
was required.  When the inspector did come to inspect the construction, most of
the wall had been put in place and it was not possible to conduct a standard
inspection.  29                              
La Forest J., for the majority of the Court, began his analysis of
facts by applying the Anns/Kamloops test.  After examining the legislative
scheme, he found that once the city had made a policy decision to inspect
building plans and construction, it owed a duty of care to all who it is
reasonable to conclude might be injured by the negligent exercise of those
powers.  He then proceeded to consider whether owner-builders, as a class,
should be excluded from the scope of a municipality’s duty of care under the
second portion of the Anns/Kamloops test.  He could see no reason why an
owner-builder would not fall within the scope of the duty of care owed by a
municipality.  Owner-builders are no better versed in the technical aspects of
building construction than other members of the public, and cannot see to it
that their contractors comply with the building codes.  Owner-builders thus rely
on the disinterested expertise of building inspectors to ensure that
construction work is safe.  In addition, La Forest J. found that
owner-builders are also ratepayers in the municipality, members of the public
for whose benefit the by-law was passed.  Therefore, it is clear that
La Forest J. decided that owner-builders are a class of persons to whom a
duty is owed by municipal inspectors.  30                              
Having decided that municipal inspectors owe a duty of care to
owner-builders, La Forest J. proceeded to discuss the implications of the
owner-builder’s negligence.  He considered the dictum of Lord
Wilberforce in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, supra, that
no duty is owed “to a negligent building owner, the source of his own loss”;
see Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra, at p. 1271.  La Forest J.
found that this principle was applicable only in the narrowest of
circumstances.  At p. 1271, he states:  It is to be expected that contractors, in the normal course of events,
will fail to observe certain aspects of the building by-laws.  That is why
municipalities employ building inspectors.  Their role is to detect such
negligent omissions before they translate into dangers to health and safety. 
If, as I believe, owner builders are within the ambit of the duty of care owed
by the building inspector, it would simply make no sense to proceed on the
assumption that every negligent act of an owner builder relieved the
municipality of its duty to show reasonable care in approving building plans
and inspecting construction.  Negligent
owners would be viewed as the sole source of their own loss where they, for
example, knowingly flouted the applicable building regulations or the
directives of the municipality, or totally failed to acquit themselves of the
responsibilities that properly rested on them, none of which apply in this
appeal.  La Forest J. concluded that the conduct of the plaintiffs in Rothfield
v. Manolakos, supra, was not such as to make them the sole source of
their own loss.  31                              
There is some ambiguity in the decision in Rothfield v. Manolakos
as to where in the traditional tort law analysis the consideration of an
owner-builder’s negligence should take place, namely whether the analysis
should take place in the determination of whether a municipality owes a duty of
care to the negligent owner-builder, or whether the negligence of an
owner-builder can serve as a defence to a finding of negligence on the part of
a municipal inspector.  This ambiguity stems from the fact that La Forest
J. began his analysis of the consequences of the negligence of an owner-builder
by quoting the dictum of Lord Wilberforce in Anns v. Merton London
Borough Council, supra.  At p. 504, Lord Wilberforce states:  To whom the duty is owed.  There is, in my
opinion, no difficulty about this.  A reasonable man in the position of the
inspector must realise that if the foundations are covered in without adequate
depth or strength as required by the byelaws, injury to safety or health may be
suffered by owners or occupiers of the house.  The duty is owed to them, not of
course to a negligent building owner, the source of his own loss.  Lord
Wilberforce’s dictum does imply that an examination of the negligence of
an owner-builder will take place within the two-step analysis of whether a duty
of care is owed by a municipality in conducting an inspection.  As a result,
the analysis of the consequences of the negligence of an owner-builder in Rothfield
v. Manolakos, supra, also uses language which implies that the
inquiry into whether a municipality is liable for its negligent inspection will
end at the duty stage of the analysis if the plaintiff’s conduct is found to be
such as to make him or her the sole source of his or her own loss.  Upon
further examination, however, it is my view that the true intention of the
decision in Rothfield v. Manolakos was to create a defence available to
municipalities in a very limited set of circumstances.  32                              
There are several passages in the reasons of La Forest J. in Rothfield
v. Manolakos which make it clear that the negligent conduct of an
owner-builder should not absolve a municipality of its duty to take reasonable
care in its inspection.  For example, at p. 1273, he states:  It cannot be disputed that the owners were
negligent in failing to give timely notice for the pre-pour inspection.  The
by-law places this obligation squarely on every property owner.  But the fact
remains that when the inspector did attend at the site he was confronted with a
situation in which it must have been at once clear to him that the retaining
wall was potentially substandard.  As I have just pointed out, there is no
mystery to the fact that uninspected foundations may give rise to hidden
defects.  Again, at p.
1274, he states:  . . . when he attended at the site, [the inspector] was
confronted with a situation which, if left unremedied, manifestly stood to pose
a threat to the health and safety of the public, including the neighbours and
the owner builder.  Of course, the cause of the problem would have been evident
if the inspector had been asked to come at the proper time.  But this does not
absolve the inspector of his duties.  It must be remembered that the inspector
was, at the time, armed with all the powers necessary to remedy the situation. 
As I see the matter, it was incumbent on the building inspector, in view of the
responsibility that rested on him, to order the cessation of the work, and the
taking of whatever corrective measures were necessary to enable him to ensure
that the structure was up to standard. In light of
these two passages, it is apparent that an inspector who attends at a site owes
a duty of care to the public, to third-party neighbours, and to owner-builders
to ensure that all renovation and construction projects meet the standards set
out in the by-laws.  This duty arises regardless of the conduct or negligence
of the owner-builder.  33                              
Having found that a municipality whose inspector conducts a site
inspection owes a duty to conduct a reasonable inspection, despite the
negligence of the owner-builder, La Forest J. proceeds to set out a
defence that may be available to municipalities in limited circumstances.  He
underlines that it may be open to a municipality to argue in its defence that
an owner-builder’s conduct was such that it was impossible to fulfill the duty
to take reasonable care in its inspection.  He sets out the test as follows, at
pp. 1273-74:  The key question, it seems to me, is whether it is reasonable to
conclude that despite the negligence of the owners, the inspector was still in
a position to acquit himself of the responsibility that the by-law placed on
him, i.e., to take reasonable care to ensure that all building was done in
accordance with the applicable standards of the by-law.  In other words, is it
reasonable, in the circumstances, to conclude that a due exercise by the
inspector of his powers, even though he was summoned late, could have avoided
the danger?  The test
assumes that inspectors owe a duty to take reasonable care to ensure that all
construction is done in accordance with the standards.  A municipality will
only be absolved completely of the liability which flows from an inspection
which does not meet the standard of reasonable care when the conduct of the
owner-builder is such as to make it impossible for the inspector to do anything
to avoid the danger.  In such circumstances, for example when an owner-builder
determines to flout the building by-law, or is completely indifferent to the
responsibilities that the by-law places on him or her, that owner-builder
cannot reasonably allege that any damage suffered is the result of the failure
of the building inspector to take reasonable care in conducting an inspection.  34                              
La Forest J.’s interpretation of Lord Wilberforce’s dictum
in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, supra, is consistent
with the interpretation provided by the English Court of Appeal.  In Acrecrest
Ltd. v. Hattrell & Partners, [1983] 1 All E.R. 17, Donaldson L.J. found
that the principle does not exclude negligent builder-owners from the ambit of
a municipality’s duty of care, but rather that it serves as a defence.  He
interprets the Lord Wilberforce’s dictum as follows, at p. 31:  . . . the local authority’s duty of care extends to the
building owner and the builder-owner to the same extent as to future owners and
present and future occupiers.  The difference in the position of the building
owner or builder-owner is not in the ambit of the duty, but in the fact that
they may have more difficulty in proving a causal connection between the damage
and the building inspector’s negligence and may also be faced with allegations
of contributory negligence which may partially or even wholly defeat their
claim.  This, I think, is what Lord Wilberforce meant when in the Anns
case . . . he said:   “The duty is owed to them [the owners or occupiers
of the house], not of course to the negligent building owner, the source of his
own loss.”  If the building owner’s negligence was the effective source of his
loss, he would fail on the ground that there was a break in the chain of
causation or on the ground that it was just and equitable that the damages
recoverable should be reduced to nothing, having regard to the building owner’s
share in the responsibility for the damage. . . .  Clearly, the
English Court of Appeal interpreted Lord Wilberforce’s dictum as a
defence to a claim of negligence on the part of an owner-builder who was the
sole source of his or her own loss.  Such a defence could be invoked, either to
show that the negligence of an inspector could not in any way be the cause of
the owner-builder’s loss, or as a complete bar to recovery for the
owner-builder’s contributory negligence.  35                              
La Forest J.’s interpretation of Lord Wilberforce’s dictum
as a defence to a finding of negligence against a municipality, rather than as
a principle which excludes a class of negligent builder-owners from the scope
of a municipality’s duty of care, is also consistent with this Court’s approach
to other defences in tort law which focus on the plaintiff’s conduct.  In the
context of the defence of ex turpi causa non oritur actio, this Court
has ruled that it is inappropriate to consider the effect of the conduct of a
plaintiff within the duty of care analysis.  In Hall v. Hebert, [1993] 2
S.C.R. 159, McLachlin J., for the majority of the Court, found that it is
inconsistent with the conceptual role of the duty of care within the
traditional tort law analysis to consider the plaintiff’s conduct as a
consideration which can remove him or her from the scope of a duty which would
otherwise be owed to him or her.  She found that a duty of care should be
grounded in considerations of proximity and foreseeability.  The legality or
morality of the plaintiff’s conduct is an extrinsic consideration.  As such, she
found, in those cases where the conduct of the plaintiff does become an issue
to be considered, it should be done by way of a defence, rather than by
distorting the notion of the duty of care owed by the defendant to the
plaintiff; see Hall v. Hebert, supra, at p. 182.  It would be
inconsistent with this Court’s jurisprudence to develop an area of negligence
law where the conduct of the plaintiff is determinative of whether he or she is
owed a duty of care when this Court has specifically pronounced that a plaintiff’s
conduct may not be considered in determining whether a duty of care is owed to
him or her in other areas of negligence law.  36                              
The respondent city argues that to interpret the decision of
La Forest J. in Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra, as
setting out the parameters for a defence to a claim of negligence by a
negligent owner-builder against a municipality would necessitate overruling
this Court’s decision in Hospitality Investments Ltd. v. Everett Lord
Building Construction Ltd., [1996] 3 S.C.R. 605.  This decision consists of
one paragraph which restores the judgment of the New Brunswick Court of Queen’s
Bench at (1993), 143 N.B.R. (2d) 258, and is set out, at p. 606, as follows:  We agree with the trial judge that no duty of care
was owed to the respondent in the circumstances of this case.  Accordingly, the
appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal (1995), 166 N.B.R. (2d)
241, is reversed, and the trial judgment (1993), 143 N.B.R. (2d) 258, is
restored, the whole with costs throughout.  This decision
does appear to contradict the decision in Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra,
as it seems to exempt the municipality from liability at the first stage of the
negligence analysis.  However, the Court did not adopt the reasons of the trial
judge in the case and wrote only one sentence in disposing of the appeal.  To
the extent that the decision can be read as departing from the analysis of Rothfield
v. Manolakos, it should not be followed.  37                              
The respondent city also relies on the decision of the British Columbia
Court of Appeal in McCrea v. White Rock, [1975] 2 W.W.R. 593, to support
its contention that a duty of care is not owed to the appellant in the case at
bar.  That case is also distinguishable from the case at bar.  In that case,
the plaintiffs had hired a contractor to renovate their grocery store.  The
contractor applied for and received a building permit on the basis of a plan
which he submitted to the inspector.  He did not, however, follow the plan when
installing a beam into the renovations and eventually the building collapsed. 
The by-law which governed inspections in the City of White Rock provided for a
scheme of inspections to occur at various stages of the construction.  A duty
was placed on the owners of the building to notify the inspector at various
stages of the construction to receive inspections.  The city had made a policy
decision not to inspect until notified of the need for an inspection.  The
contractor called the inspector on behalf of the owners, and received three
inspections pursuant to the by-law.  There was evidence that the practice in
White Rock was for the contractor to call for inspections on behalf of the
owner.  No further calls for inspection were made and as a result the inspector
did not inspect the beam and did not conduct any further inspections of the
site.  38                              
While three separate and concurring sets of reasons were delivered in
that case, all three of the judges of the British Columbia Court of Appeal
agreed that the by-law imposed a duty to inspect the construction only when the
inspector was notified by the owners that the construction had reached one of
the stages where inspection was required by by-law.  A municipal inspector
could not be expected to attend at a site continuously to ensure that the
construction met the specifications in the permit.  Since the owners had failed
to notify the inspector of the need to inspect the work, the inspector owed no
duty to them.  Two of the sets of reasons were careful to distinguish the case
from those cases where inspectors had attended at construction cites and been
negligent in conducting their inspections.  This case is distinguishable from
the case at bar, where the owners did notify the inspector of a need to
inspect, and the inspector did attend at the site to conduct the inspection.  39                              
To summarize, despite some ambiguity in the language used in his
decision, it is clear that La Forest J. created a complete defence for
municipalities that could be used to militate against a finding of negligence
only in the rarest of circumstances, namely, when the owner-builder’s conduct
was such that a court could only conclude that he or she was the sole source of
his or her own loss.  This complete defence may encompass those situations
where an owner-builder never applies for a building permit, or never notifies
the inspector of the need for an inspection, or those situations where the
inspector receives notification so late that it would be impossible, upon full
exercise of the powers granted under the governing legislation, to discover any
hidden defects.  In other cases, such as Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra,
itself, it will still be open to municipalities to show that a plaintiff was
contributorily negligent, and to seek an apportionment of the damages
accordingly.  It is also clear that once a municipality chooses to implement a
policy decision to inspect, it owes a duty to all who might be injured by the
negligent exercise of those powers, including builder-owners, to take
reasonable care in conducting that inspection.  As a result, I must disagree
with the findings of the Ontario Court of Appeal in this case.  The city owed a
duty to the appellant to conduct a reasonable inspection of the renovations to
his home.  B.  Standard
of Care  40                              
As I have stated above, to avoid liability the city must show that its
inspectors exercised the standard of care that would be expected of an
ordinary, reasonable and prudent inspector in the same circumstances.  The
measure of what constitutes a reasonable inspection will vary depending on the
facts of each case, including the likelihood of a known or foreseeable harm,
the gravity of that harm, and the burden or cost which would be incurred to
prevent the injury; see, for example, Ryan v. Victoria, supra, at
para. 28.  For example, a more thorough inspection may be required once an
inspector is put on notice of the possibility that a construction project may
be defective.  In addition, a municipal inspector may be required to exercise
greater care when the work being inspected is integral to the structure of the
house and could result in serious harm if it is defective.  While in some
circumstances a more thorough inspection will be required to meet the standard
of care, municipalities will not be held to a standard where they are required
to act as insurers for the renovation work.  The city was not required to
discover every latent defect in the renovations at the appellant’s home.  It
was, however, required to conduct a reasonable inspection in light of all of
the circumstances; see, for example, Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra,
at pp. 1268-69.  41                              
The inspection scheme set out in the 1990 Building Code Act
delineates the powers that are available to municipal inspectors to discover defects
in a construction project.  The city can only be held liable for those defects
which the municipal inspector could reasonably be expected to have detected and
had the power to have remedied.  42                              
I turn now to the inspection that took place at the appellant’s home. 
In examining whether the inspection was reasonable in the circumstances, we
must bear in mind that the determination of whether a defendant has met the
standard of care required in the circumstances is a question of fact.  While it
is open to an appeal court to find that a trial judge applied the wrong
standard of care, once it is determined that he or she applied the correct
standard, an appeal court can reverse a trial judge’s findings with respect to
whether that standard was met by the defendant only if it can be established
that he or she made some palpable and overriding error which affected the
assessment of the facts; see, for example, Ryan v. Victoria, supra,
at para. 57; Stein v. The Ship “Kathy K”, [1976] 2 S.C.R. 802, at p.
808.  43                              
After conducting a thorough examination of the facts in this case,
Conant J. concluded that the city’s inspection fell short of meeting a
reasonable standard in the circumstances.  He accepted the appellant’s
submission that the behaviour of the contractor should have made the inspector
wary.  The contractor did not apply for the building permit until after the
underpinning had been put in.  The contractor had ignored the instructions in
the permit, which specified that the inspector was to be notified before
proceeding with the underpinning.  The contractor had also failed to post the
permit outside the appellant’s home.  Mr. Tecson testified that he did not know
the contractor and had no basis for relying on him.  The trial judge concluded
that, given these circumstances, it would have been reasonable to inspect
further.  It was simply insufficient for the inspector to rely on the
contractor’s assurances that the work, which was not readily visible, had been completed
according to the specifications.  Indeed, it has been recognized by this Court
that it is to be expected that contractors, in the normal course of events,
will fail to observe certain aspects of the building by-laws.  It is for this
reason that municipalities employ building inspectors; see, for example, Rothfield
v. Manolakos, supra, at p. 1271.  It is, therefore, unreasonable for
an inspector to conclude that a project has met the standards in the building
code simply because the contractor has said so.  Such a conclusion is
especially unreasonable when the inspector has been put on notice of the
contractor’s willingness to contravene the instructions in the building permit.  44                              
Conant J. also found that a more thorough inspection was reasonable in this
case because of the nature of the work that was being carried out.  He found
that the risk of harm was great, requiring a higher standard of care.  The
construction work consisted of the installation of underpinning, which was to
bear the weight of the entire house.  It was a major structural element, and a
serious defect in its construction could have led to the collapse of the entire
house.  While the tests conducted by the inspector could help to ascertain the
quality of the materials used, they could not help to ascertain whether the
dimensions of the underpinning were in accordance with the plan.  Given the
importance of the underpinning to the safety of the entire house, verification
that its construction met the specifications of the plan was necessary.  45                              
The city argued that the inspector lacked the power to do anything
further than the inspection that he conducted.  The underpinning had been laid
before his arrival and it was impossible to determine visually whether it
continued for the full width of the footing.  The basement was dug up for the
laying of the drains, and only a few inches of the depth of the underpinning
were visible because of the piles of dirt from the excavation.  The city argued
that the powers of the building inspector to uncover work were limited. 
Section 9(2) restricted those powers to situations where there was a reason to
believe that a part of the building had not been constructed in compliance with
the Act and there was a pre-existing order not to cover.  At trial, Conant J.
accepted that the preconditions to satisfy granting an order pursuant to s.
9(2) of the Act were absent in this case.  However, he rejected the argument
that this was the only power available to the municipality to remedy the
defect.  46                              
The trial judge found that, pursuant to s. 11(1)(d) of the 1990 Act, the
inspector had the power to order the appellant to call in an engineer to saw
through the underpinning to determine its width.  Furthermore, pursuant to s.
9(1) of the Act, the inspector could have ordered that the basement floor not
be laid.  He could then have returned after the drains had been installed, when
it was not raining, and dug down to determine the depth of the underpinning. 
The city argues that this places too high a standard on the inspector.  He had
no reason to believe that the underpinning did not meet the specifications in
the plan.  His inspection indicated that the work had been done properly.  I
find no error in the findings of the trial judge in this respect.  The
inspector reached his conclusion that the depth and the width of the
underpinning met the specifications in the plan on the assurance of a
contractor who had already shown disregard for the requirements of the building
permit, and tests which concluded that the other aspects of the underpinning
had met the standard.  Given the nature of the work, it was unreasonable to
conclude that the width and the depth of the underpinning met the requirements
of the building code without actually inspecting that aspect of the work.  47                              
The trial judge applied the correct principles in determining that the
inspector failed to conduct a reasonable inspection in the circumstances.  He
recognized that in the circumstances, especially in light of the importance of
the underpinning to the structural safety of the home, a more vigilant
inspection was required.  The Act granted the power to the inspector to conduct
such an inspection.  By failing to exercise those powers to ensure that the
underpinning met the specifications in the plan, the inspector failed to meet
the standard of care that would have been expected of an ordinary, reasonable
and prudent inspector in the circumstances.  I therefore agree with Conant J.
that the municipality was negligent in conducting the inspection of the
renovations on the appellant’s home.  C.  The
Negligent Owner-Builder  48                              
Having found that the city owed a duty to the appellant to conduct a
reasonable inspection, and that its inspector failed to conduct a reasonable
inspection in the circumstances, I must now examine whether the conduct of the
appellant in this case was negligent, absolving the city of some of its
liability for its insufficient inspection.  The appellant’s conduct may even
have been such as to justify absolving the city of all liability for its
negligence.  49                              
Mr. Ingles had specified in his contract that Tutkaluk was to apply for
a building permit.  Tutkaluk told him that the work would be delayed if it had
to obtain a building permit before it began.  The trial judge found that the
appellant knew or should have known what he was doing in agreeing to a delay in
obtaining a building permit, and found that he was negligent in allowing the
construction to begin without a permit.  On the other hand, the trial judge
also found that it was impossible to conclude that the appellant and his wife
participated in a conscious effort to prevent the building inspector from
examining the underpinnings of their home.  The Court of Appeal found that the
appellant and his wife were “sadly mistaken” in relying on Tutkaluk’s advice
that it was appropriate to proceed with the underpinning without a permit.  It
is clear that the appellant was negligent.  That negligence may reduce, in
part, the city’s liability.  However, for the city to avail itself of the
complete defence described in Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra, it
must show that the appellant’s conduct was such as to make him the sole source
of his own loss.  50                              
As I have discussed above, the defence described in Rothfield v. Manolakos
applies only in the narrowest circumstances.  To avail itself of the defence,
the municipality must show that the owner-builders knowingly flouted the
applicable building regulations or the directives of the building inspector, or
that the owner-builders totally failed to acquit themselves of the
responsibilities that rested on them, such that the inspector was no longer in
a position to take reasonable measures to ensure that the construction was done
in accordance with the applicable standards.  In delineating the type of
conduct which might be considered “flouting” of the building regulations, or a
total failure to meet the requirements of the legislative scheme on the part of
the owner, it is important to consider the fact that the defence absolves
municipalities of all liability.  As a result it serves as a complete bar to
recovery for certain plaintiffs.  The scope of the defence must be consistent
with the purposes of a system of tort law, and with tort law principles
themselves.  51                              
The contributory negligence bar, where a plaintiff was denied any means
of recovery once he or she was seen to have contributed to his or her own loss,
is no longer a part of our system of tort law.  It has been replaced by
statutory schemes which apportion liability between negligent defendants and
contributorily negligent plaintiffs.  This Court recently reaffirmed its
disapproval of the bar in Bow Valley Husky (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Saint John
Shipbuilding Ltd., [1997] 3 S.C.R. 1210.  In the course of determining
whether the contributory negligence bar could still apply in maritime law,
McLachlin J. states (at para. 94):  The considerations on which the contributory negligence bar was based
no longer comport with the modern view of fairness and justice.  Tort law no
longer accepts the traditional theory underpinning the contributory negligence
bar –  that the injured party cannot prove that the tortfeasor “caused” the
damage.  The contributory negligence bar results in manifest unfairness, particularly
where the negligence of the injured party is slight in comparison with the
negligence of others.  Nor does the contributory negligence bar further the
goal of modern tort law of encouraging care and vigilance.  So long as an
injured party can be shown to be marginally at fault, a tortfeasor’s conduct,
no matter how egregious, goes unpunished.  In light of
this Court’s approach to the contributory negligence bar, a municipality cannot
avail itself of the defence set out in Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra,
simply because a plaintiff acted negligently.  To allow the municipality to do
so would amount to a reintroduction of the contributory negligence bar into the
sphere of municipal inspection.  It would be inconsistent with the modern goal
of tort law of encouraging care and vigilance to absolve a municipality of all
liability for a negligent inspection simply because its inspectors were
contacted late.  Municipalities, having made a policy decision to inspect even
when a permit is obtained late, would be able to conduct unreasonable
inspections, while being assured that there would be no financial sanction for
doing so.  As I have stated above, the contributory negligence of a plaintiff
may still be relevant to the apportionment of liability.  In Bow Valley v.
Saint John Shipbuilding, supra, McLachlin J. reduced the plaintiff’s
recovery by 60 percent due to its negligence.  In the case at bar, the
liability will also be apportioned in accordance with the appellant’s
negligence.  In the rarest of circumstances, such as those described in Rothfield
v. Manolakos, a defendant may be absolved of all liability because it is
shown that the owner-builder is entirely responsible for the damage and did not
rely on the inspection.  52                              
The concept of  “flouting”, therefore, must denote conduct which extends
far beyond mere negligence on the part of an owner-builder.  The word suggests
that the owner-builder in fact mocks the inspection scheme.  Certainly, an
owner-builder who submitted false plans and documents to receive a permit would
be mocking the scheme.  Similarly, an owner-builder who never contacted an
inspector to conduct an inspection would show a lack of respect for the
inspection scheme and certainly no reliance on it.  However, in this case the appellant
did not act in these ways.  He certainly acted negligently.  The trial judge,
however, found that he did not participate in a conscious effort to undermine
the building code regime.  In my view, such conduct does not amount to a
“flouting” of the building code.  As a result, I find that the Court of Appeal
erred in absolving the city of all liability.  D.  Damages  53                              
The appellant contends that this Court does not have the jurisdiction to
review the trial judge’s award of damages in this case because the respondent
city did not apply for leave to cross-appeal pursuant to Rule 29 of the Rules
of the Supreme Court of Canada, SOR/83-74.  The relevant provisions of Rule
29 provide as follows:  29.  (1)  A respondent who seeks to set
aside or vary the whole or any part of the disposition of the judgment appealed
from shall apply for leave to cross-appeal within 30 clear days after the
service of the application for leave.                                                                     . . .  (3)  A respondent who seeks to uphold the judgment
on a ground or grounds not raised in the reasons for the judgment appealed from
may do so in the respondent’s factum without applying for leave to
cross-appeal, and the appellant may serve and file a factum in reply in
accordance with Rule 41.  The appellant
argues that since the city’s arguments with respect to apportionment, damages,
and joint and several liability do not seek to uphold the Court of Appeal
judgment on a ground not raised in the reasons for judgment, the city must
apply for leave to cross-appeal pursuant to Rule 29(1).  54                              
The Court of Appeal did not find that the city was negligent in this
case, and as such, did not comment upon the apportionment of the damages by the
trial judge.  In asking this Court to review the trial judge’s apportionment of
fault in this case, the city is not seeking to set aside or vary any part of
the Court of Appeal judgment.  In addition, the city is not seeking to uphold
the judgment on a ground or grounds not raised in the reasons for judgment. 
The city is merely responding to the appellant’s position that the appellant’s
negligence is properly considered in the apportionment of fault, and not in the
determination of whether a duty of care was owed by the municipality. 
Therefore, I find that the city’s arguments do not fall within Rule 29 and that
this Court has the jurisdiction to review the apportionment of fault by the
trial judge.  55                              
The trial judge found that Tutkaluk was 80 percent liable for the damage
suffered by the appellant.  The city was 20 percent liable for its negligent
inspection.  He then turned to the appellant’s negligence.  Having found that
the appellant should bear some of the responsibility for his loss, the trial
judge reduced the city’s liability by 30 percent to account for the appellant’s
negligence.  It appears that the trial judge took this approach to ensure that
Tutkaluk would not benefit from the finding of negligence against the
appellant, by having his damages reduced in proportion to the appellant’s
fault.  With respect, this initial apportionment is not consistent with the Negligence
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. N.1.  Sections 1 and 3 of that Act read as follows:  1.  Where damages have been caused or
contributed to by the fault or neglect of two or more persons, the court shall
determine the degree in which each of such persons is at fault or negligent,
and, where two or more persons are found at fault or negligent, they are
jointly and severally liable to the person suffering loss or damage for such
fault or negligence, but as between themselves, in the absence of any contract
express or implied, each is liable to make contribution and indemnify each
other in the degree in which they are respectively found to be at fault or negligent.   3.  In any action for damages that is
founded upon the fault or negligence of the defendant if fault or negligence is
found on the part of the plaintiff that contributed to the damages, the court
shall apportion the damages in proportion to the degree of fault or negligence
found against the parties respectively.  When there are
two or more tortfeasors, and a plaintiff has also been found negligent, the
proper approach to apportionment is to first reduce the extent of the
recoverable damages in proportion with the plaintiff’s negligence, and then to
apportion the remaining damages between the defendants, in accordance with
their fault; see, for example, Fitzgerald v. Lane, [1988] 2 All E.R. 961
(H.L.); Bow Valley v. Saint John Shipbuilding, supra; Colonial
Coach Lines Ltd. v. Bennett, [1968] 1 O.R. 333.  56                              
In his subsequent addendum, however, the trial judge clarified that his
intention was to apportion fault so that the appellant would be 6 percent
liable, the city would be 14 percent liable and Tutkaluk would be 80 percent
liable.  In assessing the damages, he corrected his previous error, and
subtracted the portion of the damages that could be attributed to the plaintiff
in accordance with his findings of fault.  57                              
The city has asked this Court to overturn the trial judge’s
apportionment of fault in this case.  It argues that his apportionment is
inconsistent with other apportionments in similar situations; see, for example,
Rothfield v. Manolakos, supra, at p. 1278.  The apportionment of
liability is primarily a matter within the province of the trial judge. 
Appellate courts should not interfere with the trial judge’s apportionment
unless there is demonstrable error in the trial judge’s appreciation of the
facts or applicable legal principles; see Bow Valley v. Saint John
Shipbuilding, supra, at para. 78.  While the trial judge applied an
unorthodox method of apportionment in his original judgment, his subsequent
addendum clearly shows his intention to apportion fault between the plaintiff
and the defendants as follows:  6 percent to the appellant; 14 percent to the
city; and 80 percent to the contractor.  The trial judge was well apprised of
all of the facts in the case, and based his final apportionment on these
facts.  In my view, there is no demonstrable error in the trial judge’s
appreciation of the facts in this case to justify interfering with his
apportionment.  58                              
The city also argues that it should not be held to be jointly and
severally liable with the contractor and that it should be liable only for its
portion of the fault.  To support this contention, the city relies on
authorities from British Columbia that have held that where the plaintiff is
contributorily negligent, multiple tortfeasors will only be liable to the
extent of their fault; see, for example, Leischner v. West Kootenay Power
& Light Co. (1986), 24 D.L.R. (4th) 641 (B.C.C.A.).  I do not find
these authorities to be applicable in this case.  The legislation in British
Columbia differs significantly from the legislation in Ontario.  Section 2(c)
of the Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 298, reads as follows:  . . . as between each person who has sustained damage or loss
and each other person who is liable to make good the damage or loss, the
person sustaining the damage or loss shall be entitled to recover from that
other person the percentage of the damage or loss sustained as corresponds to
the degree of fault of that other person.  [Emphasis added.]  Therefore, it
is possible to read the British Columbia legislation as allowing contributorily
negligent plaintiffs to recover only the percentage of the damage sustained
that corresponds to the degree of fault of each of the individual tortfeasors.  59                              
The Ontario legislation has been interpreted differently, and joint and
several judgments have been awarded to contributorily negligent plaintiffs; see
Menow v. Honsberger Ltd., [1970] 1 O.R. 54 (H.C.), aff’d [1971] 1 O.R.
129 (C.A.), aff’d on other grounds, [1974] S.C.R. 239 (sub nom. Jordan House
Ltd. v. Menow).  Similarly, in Bow Valley v. Saint John Shipbuilding,
supra, this Court ruled that defendants would be jointly and severally
liable for a negligent plaintiff’s damages in the context of the Canada
Shipping Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. S-9 .  The purpose of a regime which imposes
joint and several liability on multiple defendants is to ensure that plaintiffs
receive actual compensation for their loss.  Given the wording of the Ontario Negligence
Act, I can see no reason to deny this benefit to a plaintiff who
contributes to his or her loss.  His or her responsibility for the loss is
accounted for in the apportionment of fault.  There is no reason to account for
it again by denying him or her the benefit of a scheme of joint and several
liability when the wording of the legislation does not intend it to be so.  60                              
In light of the foregoing analysis, I would allow the appeal and restore
the apportionment of fault by the trial judge.  As a result, the damages of
$52,520 will be reduced by $3,151.20, representing 6 percent of the damages, to
account for the appellant’s negligence.  I would thus restore the judgment of
$49,368.80 against both the city and the contractor.  The city is entitled to
have judgment for indemnity against the contractor for $42,016.  61                              
I turn now to the prejudgment interest that was awarded by the trial
judge.  The trial judge awarded prejudgment interest at the rate of 12.9
percent.  The city has asked this Court to review that award to account for the
fluctuations in the market interest rates that occurred between the date that
the action was commenced and the date of judgment.  The Courts of Justice
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. C.43, s. 130, grants trial judges the discretion to
award prejudgment interest at a different rate than the prescribed interest
rate to account for changes in market interest rates.  The trial judge did not
find that this was an appropriate case to lower the prejudgment interest rate
from the one prescribed.  He did not find that he was prevented from adjusting
the interest rate, but simply chose not to do so.  I find no reason to
interfere with the trial judge’s exercise of his discretion on this matter.  62                              
I would accordingly allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
Court of Appeal and restore the decision of the trial judge, with costs
throughout.  Appeal allowed with costs.  Solicitor for the appellant:  Philip Anisman, Toronto.  Solicitor for the respondent:  City Solicitor, Toronto.    