Stewart v. Pettie, [1995] 1
S.C.R. 131  Mayfield Investments Ltd., operating
as the Mayfield Inn                                                                                      Appellant  v.  Gillian Stewart and Keith Stewart, and Stuart David Pettie                                                                     Respondents  and between  Gillian Stewart and Keith Stewart                                                    Appellants  v.  Mayfield Investments Ltd., operating as the Mayfield Inn, and Stuart David
Pettie                                  Respondents  Indexed as:  Stewart v.
Pettie  File No.:  23739.  1994:  October 13;
1995:  January 26.  Present:  La Forest,
Sopinka, Gonthier, Cory, McLachlin, Iacobucci and Major JJ.  on appeal from the court of appeal for
alberta                      After an evening of
dinner and live theatre at the Mayfield Inn, a passenger in a car driven by her
brother was seriously injured when he crashed the vehicle after losing control
on slippery road conditions.  His driving had been appropriate to the
conditions.  The driver's blood alcohol level, however, was well above the
legal limit an hour after the accident.  He had been drinking throughout the
evening and the commercial host was aware of his condition when he left in that
the same waitress had served him all evening and had kept a running total of
his tab.  The passengers in the car had allowed the driver to drive,
notwithstanding the availability of sober drivers in the party.  In addition,
the injured woman knew how much her brother had had to drink and how he reacted
when intoxicated.  No evidence was tendered as to what she or the other
passengers would have done had the commercial host intervened.                     The plaintiffs were
unsuccessful at trial as against Mayfield Investments Ltd., but the trial judge
awarded a provisional 10 percent against them in the event he was overturned on
appeal and found the driver negligent, but not grossly negligent.  The Court of
Appeal allowed the appeal and found Mayfield negligent but did not otherwise
disturb the trial judge's judgment.  Mayfield Investments Ltd. appealed and the
Stewarts cross-appealed the finding that the driver was not grossly negligent
in his driving.  At issue here was whether the commercial host met the standard
of care required of a vendor of alcohol and whether it was negligent in failing
to take any steps to ensure that the driver did not drive on leaving its
premises.  Two secondary issues, dealing with contributory negligence and gross
negligence, did not arise.                     Held:  The appeal should be
allowed; the cross-appeal should be dismissed.                      The question of
whether a duty of care exists is a question of the relationship between the
parties, not a question of conduct.  The question of what conduct is required
to satisfy the duty is a question of the appropriate standard of care.  Commercial
vendors of alcohol unquestionably owe a general duty of care to persons who can
be expected to use the highways.                      Notwithstanding
legislation prohibiting the serving of alcohol to persons who are apparently
intoxicated, no clear violation of liquor control legislation occurred here,
given the fact that the patron was not exhibiting any signs of intoxication. 
Moreover, being in violation of legislation alone does not ground liability.                     The reluctance of
the courts to impose liability for a failure to take some positive action has
been tempered where some "special relationship" between the parties
warrants the imposition of a positive duty.  Two questions must be answered: 
whether the defendant was required, in the circumstances, to take any positive
steps at all, and if so, whether the steps taken discharged that burden.                      The commercial host
here took no steps to ensure its patron did not drive.  None of its employees
asked if the patron intended to drive or suggested any alternative.  The fact
that it remained "vigilant" and maintained "careful
observation" of its patron could not be equated with taking positive
steps.  The circumstances, however, were not such that a reasonably prudent
establishment would have foreseen that the patron would drive, and therefore
should have taken steps to prevent this.  The commercial host knew that some of
the party were sober and could reasonably assume one of them would drive.  It
did not need to enquire as to who was driving.                     The plaintiff in a
tort action has the burden of proving each of the elements of the claim on the
balance of probabilities, including proving that the defendant's impugned
conduct actually caused the loss complained of.  An evidentiary gap exists here
because no evidence was tendered as to whether the sober passengers would have
come to the same or a different conclusion had the commercial host intervened
in some way.  Nothing unusual or difficult exists here to bring into play the
rule allowing for a less onerous proof of causation because of some inherent
difficulty in proving causation.  Indeed, it was the injured person who could
have provided this information and did not.  The inference, which was not
negated by evidence led, is that her decision would have been no different even
if she had been informed by the commercial host of all the circumstances.  Cases Cited                     Considered:  Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow,
[1974] S.C.R. 239; Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1
S.C.R. 1186; City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2; Sambell
v. Hudago Enterprises Ltd., [1990] O.J. No. 2494 (QL); Hague v. Billings
(1989), 48 C.C.L.T. 192 (Ont. H.C.), aff'd in part (1993), 13 O.R. (3d) 298
(C.A.); referred to:  Schmidt v. Sharpe (1983), 27 C.C.L.T. 1; Canada
Trust Co. v. Porter (1980), 2 A.C.W.S. (2d) 428; Gibbons v. Yates,
Ont. Co. Ct., June 17, 1982, unreported; Anns v. Merton London Borough
Council, [1978] A.C. 728; Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R.
1228; Hall v. Hebert, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 159; Donoghue v. Stevenson,
[1932] A.C. 562; The Queen in right of Canada v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool,
[1983] 1 S.C.R. 205; Arland v. Taylor, [1955] O.R. 131; Gouge v.
Three Top Investment Holdings Inc., [1994] O.J. No. 751 (QL); Snell v.
Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311.  Statutes and Regulations Cited    Liquor
Licence Act, R.S.O.
1980, c. 244, s. 53.  Authors Cited  Fleming, John G.  The Law of Torts,
8th ed.  Sydney:  Law Book Co., 1992.                     APPEAL and
CROSS-APPEAL from a judgment of the Alberta Court of Appeal (1993), 141 A.R. 4,
46 W.A.C. 4, 10 Alta. L.R. (3d) 113, [1993] 7 W.W.R. 320, 16 C.C.L.T. (2d) 197,
44 M.V.R. (2d) 165, allowing in part an appeal from a judgment of
Agrios J. (1991), 2 Alta. L.R. (3d) 97, [1992] 4 W.W.R. 532.  Appeal
allowed; cross-appeal dismissed.                     Daniel W. Hagg, Q.C., and Allan A.
Greber, for the appellant/cross-respondent Mayfield Investments Ltd.                      Written submission
only by Peter R. Chomicki, Q.C., for the
respondent/cross-respondent Stuart David Pettie.                     The judgment of the
Court was delivered by  1                 Major
J. -- On December 8, 1985, Gillian Stewart, her husband Keith Stewart,
her brother Stuart Pettie, and his wife Shelley Pettie went to the Stage West,
a dinner theatre in Edmonton for an evening of dinner and live theatre.  Before
the evening was finished tragedy had struck.  After leaving Stage West at the
conclusion of the evening a minor single vehicle accident left Gillian Stewart
a quadriplegic.  Among others, she sued Mayfield Investments Ltd. (Mayfield),
the owner of Stage West claiming contribution for her injuries. This appeal is
to decide whether on the facts of this case the principles of commercial host
liability, first established by this Court in Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow,
[1974] S.C.R. 239, apply to impose liability on Mayfield.  I.  The Facts  2                 Gillian Stewart and her
sister-in-law, Shelley Pettie, were both employed by Dispensaries Limited.  For
its 1985 Christmas party, Dispensaries Limited paid the price of admission for
its employees and their spouses and friends to attend a performance at Stage
West, a dinner theatre operated in Edmonton by the appellant, Mayfield
Investments Ltd., and located at the Mayfield Inn.  The admission price
included the dinner and performance, but did not include the cost of alcohol
consumed.  3                 The two sisters-in-law, with
their husbands, went to the dinner theatre together in Stuart Pettie's car,
with Stuart Pettie driving.  They arrived at the dinner theatre around 6:00
p.m., and were seated by a hostess at a table which they selected from a group
of tables which had been set aside for the approximately 60 people in the
Dispensaries Limited group.  4                 The dinner theatre was organized
with a full buffet dinner to be followed at 7:45 p.m. by a three-act play.  In
addition, cocktail waitresses provided table service of alcohol.  The Stewart
and Pettie table was served by the same waitress all evening, and she kept a
running total of all alcohol ordered, which she then presented at the end of
the evening for payment.  Waitresses would take drink orders during dinner and
before the play started, and would also take drink orders during the two
intermissions.  No orders were taken while the play was in progress.  5                 Stuart Pettie and Keith Stewart
each ordered several drinks over the course of the evening, ordering the first
drinks before dinner, and, in addition, ordering drinks after dinner but before
Act I, and then during each of the two intermissions.  Their wives, on the
other hand, had no alcohol during the entire evening.  They were present at the
table during the entire course of the evening, while the drinks were ordered,
served, and consumed.  Gillian Stewart's testimony was clear that she knew, at
least in general terms, the amount that Stuart Pettie had to drink during the
evening.  6                 Stuart Pettie was drinking
"double" rum and cokes throughout the evening.  The trial judge found
that he drank five to seven of these drinks, or 10 to 14 ounces of liquor.  The
trial judge also found that despite the amount that he had to drink, Stuart
Pettie exhibited no signs of intoxication.  This appearance was deceiving,
however, as he was intoxicated by the end of the evening.  7                 The group left the dinner
theatre around 11:00 p.m.  Once out in the parking lot, they had a discussion
amongst themselves about whether or not Stuart Pettie was fit to drive, given
the fact that he had been drinking.  Neither his wife, nor his sister (who
acknowledged that she knew what her brother was like when he was drunk), had
any concerns about letting Stuart Pettie drive.  All four therefore got into
the car and started home, with Stuart Pettie driving, Keith Stewart in the
front passenger seat, and their spouses in the back seat.  8                 That particular December night
in Edmonton there was a frost which made the roads unusually slippery.  The
trial judge found that Pettie was driving slower than the speed limit (50 km/h
in a 60 km/h zone), and also accepted the evidence of Gillian Stewart that he
was driving properly, safely and cautiously in the circumstances.  Despite his
caution, Stuart Pettie suddenly lost momentary control of the vehicle.  The car
swerved to the right, hopped the curb, and struck a light pole and noise
abatement wall which ran alongside the road.  Three of the four persons in the
vehicle suffered no serious injuries.  Gillian Stewart, however, who was not
wearing a seat belt, was thrown across the car, struck her head, and was
rendered a quadriplegic.  9                 The expert testimony at trial
was that had she been wearing her seat belt (which was not required in Alberta
in 1985) her injuries would have been prevented.  10               About an hour after the accident,
Stuart Pettie registered blood alcohol readings of .190 and .200.  The trial
judge found that, while it is not clear what his blood alcohol reading would
have been at the time of the accident, he was, without a doubt, intoxicated,
and that his blood alcohol content would have been certainly over .1.  11               The Stewarts brought an action
against Stuart Pettie, Mayfield, and the City of Edmonton.  The action as
against Stuart Pettie was settled, with Stuart Pettie admitting gross
negligence (as was necessary under then-existing legislation covering
gratuitous passengers).  The action as against the City of Edmonton was settled
prior to trial. The plaintiffs were unsuccessful at trial as against Mayfield
Investments Ltd., but the trial judge awarded a provisional 10 percent against
them in the event he was overturned on appeal.  He also assessed 25 percent
against Gillian Stewart for contributory negligence for failing to wear her
seat belt.  Finally, the trial judge found that Pettie's driving, while
negligent, was not grossly negligent.  12               The Court of Appeal allowed the
appeal and found that Mayfield was negligent.  They did not, however, disturb
the trial judge's apportionment, or his finding on the contributory negligence
or gross negligence issues.  Mayfield Investments Ltd. sought and was granted
leave to appeal to this Court, and the Stewarts sought and were granted leave
to cross-appeal the finding that Stuart Pettie was not grossly negligent in
this driving.  II. The Courts Below  Alberta Court of Queen's Bench (1991), 2 Alta. L.R. (3d) 97  13               Agrios J. found no liability on
the part of Mayfield.  He said that, in order for Mayfield to be liable, there
would have to be some combination of circumstances such as visible intoxication
and knowledge that Pettie was going to drive.  Here, Pettie was not obviously
intoxicated, and, even if he was, he was in the company of a sober wife and
sister, who were fully aware of the circumstances.  If they were not concerned,
it is unreasonable to expect that Mayfield should have been.  Therefore,
Mayfield was under no obligation to intervene.  14               Agrios J. then found that Pettie
was not grossly negligent in his driving, and assessed Gillian Stewart's
contributory negligence for failing to wear her seat belt at 25 percent.  Alberta Court of Appeal (1993), 10 Alta. L.R. (3d) 113  15               Writing for herself and Irving
J.A., Hetherington J.A. said that the waitress should have known Pettie was
becoming intoxicated, since she knew how much he had to drink.  The waitress
should also have known that he might leave by car, but she made no inquiries
about whether he planned to drive.  Mayfield breached two duties of care by
serving Pettie past the point of intoxication and then by failing to take any
steps to ensure that no harm came to third parties.  Hetherington J.A. said
that the presence of a sober wife and sister did not affect the foreseeability
of the fact that Pettie might drive.  16               Kerans J.A., writing a separate
concurring judgment, said that the judge erred in finding that Pettie had been
placed in the care of his sober wife and sister.  The fact that Pettie was
sitting with sober people is irrelevant without inquiries being made as to the
relationship between them.  The server ought to have known that Pettie was
intoxicated and that there was a risk that he might cause harm to third parties
as a result.  There was a foreseeable risk that Pettie might drive, and no
inquiries were made to check this.  The presence of the two sober people cannot
relieve Mayfield of liability, since there was no evidence that Mayfield knew
they had all come together in the same vehicle.  Had intervention been made, it
likely would have been effective to deter Stuart Pettie from driving.  17               Finally, in supplemental reasons,
the Court of Appeal declined to interfere with the trial judge's finding that
Stuart Pettie was not grossly negligent, or with his apportionment of
liability.  III.  Issues  18               There was one main issue argued
and two secondary issues. The main issue is:  1.  Did
Mayfield Investments Ltd. meet the standard of care required of a vendor of
alcohol, or was it negligent in failing to take any steps to ensure that Stuart
Pettie did not drive after leaving Stage West?  19               The two secondary issues, which
arise only if the appeal is dismissed, are:  2.Did
the Trial Judge and the Court of Appeal make a proper determination and
assessment on the Plaintiff's contributory negligence?  3.Did
the Trial Judge err in finding that Stuart Pettie was not grossly negligent? 
This question is necessitated by the legislative provisions of the Alberta Highway
Traffic Act, R.S.A. 1980, c. H-7, and the Alberta Contributory
Negligence Act, R.S.A. 1980, c. C-23, as they existed at the time of the
accident.  IV.  Analysis  1.Was
Mayfield Investments Ltd. negligent in failing to take any steps to ensure that
Stuart Pettie did not drive after leaving Stage West?  20               This Court has not previously
considered a case involving the liability of a commercial host where the
plaintiff was not the person who became inebriated in the defendant's
establishment.  In both Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow, supra, and Crocker
v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., [1988] 1 S.C.R. 1186, it was the
plaintiff who became drunk and as a consequence was unable to look after
himself.  21               There are a number of lower court
decisions in which commercial establishments have been found liable to third
parties injured by a patron who had become inebriated in their establishment. 
See Schmidt v. Sharpe (1983), 27 C.C.L.T. 1 (Ont. H.C.); Canada Trust
Co. v. Porter (1980), 2 A.C.W.S. (2d) 428 (Ont. C.A.); Gibbons v. Yates,
Ont. Co. Ct., June 17, 1982, unreported;  Sambell v. Hudago Enterprises Ltd.,
[1990] O.J. No. 2494 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)) (QL); and Hague v. Billings
(1989), 48 C.C.L.T. 192 (Ont. H.C.), aff'd in part (1993), 13 O.R. (3d) 298
(C.A.).  22               The present appeal is one in which
a third party is claiming against the commercial host.  This raises the
question of whether the establishment owed any duty of care to that third
party.  If a duty of care is found to exist, then it is necessary to consider
what standard of care was necessary and whether that standard was met.  23               Another consideration is whether
there was a causal connection between the defendant's allegedly negligent
conduct and the damage suffered by the plaintiff.                     A.   Duty of
Care  24               The "modern" approach to
determining the existence of a duty of care is that established by the House of
Lords in Anns v. Merton London Borough Council, [1978] A.C. 728, and
adopted by this Court in City of Kamloops v. Nielsen, [1984] 2 S.C.R. 2,
at pp. 10-11.  This test, as established by Wilson J. in Kamloops,
paraphrasing Anns is:  (1)is
there a sufficiently close relationship between the parties . . . so that, in
the reasonable contemplation of the authority, carelessness on its part might
cause damage to that person?  If so,  (2)are
there any considerations which ought to negative or limit (a) the scope of the
duty and (b) the class of persons to whom it is owed or (c) the damages to
which a breach of it may give rise?  25               This approach has been approved in
Just v. British Columbia, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1228, and Hall v. Hebert,
[1993] 2 S.C.R. 159.  The basis of the test is the historic case of Donoghue
v. Stevenson, [1932] A.C. 562, which established the "neighbour
principle": that actors owe a duty of care to those whom they ought
reasonably have in contemplation as being at risk when they act.  26               In Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow,
supra, it was established that a duty of care exists between
alcohol-serving establishments and their patrons who become intoxicated, with
the result that they were unable to look after themselves. The plaintiff, who
was a well-known patron of that bar, became intoxicated and began annoying
customers.  He was ejected from the bar, even though the waiters and employees
of the bar knew that, in order to get home, he would have to walk along a busy
highway.  While doing so, he was struck by a car.  Laskin J. (as he then was)
said that the bar owed a duty of care to Menow not to place him in a situation
where he was at risk of injury.  He said (at pp. 247-48):  If
the hotel's only involvement was the supplying of the beer consumed by Menow,
it would be difficult to support the imposition of common law liability upon it
for injuries suffered by Menow after being shown the door of the hotel and
after leaving the hotel. . . .  The hotel, however, was not in the position of
persons in general who see an intoxicated person who appears to be unable to
control his steps.  It was in an invitor-invitee relationship with Menow as one
of its patrons, and it was aware, through its employees, of his intoxicated
condition, a condition which, on the findings of the trial judge, it fed in
violation of applicable liquor licence and liquor control legislation.  There
was a probable risk of personal injury to Menow if he was turned out of the
hotel to proceed on foot on a  much-travelled highway passing in front of the
hotel.                     There
is, in my opinion, nothing unreasonable in calling upon the hotel in such
circumstances to take care to see that Menow is not exposed to injury because
of his intoxication.  27               Laskin J. held that the hotel had
breached the duty owed to Menow by turning him out of the hotel in
circumstances in which they knew that he would have to walk along the highway. 
The risk to Menow that the hotel's actions created was foreseeable.  The hotel
was therefore found to be liable for one-third of Menow's injuries.  28               It is a logical step to move from
finding that a duty of care is owed to patrons of the bar to finding that a
duty is also owed to third parties who might reasonably be expected to come
into contact with the patron, and to whom the patron may pose some risk.  It is
clear that a bar owes a duty of care to patrons, and as a result, may be
required to prevent an intoxicated patron from driving where it is apparent
that he intends to drive.  Equally such a duty is owed, in that situation, to
third parties who may be using the highways.  In fact, it is the same problem
which creates the risk to the third parties as creates the risk to the patron. 
If the patron drives while intoxicated and is involved in an accident, it is
only chance which results in the patron being injured rather than a third
party.  The risk to third parties from the patron's intoxicated driving is real
and foreseeable.  29               In this case, there was a
sufficient degree of proximity between Mayfield Investments Ltd. and Gillian
Stewart that a duty of care existed between them.  The more difficult question
is what was the standard of care and whether or not it was breached.  30               Before moving to the standard of
care test, two points deserve comment.  In so far as the existence of a duty of
care is concerned it is irrelevant that Gillian Stewart was a passenger in the
vehicle driven by the patron rather than the passenger or driver of another
vehicle, other than for ancillary purposes such as contributory negligence. 
The duty of care arises because Gillian Stewart was a member of a class of
persons who could be expected to be on the highway.  It is this class of
persons to whom the duty is owed.  31               On the second point, the
respondents argue that Mayfield Investments Ltd. owed two duties of care to
Gillian Stewart: first, not to serve Stuart Pettie past the point of
intoxication, and second, having served him past the point of intoxication, to
take positive steps to ensure that he did not drive a car.  The respondents say
that Mayfield breached both duties, and therefore should be liable to Gillian
Stewart for her injuries.  32               I believe this argument confuses
the existence of the duty of care with the standard of care required of
Mayfield.  The question of whether a duty of care exists is a question of the
relationship between the parties, not a question of conduct.  The question of
what conduct is required to satisfy the duty is a question of the appropriate
standard of care.  The point is made by Fleming in his book The Law of Torts
(8th ed. 1992), at pp. 105-6:                     The
general standard of conduct required by law is a necessary complement of the
legal concept of "duty".  There is not only the question "Did
the defendant owe a duty to be careful?" but also "What precisely was
required of him to discharge it?"  Indeed, it is not uncommon to encounter
formulations of the standard of care in terms of "duty", as when it
is asserted that a motorist is under a duty to keep a proper lookout or give a
turn signal.  But this method of expression is best avoided.  In the first
place, the duty issue is already sufficiently complex without fragmenting it
further to cover an endless series of details of conduct.  "Duty" is
more appropriately reserved for the problem of whether the relation between the
parties (like manufacturer and consumer or occupier and trespasser) warrants
the imposition upon one of an obligation of care for the benefit of the other,
and it is more convenient to deal with individual conduct in terms of the legal
standard of what is required to meet that obligation.  Secondly, it is apt to
obscure the division of functions between judge and jury.  It is for the court
to determine the existence of a duty relationship and to lay down in general
terms the standard of care by which to measure the defendant's conduct; it is
for the jury to translate the general into a particular standard suitable for
the case in hand and to decide whether that standard has been attained.  33               There is no question that
commercial vendors of alcohol owe a general duty of care to persons who can be
expected to use the highways.  To paraphrase Wilson J. in City of Kamloops
v. Nielsen, it clearly ought to be in the reasonable contemplation of such
people that carelessness on their part might cause injury to such third
parties.  It remains to determine what standard of care is necessary to
discharge the duty.                     B.    Standard
of Care  34               Laskin J. said in Jordan House
Ltd. v. Menow, supra, at p. 247, "The common law assesses
liability for negligence on the basis of breach of a duty of care arising from
a foreseeable and unreasonable risk of harm to one person created by the act or
omission of another."  The respondents argued, and the Court of Appeal
agreed, that Mayfield was negligent because they (a) served Stuart Pettie past
the point of intoxication, and (b) failed to take any steps to prevent harm
from coming to himself or a third person once he was intoxicated.    37               Historically, the courts have been
reluctant to impose liability for a failure by an individual to take some
positive action. This reluctance has been tempered in recent years where the
relationship between the parties is such that the imposition of such an
obligation has been warranted.  In those cases, there has been some
"special relationship" between the parties warranting the imposition
of a positive duty. Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow, supra, was such a
case.  38               A similar positive obligation was
found to exist in Crocker v. Sundance Northwest Resorts Ltd., supra.
The plaintiff entered a "tubing" competition put on by the defendant
ski-hill.  Before the race, the plaintiff became drunk in the ski-hill's bar,
and by the time he was to race, was visibly intoxicated.  The organizers of the
race suggested that he not compete, but permitted him to do so nevertheless. 
As a result, he was thrown from his tube, and rendered a quadriplegic.  39               In finding liability on the part
of the owner Sundance, Wilson J. noted that courts have increasingly required a
duty to act where there is a "special relationship" between the
parties.  Canadian courts have been willing to expand the kinds of
relationships to which a positive duty to act attaches.  Wilson J. reviewed
cases where the courts will require a positive action on the part of the
defendant, and said at p. 1197:  The
common thread running through these cases is that one is under a duty not to
place another person in a position where it is foreseeable that the person
could suffer injury.  40               Wilson J. said that, given the
fact that the activity was under Sundance's full control and was promoted by it
for commercial gain, Sundance was under a positive obligation as the promoter
of a dangerous sport to take all reasonable steps to prevent a visibly
incapacitated person from participating.  She concluded that these precautions
were not taken.  41               It is apparent from Wilson J.'s
reasoning that there are two questions to be answered.  The first is whether
the defendant was required, in the circumstances, to take any positive steps at
all.  If this is answered in the affirmative, the next question is whether the
steps taken by the defendants were sufficient to discharge the burden placed on
them.  42               There is no dispute that neither
the appellant nor anyone on its behalf took any steps to ensure that Stuart Pettie
did not drive.  Mayfield suggested that they remained "vigilant" and
maintained "careful observation" of Stuart Pettie, and that this
should be sufficient.  However, remaining "vigilant" is not the same
as taking positive steps, and it is common ground that none of Mayfield's
employees made inquires about whether Stuart Pettie intended to drive or
suggested any alternative.  Therefore, if Mayfield is to avoid liability, it
will have to be on the basis that, on the facts of this case, Mayfield had no obligation
to take any positive steps to ensure that Stuart Pettie did not drive.  43               As mentioned, there are lower
court decisions which hold that a special relationship exists between beverage
rooms and members of the motoring public. In the result they will be liable to
an injured third party for failing to take adequate steps to prevent an
intoxicated patron from driving.  In Hague v. Billings, supra, a
highly intoxicated driver visited two different bars before becoming involved
in an accident in which one person was killed and another seriously injured. 
After the first bar had refused to serve him more than one beer because he was
obviously intoxicated, he went to the second bar.  The second bar continued to
serve the driver even though he was clearly intoxicated.  They also failed to
make any attempt to learn if, on leaving he planned to drive.  44               The trial judge followed the
Ontario Court of Appeal's earlier decision in Canada Trust Co. v. Porter,
supra, which held that the duty prescribed in s. 53 of the Liquor
Licence Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 244, and the common law duty were
co-extensive.  This section provided a statutory cause of action against a
vendor of alcohol for injury or damage caused by a patron who became
intoxicated in that establishment.  The trial judge in Hague v. Billings
found no liability on the part of the first bar, since they refused to serve
the driver after discovering that he was intoxicated.  The second bar was held
to be liable, as they had not stopped serving the driver, even though he was
obviously intoxicated.  In addition they made no attempt to discover whether he
planned to drive, even though the bar was located on a highway and the only
practical way to get there was to drive.  While the apportionment of liability
was varied, this decision was affirmed on appeal.  45               Similarly, in Sambell v. Hudago
Enterprises Ltd., supra, the driver became drunk in the defendant's
bar, and injured a passenger in his vehicle.  As in Porter, supra,
the trial judge in Sambell held that s. 53 of the Ontario Liquor
Licence Act provides a statutory action against bars for people injured as
a result of a patron of the bar becoming drunk.  He also held that there was a
parallel liability at common law (per Gautreau J.):                     I
feel that they are liable both under the Liquor License Act and at common law.
There is a high standard of care imposed on a tavern and its staff. The Squire
Tavern people were oblivious to their duty.  They knew these people were
driving. They knew or should have known that they were intoxicated. They added
to the level of intoxication by serving them more. I think that the standard
maintained by the Squire was too low. Drinks would only be refused if the
person was "too loud, starting arguments, knocking over drinks or falling
down". It appears that the key to the instructions given to the waitresses
was whether the patron was creating problems for the staff or upsetting other
patrons. This is not enough.                     The
law is clear that at common law a tavern owner also owes a duty to take
positive action to protect patrons and others from the dangers of intoxication.  46               The decisions of the Ontario
Courts in this area may have been influenced by the existence of provincial
legislation.  The case at bar, being from Alberta must in the absence of
comparable legislation, be decided on the common law.  47               There is little difficulty with
the proposition, supported by the above cases, that the necessary "special
relationship" exists between vendors of alcohol and the motoring public. 
This is no more than a restatement of the fact, already mentioned, that a
general duty of care exists between establishments in Mayfield's position and
persons using the highways.  48               I do, however, have difficulty
accepting the proposition that the mere existence of this "special
relationship", without more, permits the imposition of a positive obligation
to act.  Every person who enters a bar or restaurant is in an invitor-invitee
relationship with the establishment, and is therefore in a "special
relationship" with that establishment.  However, it does not make sense to
suggest that, simply as a result of this relationship, a commercial host cannot
consider other relevant factors in determining whether in the circumstances
positive steps are necessary.  49               The existence of this
"special relationship" will frequently warrant the imposition of a
positive obligation to act, but the sine qua non of tortious liability
remains the foreseeability of the risk.  Where no risk is foreseeable as a
result of the circumstances, no action will be required, despite the existence
of a special relationship.  The respondents argue that Mayfield should have
taken positive action, even though Mayfield knew that the driver was with three
other people, two of whom were sober, and it was reasonable to infer from all
of the circumstances that the group was travelling together.  50               One of the primary purposes of
negligence law is to enforce reasonable standards of conduct so as to prevent
the creation of reasonably foreseeable risks.  In this way, tort law serves as
a disincentive to risk-creating behaviour.  To impose liability even where the
risk which materialized was not reasonably foreseeable is to lay a portion of
the loss at the feet of a party who has, in the circumstances, acted
reasonably.  Tort law does not require the wisdom of Solomon.  All it requires
is that people act reasonably in the circumstances.  The "reasonable
person" of negligence law was described by Laidlaw J.A. in this way in Arland
v. Taylor, [1955] O.R. 131 (C.A.), at p. 142:  He
is not an extraordinary or unusual creature; he is not superhuman; he is not
required to display the highest skill of which anyone is capable; he is not a
genius who can perform uncommon feats, nor is he possessed of unusual powers of
foresight.  He is a person of normal intelligence who makes prudence a guide to
his conduct.  He does nothing that a prudent man would not do and does not omit
to do anything a prudent man would do. He acts in accord with general and
approved practice. His conduct is guided by considerations which ordinarily
regulate the conduct of human affairs.  His conduct is the standard
"adopted in the community by persons of ordinary intelligence and
prudence."  51               Obviously, the fact that tragedy
has befallen Gillian Stewart cannot, in itself, lead to a finding of liability
on the part of Mayfield.  The question is whether, before 11:00 p.m. on
December 8, 1985, the circumstances were such that a reasonably prudent
establishment should have foreseen that Stuart Pettie would drive, and
therefore should have taken steps to prevent this.  52               I agree with the Court of Appeal
that Mayfield cannot escape liability simply because Stuart Pettie was
apparently not exhibiting any visible signs of intoxication.  The waitress kept
a running tab, and knew that Pettie had consumed 10 to 14 ounces of alcohol
over a five-hour period.  On the basis of this knowledge alone, she either knew
or should have known that Pettie was becoming intoxicated, and this is so
whether or not he was exhibiting visible symptoms.  53               However, I disagree with the Court
of Appeal that the presence of the two sober women at the table cannot act to
relieve Mayfield of liability. Laskin J. in Jordan House Ltd. v. Menow, supra,
made it clear that the hotel's duty to Menow in that case could have been
discharged by making sure "that he got home safely by taking him under its
charge or putting him under the charge of a responsible person . .
." (p. 249, emphasis added).  Had Pettie been alone and intoxicated,
Mayfield could have discharged its duty as established in Jordan House Ltd.
v. Menow by calling Pettie's wife or sister to take charge of him.  How,
then, can Mayfield be liable when Pettie was already in their charge, and they
knew how much he had had to drink?  While it is technically true that Stuart
Pettie was not "put into" the care of his sober wife and sister, this
is surely a matter of semantics.  He was already in their care, and they knew
how much he had to drink. It is not reasonable to suggest in these
circumstances that Mayfield had to do more.  54               Mayfield would have known that the
group arrived together, that they spent the evening together, and that they
left together.  In addition, they would have known that they were part of the
Dispensaries Limited company Christmas party, and that two sober adults were
present at the table when the drinks were ordered and consumed.  In the circumstances,
it was reasonable for Mayfield to assume that the four people at the table were
not travelling separately, and it was reasonable for Mayfield to assume that
one of the two sober people who were at the table would either drive or find
alternative transportation.  55               The trial judge was correct in
concluding on these facts that it was not necessary for Mayfield to enquire who
was driving or that it would have made any difference if they had. It was not
reasonably foreseeable that Stuart Pettie would be driving when a sober wife
and sister were present with full knowledge of the circumstances.  56               I agree that establishments which
serve alcohol must either intervene in appropriate circumstances or risk
liability, and that this liability cannot be avoided where the establishment
has intentionally structured the environment in such a way as to make it
impossible to know whether intervention is necessary.  Such was the situation
in Canada Trust Co. v. Porter, supra, where the alcohol was
served from behind a bar and it was impossible for the establishment either to
monitor the amount consumed or to determine whether intervention was
necessary.  A similar situation arose in Gouge v. Three Top Investment
Holdings Inc., [1994] O.J. No. 751 (Ont. Ct. (Gen. Div.)) (QL), where the
plaintiff attended a company Christmas party which had a "cash bar",
over-indulged, and then was involved in an accident.  In such circumstances, it
would not be open to the establishment to claim that they could not foresee the
risk created when the inability to foresee the risk was the direct result of
the way the serving environment was structured.  57               However that was not the situation
here. Mayfield was aware of the circumstances in which Stuart Pettie was
drinking. In the environment of the case at bar, it was not reasonable for them
to intervene.  58               On the facts of this case I
conclude that Mayfield Investments Ltd. did not breach the duty of care they
owed to Gillian Stewart.  On this basis I would allow the appeal.                     C.   Causation  59               An equally compelling reason to
allow this appeal flows from the absence of proof of causation.  60               The plaintiff in a tort action has
the burden of proving each of the elements of the claim on the balance of
probabilities.  This includes proving that the defendant's impugned conduct
actually caused the loss complained of.  61               Here, the appellant claims that
the respondents have not proved that the failure of Mayfield to intervene
actually caused the injuries to Gillian Stewart.  They point to the
conversation that took place in the parking lot after the group left Stage
West, and argue that, even if Mayfield had intervened in some way, Gillian
Stewart and Shelley Pettie addressed the issue of Stuart Pettie's fitness to
drive in the parking lot after leaving the Mayfield Inn, and came to an
independent determination on this point.  62               Kerans J.A., in a separate
concurring judgment in the Court of Appeal, resolved this issue as follows, at
p. 124:  Had
the server made the sort of comment I just suggested, I am of the view that the
conversation relied upon would have come to a different conclusion. . . .  Her
intervention, in my view, probably would have made the difference.  63               (Hetherington J.A., writing for
the majority in the Court of Appeal, did not comment on the question of whether
Gillian Stewart and Shelley Pettie would have decided to let Stuart Pettie
drive even if Mayfield had intervened.)  64               With respect, this statement is
based on pure speculation.  The fact is that there is no evidence on the
question of whether Gillian Stewart and Shelley Pettie would have come to the
same or a different conclusion had Mayfield intervened in some way.  We are therefore
left with an evidentiary gap on this issue.  65               There has progressively been
developments in tort law which lessen the burden facing a plaintiff in trying
to prove that the defendant's actions actually caused the loss complained of. 
See Snell v. Farrell, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 311.  This makes the plaintiff's
task less onerous where there is some inherent difficulty in proving causation
with scientific accuracy, or where the facts surrounding causation lie uniquely
within the knowledge of the defendant.  66               However, that is not the situation
here.  There is nothing unusual or difficult in this case about proving
causation.  Nor do the facts lie particularly within the knowledge of the
defendant. The person who had the obligation and could have provided some evidence,
if such existed, on whether intervention by Mayfield would have made any
difference was the injured Gillian Stewart.  She testified at the trial, but
not on this point. This leaves the inference that had she been asked if
Mayfield's had intervened, that is to advise her of facts already known to her
that would have made any difference to her decision to have Pettie drive, her
answer would have been no.  67               That answer would accord with the
circumstances.  The respondent Stewart, in the company of an equally sober
sister-in-law, concluded that Pettie was competent to drive.  The courts should
not interfere in such decisions freely made.  68               This is not a case where the fact
of causation is so patently obvious as to require no proof.  Nor is it a case
where there is a natural inference of causation from established facts, such
that the defendant has to lead evidence negativing causation.  It is a case
where there is no evidence to indicate that Gillian Stewart and Shelley Pettie
would have reached any other conclusion than the one they reached even if
Mayfield had intervened.  69               I would therefore also allow this
appeal on the basis that the plaintiffs have failed to discharge the onus
placed on them to show that Mayfield's failure to intervene actually caused
Gillian Stewart's injuries.  70               Given the fact that I do not find
any liability on the part of Mayfield Investments Ltd., it is unnecessary to
address the issues relating to Gillian Stewart's contributory negligence, or
whether the fact that Stuart Pettie drove while intoxicated could be said to
be, in itself, gross negligence.  V.  Disposition  71               I would allow the appeal and
dismiss the action against Mayfield Investments Ltd. with costs throughout.  72               I would dismiss the cross-appeal
by Gillian Stewart and Keith Stewart against the finding by the courts below
that Stuart Pettie was not grossly negligent.                     Appeal allowed with
costs; cross-appeal dismissed.                     Solicitors for the
appellant/cross-respondent Mayfield Investments Ltd.:  Bryan &
Company, Edmonton.                     Solicitors for the
respondents/cross-appellants Gillian Stewart and Keith
Stewart:  Bishop & McKenzie, Edmonton.                     Solicitors for the
respondent/cross-respondent Stuart David Pettie:  Chomicki, Baril,
Edmonton.  