  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation:
  R. v. Vokurka, 2014 SCC 22, [2014]
  1 S.C.R. 498 Date:
  20140321 Docket:
  35510  Between: Eric
Vokurka Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent    Coram: LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 2) Abella J. (LeBel, Rothstein, Moldaver and
  Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)   R.
v. Vokurka, 2014 SCC 22, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 498    Eric Vokurka                                                                                                  Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent    Indexed as:  R.
v. Vokurka    2014 SCC 22    File No.:  35510.    2014:  March 21.    Present:  LeBel,
Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.    on appeal from the court
of appeal for newfoundland and labrador                      Criminal
law — Reasonable verdict — Defences — Accident — Trial judge did not err in
concluding that accused intentionally inflicted victim’s injuries — Inferences
made in support of trial judge’s verdict reasonably supported by evidence —
Basis for excluding possibility of accident adequately explained by trial
judge.                      APPEAL
from a judgment of the Newfoundland and Labrador Court of Appeal (Welsh, Barry
and Hoegg JJ.A.), 2013 NLCA 51, 339 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 248, 1054 A.P.R. 248,
[2013] N.J. No. 267 (QL), 2013 CarswellNfld 286, upholding the accused’s
conviction for aggravated assault.  Appeal dismissed.                      Keir O’Flaherty and Bob Buckingham, for the appellant.                      Iain R. W. Hollett, for the respondent.                      The
judgment of the Court was delivered orally by  [1]               Abella J. — The critical issue at trial was whether Mr. Vokurka
intentionally inflicted the victim’s injuries. The majority in the Court of
Appeal found that the trial judge’s findings of fact, inferences drawn from
those facts, and the finding of guilt were reasonable.  [2]               The
dissenting judge was of the view that the trial judge erred in failing to
adequately consider and explain why, in her view, the “equally plausible
explanation” supporting the defence of accident was not accepted.  We do not
agree, and agree instead with the majority that the trial judge adequately
explained why he rejected the possibility of accident and found that the charge
was proved beyond a reasonable doubt.  The trial judge set out the evidence of
the victim’s statements, a doctor’s expert evidence about the nature of the
wound, and the victim’s reaction to being cut, all of which led him clearly to
the view that there was no “equally plausible explanation” for the
cutting. He reviewed the relevant evidence and set out his reasons for
concluding beyond a reasonable doubt that the injuries were intentionally
inflicted. His inferences were reasonably supported by the evidence. Like the
majority in the Court of Appeal, we see no error on his approach. It was not
open to the dissenting judge, with respect, to reweigh the evidence by
substituting her own view of it. The
appeal is therefore dismissed.                      Judgment
accordingly.                      Solicitors for the
appellant:  Bob Buckingham Law, St. John’s.                      Solicitor for the
respondent:  Attorney General of Newfoundland and Labrador, St. John’s.  