SCC Case Information: 36472   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Paterson, 2017 SCC 15, [2017] 1 S.C.R.
  202 Appeal
  heard: November 2, 2016 Judgment
  rendered: March 17, 2017 Docket: 36472  Between: Brendan
Paterson Appellant  and  Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent  - and –  Attorney
General of Ontario, Attorney General of Alberta and British Columbia Civil
Liberties Association Interveners   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner,
Gascon and Brown JJ.  Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to
  59)  Dissenting Reasons: (paras. 60 to
  99) Brown J. (McLachlin C.J. and Abella,
  Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. concurring)  Moldaver J. (Gascon J. concurring)      R.
v. Paterson, 2017 SCC 15, [2017] 1
S.C.R. 202 Brendan Paterson                                                                                            Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney General of Alberta and British Columbia Civil
Liberties Association                                              Interveners Indexed as: R. v. Paterson 2017 SCC 15 File No.: 36472. 2016: November 2; 2017: March 17. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner, Gascon and Brown JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia                     Constitutional
law — Charter of Rights  — Search and seizure — Exclusion of evidence — Accused
admitting to police to having marihuana in his residence — Accused allowing
police to seize roaches after being told this would be “no case” seizure —
Warrantless entry by police into residence resulting in police seeing other
drugs and weapon and arresting accused — Whether “exigent circumstances”, within
meaning of s. 11(7)  of Controlled Drugs and Substances Act , made it “impracticable” to obtain
warrant before entering and searching residence — Whether
accused’s Charter  right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure
infringed — If so, whether evidence obtained from warrantless entry and search
of residence should be excluded — Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996,
c. 19, s. 11(7)  — Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms, ss. 8 , 24(2) .                     Criminal
law — Evidence — Admissibility — Voir dire — Accused admitting to police to
having marihuana in his residence — Whether Crown required to prove voluntariness of
accused’s statement prior to its admission at voir dire considering lawfulness
of entry and search of accused’s residence — Whether
common law confessions rule should apply to statements tendered in context of
voir dire under Charter .                     This case arises from a warrantless entry by police officers into
the apartment of the accused, P, which followed his agreement to surrender
several marihuana roaches. The police told P they would treat this as a “no
case” seizure, meaning that they intended to seize the roaches without charging
him. Once inside, the police observed a bulletproof vest, a firearm and drugs.
They arrested P and obtained a telewarrant to search his apartment, which led
to the discovery of other firearms and drugs and to charges against P. P was
convicted at trial and the Court of Appeal of British Columbia upheld the
convictions. The Court of Appeal rejected P’s argument that the common law
confessions rule should have precluded the admission of his statement about the
roaches at the voir dire, as the Crown did not prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that his statement was voluntarily made.                     Held (Moldaver and Gascon dissenting): The appeal should be
allowed, the convictions set aside and acquittals entered.                     Per McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Karakatsanis, Wagner and Brown JJ.:
The confessions rule should
not be expanded to apply to statements tendered in the context of a voir
dire under the Charter . The Crown must prove the voluntariness of an
accused’s statement before it can rely upon that statement at trial as
supporting a finding of guilt. The purpose of the
judicial inquiry in a Charter voir dire is distinct from the purpose of
a criminal trial. A criminal trial is concerned with determining whether the
accused is guilty of an offence. In a Charter voir dire, however, the
focus is not on the accused’s guilt, but on whether the accused’s
constitutional rights were infringed. A Charter voir dire therefore involves
a review of the totality of the circumstances known to, and relied upon, by the
state actor at the time of the impugned action. Only the state actor’s contemporary state of mind and
conduct is at issue, and not the truthfulness of the statement upon which he or
she relied. It is for this reason that the truthfulness
of a statement has no bearing upon its admissibility; rather, the inquiry is
focussed upon whether it was reasonable for the state actor to rely upon the
statement as forming grounds for the action under scrutiny. Admitting a statement by an accused for the
purpose of assessing the constitutionality of state action, as opposed to the
purpose of determining the accused’s guilt, does not engage the rationale for
the confessions rule. To apply the confessions rule to evidence presented at a Charter
voir dire would distort both the rule and its rationale. It would stifle
police investigations, compromise public safety and needlessly lengthen and
complicate voir dire proceedings.                     The
warrantless entry by the police into P’s residence was
not justified by “exigent circumstances” making it “impracticable” to obtain a
warrant, within the meaning of s. 11(7) of the Controlled Drug and Substances Act (“CDSA”). It therefore infringed P’s rights under s. 8  of the Charter .
“[E]xigent circumstances”
denotes not merely convenience, propitiousness or economy, but rather urgency.
Even where exigent circumstances are present, however, they are not, on their
own, sufficient to justify a warrantless search of a residence under
s. 11(7) . Those circumstances must render it “impracticable” to obtain a
warrant. In order for a warrantless entry to satisfy
s. 11(7) , the Crown must show that the entry was compelled by urgency,
calling for immediate police action to preserve evidence, officer safety or
public safety. Further, this urgency must be shown to have been such that taking the time to obtain a warrant
would pose serious risk to those imperatives.                     In
this case, no urgency compelled immediate action in order to preserve evidence.
Nor, just as importantly, did the circumstances presented by P’s admission to
having some partially consumed roaches, coupled with the police officers’ wish
to seize them on a no case basis, make it impracticable to obtain a warrant.
Section 11(7)  is not satisfied by mere inconvenience, but
impracticability. Here, the police had a practicable option: to arrest P and
obtain a warrant to enter the residence and seize the roaches. If the situation
was not serious enough to arrest and apply for a warrant, then it cannot have
been serious enough to intrude into a private residence without a warrant.
Further, concern for officer safety did not drive the decision to proceed with
warrantless entry; rather, warrantless entry gave rise to concern for officer
safety.                     The evidence obtained as a result of the
entry and search of P’s residence should be excluded under s. 24(2)  of the
Charter  as its admission would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. The police conduct,
while not egregious, represented a serious departure from well-established
constitutional norms. These police officers were not operating in unknown legal
territory: their intention to effect a seizure on a “no case” basis was legally
insignificant, in light of the well-established legal principles governing the
authority of police to enter a residence without a warrant. The balancing of the relevant factors — seriousness of state
conduct, seriousness of the infringement of Charter  rights and the
impact upon society’s interest in adjudication — will never be an entirely
objective exercise. While the effective destruction of the Crown’s case weighs
heavily, so does the warrantless entry into a private residence, having
occurred to prevent P from destroying three roaches which the police themselves
intended to destroy. It is important not to allow the third factor of society’s
interest in adjudicating a case on its merits to trump all other
considerations, particularly where, as here, the impugned conduct was serious
and worked a substantial impact on P’s Charter  right. Considering all
these factors separately and together, the importance of ensuring that such
conduct is not condoned by the court favours exclusion.                     Per Moldaver and Gascon JJ. (dissenting): The majority analysis and conclusion on the voluntariness issue is agreed with. Contrary to the findings of the trial judge
and three judges of the Court of Appeal, it is agreed that the police entry
into P’s apartment was unlawful and in breach of his s. 8  privacy rights.
However, the firearms and drugs seized by the police from P’s apartment were properly
admitted into evidence and the appeal should be dismissed.                     The
function of this Court, in a case like the present one, is to clarify the law
so that police officers, defence and Crown counsel, trial and appellate judges
and the public at large can know what the law is and how it is to be applied in
future cases. It is not to judge the police conduct against a standard that
exceeds the wisdom and training of experienced trial and appellate judges. In
an effort to clarify the law, it is accepted that s. 11(7) of the Controlled Drug and Substances Act was not available to the police on the facts of this
case. Rather, in the circumstances, the police had three options available to
them. They could have (1) tried to obtain P’s lawful consent to enter his
apartment and seize the roaches; (2) arrested P and obtained a warrant to
search his apartment and seize the roaches; or (3) thrown up their hands
and walked away, in dereliction of their duty to seize illicit drugs, even if
only to catalogue and destroy them. That said, it is hardly fair to castigate
the police for their conduct when prior to this case, the legal boundaries of
s. 11(7)  in the context of a “no case” seizure were at best unclear. One
need only look to the lower court decisions to realize this.                     This
Court has consistently held that legal uncertainty is a factor which a court
may take into account in assessing the seriousness of a Charter  breach
occasioned by police conduct. Where the law is evolving or in a state of
uncertainty, and where the police are found to have acted in good faith,
without ignorance or wilful or flagrant disregard of an accused’s Charter  rights,
the seriousness of the breach may be attenuated.                     In
this case, the seriousness of the breach is clearly attenuated by the uncertainty
surrounding the interpretation of s. 11(7) of the CDSA in the context of a “no case” seizure, and the strong findings of
the trial judge that the police were acting in good faith throughout. The
impact of the police entry on P’s privacy interest is also attenuated because
the evidence was lawfully discoverable if the police had obtained a warrant.                     In
sum, the police, acting in good faith, made a mistake about their authority to
enter P’s apartment under the auspices of s. 11(7)  in a “no case” seizure
— the same mistake that the lower courts made. The cumulative effect of legal
uncertainty, police good faith, and the discoverability and reliability of
critical evidence needed for there to be a trial on the merits resolves the
balance in favour of admitting the evidence. In these circumstances, it is the
exclusion of reliable and crucial evidence implicating P in very serious gun
and drug offences that is far more likely to cause the public to lose faith and
confidence in our criminal justice system. That said, in a case like this one,
it is possible that an alternative remedy short of the exclusion of evidence,
such as a sentence reduction, might be available under s. 24(1)  of the Charter .
Since this was not argued, it must be left for another day. Cases Cited By Brown J.                     Applied:
R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC 32, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353; referred to: R.
v. Hodgson, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 449; Ibrahim v. The King, [1914] A.C.
599; Boudreau v. The King, [1949] S.C.R. 262; Rothman v. The Queen,
[1981] 1 S.C.R. 640; R. v. Hebert, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 151; R. v. S.
(R.J.), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 451; R. v. MacKenzie, 2013 SCC 50, [2013] 3
S.C.R. 250; R. v. Orbanski, 2005 SCC 37, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 3; R. v.
Soules, 2011 ONCA 429, 105 O.R. (3d) 561; Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd.
(Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27; Canadian Broadcasting Corp. v. SODRAC 2003
Inc., 2015 SCC 57, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 615; R. v. Grant, [1993] 3 S.C.R.
223; R. v. Feeney, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 13; R. v. Silveira, [1995] 2
S.C.R. 297; R. v. MacDonald, 2014 SCC 3, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 37; R. v.
Macooh, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 802; R. v. Erickson, 2003
BCCA 693, 192 B.C.A.C. 203; R. v. Buhay, 2003
SCC 30, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 631; R. v. Harrison, 2009 SCC 34, [2009] 2
S.C.R. 494; R. v. McGuffie, 2016 ONCA 365, 348 O.A.C. 365. By Moldaver J. (dissenting)                     R.
v. Erickson, 2003 BCCA 693, 192 B.C.A.C. 203; R. v. Grant, [1993] 3
S.C.R. 223; R. v. Feeney, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 13; R. v. M. (N.) (2007),
223 C.C.C. (3d) 417; R. v. Silveira, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 297; R. v. Cole,
2012 SCC 53, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 34; R. v. Aucoin, 2012 SCC 66, [2012] 3
S.C.R. 408; R. v. Vu, 2013 SCC 60, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 657; R. v. Spencer,
2014 SCC 43, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 212; R. v. Fearon, 2014 SCC 77, [2014] 3
S.C.R. 621. Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 7 , 8 , 9 , 24(1) ,(2) . Controlled Drugs and Substances Act,
S.C. 1996, c. 19, s. 11(1) , (2) , (7) . Authors Cited Canada. Federal/Provincial Task Force on Uniform Rules of Evidence. Report
of the Federal/Provincial Task Force on Uniform Rules of Evidence. Toronto:
Carswell, 1982. Lederman, Sidney N., Alan W. Bryant and Michelle K.
Fuerst. The Law of Evidence in Canada, 4th ed. Markham, Ont.:
LexisNexis, 2014. Penney, Steven, Vincenzo Rondinelli and James Stribopoulos. Criminal
Procedure in Canada. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2011.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (Lowry, Frankel and Bennett JJ.A.),
2015 BCCA 205, 372 B.C.A.C. 148, 640 W.A.C. 148, 324 C.C.C. (3d) 305, 340
C.R.R. (2d) 41, [2015] B.C.J. No. 946 (QL), 2015 CarswellBC 1256 (WL
Can.), affirming the convictions for possession of controlled substances,
possession of controlled substances for the purpose of trafficking and
possession of prohibited or restricted firearms entered by Blok J., 2012
BCSC 1680, [2012] B.C.J. No. 2343 (QL), 2012 CarswellBC 3519 (WL Can.).
Appeal allowed, convictions set aside and acquittals entered, Moldaver and
Gascon JJ. dissenting.                     Daniel J. Song, Kenneth S. Westlake, Q.C., and Brent R.
Anderson,
for the appellant.                     W. Paul Riley, Q.C., and Janna
Hyman, for
the respondent.                     Gillian Roberts, for the intervener the
Attorney General of Ontario.                     Written submissions only by Jolaine Antonio, for the intervener the Attorney General of Alberta.                     Roy Millen and Rebecca Spigelman, for the intervener the British
Columbia Civil Liberties Association.                     The judgment of McLachlin
C.J. and Abella, Karakatsanis, Wagner and Brown JJ. was delivered by                     Brown J. — I.         
Introduction [1]                             
This appeal raises
three distinct issues: (1) the applicability of the common law confessions rule
to statements tendered in a voir dire under the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms ; (2) whether, on the facts of this case, exigent
circumstances, within the meaning of s. 11(7)  of the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19  (“CDSA ”), made it impracticable to
obtain a warrant before entering and searching the appellant’s residence; and
(3) whether the failure by police to comply with post-seizure reporting
requirements constituted an infringement of s. 8  of the Charter . In
addition, and depending on its determination of the second and third issues,
the Court may have to consider whether the evidence obtained as the result of a
warrantless entry and search of the appellant’s residence should be excluded
under s. 24(2)  of the Charter . [2]                             
These issues arise from a warrantless entry by
police officers into the apartment of the appellant, Brendan Paterson, which
followed his agreement to surrender several marihuana “roaches”. Once inside,
the police observed a bulletproof vest, a firearm and drugs. They arrested the
appellant and obtained a telewarrant, which led to the discovery of other
firearms and drugs and to charges against the appellant in a nine-count
indictment. At trial, the appellant alleged that the warrantless entry into his
residence breached his s. 8  Charter  right to be secure from an
unreasonable search or seizure, as there
were no “exigent circumstances” rendering it impracticable to obtain a warrant,
within the meaning of s. 11(7)  of the CDSA .
Additionally, he alleged a further s. 8  breach arising from the police filing a
late and incomplete report to the clerk of the court for the telewarrant. [3]                             
The trial judge held that exigent circumstances
justified the entry into the residence. He also, however, found that the late
and incomplete report infringed the appellant’s s. 8  right, but he admitted the
evidence and convicted the appellant. His decision was affirmed at the Court of
Appeal of British Columbia, before which the appellant advanced a new argument.
The common law confessions rule should, he said, have precluded the admission
of his statement about the roaches at the voir dire considering the
lawfulness of the entry and search, as the Crown did not prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that his statement was voluntarily made. The Court of Appeal
rejected that argument, and upheld the convictions. [4]                             
For the reasons that follow, I agree with the
Court of Appeal that the confessions rule has no application here. I reach a
different conclusion, however, on the matter of the police entry into the
appellant’s residence which, in my respectful view, was not justified by
exigent circumstances making it impracticable to obtain a warrant. As I am also
of the view that the evidence obtained therefrom should be excluded under s.
24(2)  of the Charter , it is unnecessary to decide whether a late and
incomplete report could itself be a ground for a finding of an infringement of
s. 8  of the Charter , and whether there was in fact such a breach. I
would therefore allow the appeal, set aside the appellant’s convictions and
enter acquittals. II.       
Overview of Facts and Proceedings A.           
Background [5]                             
On November 30, 2007, in Langley, British
Columbia, RCMP officers Warner, Bell and Dykeman were assigned to respond to a
911 call from a woman, C.W., who was crying and apparently injured. After
speaking to the caller’s mother who directed them to the appellant (C.W.’s
boyfriend), the officers attended at the appellant’s apartment building. The
building manager gave them the appellant’s apartment number, and told them that
C.W. had been taken to hospital with unknown injuries. (C.W. would later tell police that she had
accidentally slipped and hit the back of her head, and that the appellant did
not cause her injury.) After police repeatedly knocked
on the appellant’s apartment door and announced their presence, the appellant
opened the door. As he did so, Constable Dykeman noticed the odour of raw and
smoked marihuana. [6]                             
After questioning the appellant about the 911
call and satisfying themselves that no one was in need of assistance, the
officers asked him about the odour. He first denied its source, then
acknowledged possessing some unconsumed portions of marihuana “roaches” in his
residence. While the number of roaches was not confirmed, Constable Dykeman
understood there to be three. The officers explained that they would have to
seize the roaches, but that they would treat this as a “no case” seizure,
meaning that they intended to seize the roaches without charging him.
(Constable Dykeman testified to considering obtaining a warrant, but decided
not to and instead simply seize the roaches so that he and the other officers
could be on their way.) The appellant agreed to hand over the roaches and
attempted to close the door, but Constable Dykeman blocked the door with his
foot and said he would not let the appellant out of his sight. He testified
having done so out of concern that the appellant would destroy the roaches, and
for “officer safety”. Constable Dykeman followed the appellant into his
residence. Constable Bell followed out of a concern that it was unsafe for
Constable Dykeman to be alone with the appellant. (C.W.’s mother had advised the police that the
appellant had a shotgun.) [7]                             
Once inside, the appellant grabbed a bag
containing the roaches to hand over to the officers. As he did so, Constable
Dykeman observed a bulletproof vest on a couch, a handgun on an end table, and
a bag of pills (which he believed to be ecstasy) on a speaker stand. He and
Constable Bell immediately arrested and searched the appellant, finding a cell
phone and a large amount of cash. A sweep of the residence revealed two large
bags of pills (also believed to be ecstasy) and a bag of what appeared to be crack cocaine on a
closet shelf. [8]                             
After securing the residence, Constable Dykeman
returned to his detachment and applied for and obtained a telewarrant under s.
11(1)  and (2)  of the CDSA  and s. 487.1  of the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 . Police executed the warrant that same day, finding
quantities of cocaine, methamphetamine, ecstasy pills, marihuana and oxycodone,
drug paraphernalia, four loaded weapons, a bulletproof vest as well as a large
amount of cash. Ultimately, Mr. Paterson was convicted of four counts of
possession of a prohibited or restricted firearm, three counts of possession of
a controlled substance for the purpose of trafficking, and two counts of simple
possession of a controlled substance. [9]                             
Section 487.1(9)  of the
Criminal Code  requires a peace officer to whom a warrant is issued to
file a report (“form 5.2 report”) to the clerk of the court, “as soon as
practicable but within a period not exceeding seven days after the warrant has
been executed”, containing (among other things) a list of things seized and the
grounds for seizing anything that was not listed on the Information to Obtain a
Search Warrant. In this case, while the warrant was executed on November 30,
2007, the form 5.2 report was not filed until February 13, 2008. Moreover, the
form 5.2 report was incomplete, omitting many of the items seized and stating
no grounds for seizure. B.           
Judicial History (1)          
British Columbia Supreme Court — Blok J.
(2011 BCSC 1728) [10]                         
A voir dire
hearing was conducted before the trial judge to determine the admissibility of
evidence obtained by the police as a result of their search of the appellant’s
residence. The trial judge concluded that the common law duty upon police to
protect life and public safety, as well as exigent circumstances within the
meaning of s. 11(7)  of the CDSA , justified their entry and search of the
residence. While the late and incomplete filing of the form 5.2 report
constituted a breach of the appellant’s right to be
secure against unreasonable search or seizure under s. 8  of the Charter , he refused to
exclude the evidence under s. 24(2) , since the breach was inadvertent and not
serious, the impact on the appellant’s rights was limited, and the evidence
gathered therefrom was highly reliable and crucial to the Crown’s case for
conviction for serious offences. The trial judge ultimately convicted the
appellant on all counts (2012 BCSC 1680). (2)          
Court of Appeal of British Columbia — Lowry,
Frankel and Bennett JJ.A. (2015 BCCA 205, 372 B.C.A.C. 148) [11]                         
On appeal, the
appellant argued, for the first time, that the trial judge had erred by failing
to determine the voluntariness of his statement about having roaches in his
residence before relying on them in a voir dire. Additionally, he argued
that the trial judge erred in finding that exigent circumstances justified
police entry into his residence, and in finding that the late and incomplete
filing of the form 5.2 report did not justify exclusion of the evidence under
s. 24(2) . [12]                         
The appeal was
dismissed. On the matter of voluntariness, the Crown was not required to prove
the voluntariness of an accused’s statement for it to be admitted at a voir
dire. This followed, the Court of Appeal explained, from the primary
rationale of the common law confessions rule — ensuring reliability and trial
fairness. That rationale does not apply where the evidence may never be heard
by the trier of fact and where the inquiry is into state conduct, not the guilt
of the accused. Further, police should be entitled to rely upon a statement to
justify an investigation, even where that statement is not the product of an
operating mind or is otherwise involuntarily made. Finally, imposing an onus
upon the Crown in a voir dire would operate in tension with the
prevailing burden upon the accused to demonstrate a breach. [13]                         
As to the entry by
police into the residence, the Court of Appeal agreed with the trial judge
that, as it was “impracticable” for police to obtain a warrant, the police
officers were confronted with exigent circumstances. Constable Bell’s entry
behind Constable Dykeman was also reasonable, having occurred out of concern
for officer safety. Finally, the trial judge’s conclusion under s. 24(2)  to
admit the evidence obtained from the warrantless entry and subsequent search
was entitled to deference. In the result, it was unnecessary to decide whether
he correctly found that the mishandling of the form 5.2 report constituted a
breach of s. 8 . III.         
Analysis A.       Voluntariness [14]                         
The law’s concern for “voluntariness” in
relation to police investigative techniques is embodied in the confessions
rule. That rule prohibits the admission at trial of statements made by
suspects to police or to other persons in authority, unless the Crown proves
beyond a reasonable doubt that such statements were voluntary (S. Penney, V.
Rondinelli and J. Stribopoulos, Criminal Procedure in Canada (2011), at
p. 272; R. v. Hodgson, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 449, at para. 17). The Crown’s
burden — which is identical to its burden in respect of the accused’s guilt
itself — highlights that the rule is linked to the law’s concern that
involuntary statements are “unreliable
as affirmations of guilt” (S. N. Lederman, A. W. Bryant and
M. K. Fuerst, The Law of Evidence in Canada (4th ed. 2014), §8.24; Ibrahim
v. The King, [1914] A.C. 599 (P.C.), at p. 609; Boudreau v. The King,
[1949] S.C.R. 262; Rothman v. The Queen, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 640, at pp.
653-54, per Estey J., dissenting).[1]
As this Court recognized in Hodgson (at para.
19), statements obtained by
force, threat or promises are inherently unreliable. [15]                         
The Court has also recognized, however, that
concern for the untrustworthiness of involuntary confessions does not entirely
capture the rationale for excluding evidence caught by the confessions rule. In
R. v. Hebert, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 151, the rule was said to rest on
fundamental notions of trial fairness and (at p. 173) “the idea that a person
in the power of the state’s criminal process has the right to freely choose
whether or not to make a statement to the police”, coupled with a “concern
[for] the repute and integrity of the judicial process”. Those same concerns,
the Court added (at p. 175), underlay the privilege against self-incrimination,
and supported recognition of a detainee’s right to silence as a principle of
fundamental justice under s. 7  of the Charter . “Voluntariness ” then, as
a concept designed to limit the scope of police investigative techniques, has
been broadly associated with the principle that the Crown must, to maintain the
repute and integrity of the trial process, establish guilt without the
assistance of the accused (Hodgson, at para. 23, citing the Report
of the Federal/Provincial Task Force on Uniform Rules of Evidence (1982),
at p. 175). [16]                         
The foregoing
explanations for the confessions rule are not neatly encapsulated and, as the
Court has observed more than once, “a rationale for the confessions rule
extending beyond trustworthiness has not always been easy to locate (R. v.
S. (R.J.), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 451, at para. 73; Hodgson, at para.
23). It suffices here to observe that the Crown must prove the voluntariness of
an accused’s statement before it can rely upon that statement at trial as
supporting a finding of guilt, and that this rule applies to ensure trial
fairness and to preclude conviction of an accused based upon compelled and as
such inherently unreliable evidence. While, therefore, the rule’s application
has been confined to trial, the appellant says that its “broad purpose” should
operate to require the Crown to prove the voluntariness of such statements for any
purpose — “even for the limited purpose of establishing reasonable grounds
for a search” in a voir dire. To confine the judicial inquiry into the
voluntariness of a statement to trial evidence, he says, allows police
to take “unfair . . . advantage” of “mentally ill and disabled”
persons, thereby “engender[ing] systemic imbalance against those in need of the
highest legal protections”. Further, the appellant views any evidence assisting
the Crown in any way as “incriminating”, such that a statement which justifies
a search ought to be shown to have been voluntarily made. It follows, he says,
that unreliable evidence such as an involuntary confession cannot be relied
upon to justify a search. [17]                         
As to the procedure to
be followed, the appellant says that the voluntariness of a statement — such as
the appellant’s statement regarding the roaches — leading to a police search
should be determined prior to the voir dire on the lawfulness of the
search. Alternatively, he says, a blended voir dire could occur. In this
case, since neither the trial judge nor counsel addressed the voluntariness of
the appellant’s statement, and since there is a possibility that his statements
could have been ruled involuntary, he says a new trial is necessary. [18]                         
In my view, the
confessions rule should not be expanded as proposed by the appellant. More
particularly, for the following reasons, the confessions rule should not apply
to statements tendered in the context of a voir dire under the Charter . [19]                         
First, the appellant’s submissions fail to
account for the purpose of the judicial inquiry in a Charter voir dire,
and its distinction from the purpose of a criminal trial. A criminal trial is
concerned with determining whether the accused is guilty of an offence. In a Charter
voir dire, however, the focus is not on the accused’s guilt, but on whether
the accused’s constitutional rights were infringed. A Charter voir dire
therefore involves a review of the totality of the circumstances known
to, and relied upon by, the state actor at the time of the impugned action. To be clear, only the state actor’s
contemporary state of mind and conduct is at issue, and not the truthfulness of
the statement upon which he or she relied. It is for this
reason that the truthfulness of a statement has no bearing upon its
admissibility; rather, the inquiry is focussed upon whether it was reasonable
for him or her to rely upon the statement as forming grounds for the action
under scrutiny. [20]                         
The significance of this distinction between the
purpose of a Charter voir dire and a trial also governs the
admissibility of other forms of evidence, such as hearsay, evidence of bad
character or of past discreditable conduct, information obtained from
confidential informants, information protected by privilege or, as discussed in
R. v. MacKenzie, 2013 SCC 50, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 250, at paras. 61-62,
personal opinion informed by prior training and experience. Each of these forms
of evidence raises either reliability or policy concerns and is therefore
subject to strict evidentiary rules which restrict or preclude altogether
admissibility for substantive use at the trial proper. Such concerns do not,
however, arise at a Charter voir dire, because of the limited purpose
for which this evidence may be used — going only to the state actor’s state of
mind and conduct, and not to the ultimate reliability of the evidence in
determining the guilt of the accused. It follows that admitting a statement
made by an accused for that limited purpose without first establishing its
voluntariness does not offend the rationales underlying the confessions rule.
The confessions rule’s driving concern for trial fairness and avoiding
conviction upon inherently unreliable
evidence simply does not arise at the voir dire stage. [21]                         
In sum, admitting a
statement by an accused for the purpose of assessing the constitutionality of
state action, as opposed to the purpose of determining the accused’s guilt,
does not engage the rationale for the confessions rule. To apply the rule to
evidence presented at a Charter voir dire would distort both the rule
and its rationale. [22]                         
Second, the appellant’s
arguments regarding the ability of police officers to coerce information from
vulnerable witnesses are already addressed by our criminal procedure. A
substantial distinction separates, on one hand, allowing the Crown to adduce
statements at a Charter voir dire without proving voluntariness and, on
the other hand, condoning police conduct which coerces involuntary statements.
The appellant’s submissions construct a false choice by failing to account for
other legal protections against abusive state conduct. For example, the
appellant’s concern that police might ignore obvious indicia of unreliability
such as an operating mind is addressed by the requirement that the Crown
demonstrate that police reasonably relied on an accused’s statement and that it
provided the requisite grounds to act. Similarly, coercive or otherwise abusive
tactics by police designed to extract information involuntarily from an accused
would be subject to scrutiny under ss. 7 , 8  or 9  of the Charter , with a
view to possible exclusion of such evidence under s. 24(2)  or a stay of
proceedings. In brief, the appellant’s submissions offer no good reason for
concern that the rights of the accused are not entirely reconcilable with the
state’s reliance on an accused’s statement to demonstrate the constitutionality
of its investigative steps. [23]                         
Finally, applying the
confessions rule to statements adduced in a Charter voir dire would lead
to undesirable consequences, inhibiting legitimate and necessary police
investigative powers. For example, and as the intervener, the Attorney General
of Ontario observed, requiring police to prove the voluntariness of an
accused’s statement would contradict this Court’s direction in R. v.
Orbanski, 2005 SCC 37, [2005] 2 S.C.R. 3, that police may rely, for the
limited purpose of forming grounds for an approved screening device demand,
upon answers given roadside by drivers in response to questions about alcohol
consumption. To be clear, such evidence entails, as the Court said, “compelled
direct participation” by the driver (para. 58 (emphasis added)),[2] which would be
inadmissible at trial to prove impairment. The limited purpose of justifying
further investigation, however, coupled with the absence of concern for trial
fairness and reliability, supports its admissibility at a Charter voir dire
considering the constitutionality of the investigation itself and, in
particular, of the reasonableness of the officer’s grounds for demanding a
breath sample. [24]                         
Indeed, in some
instances, application of the confessions rule to statements adduced at a Charter
voir dire would lead to absurdities. Police
officers would be required to positively ascertain voluntariness in respect of
almost every person they encounter in responding to an emergency, when
receiving a 911 call or at other early points in an investigation, where it may
be unclear who is a suspect and who is a mere witness. In dynamic and emergent
circumstances, police officers must be permitted, within constitutional bounds,
to respond and investigate with dispatch. Taken to its logical extension, the
appellant’s submission would cast doubt on basic and uncontroversial police
practices which are dependent upon statements made by suspects. It would stifle
police investigations, compromise public safety and needlessly lengthen and
complicate voir dire proceedings — all, it bears reiterating, to secure
protections which (as I have explained at para. 22) our criminal procedure
already affords accused persons. [25]                         
It follows from the
foregoing that I am of the view the Court of Appeal correctly decided that the
Crown was not required to prove the voluntariness of the appellant’s statement
regarding the roaches in his residence prior to its admission at a Charter
voir dire. B.       
Did Exigent Circumstances, Making it
Impracticable to Obtain a Warrant, Justify a Warrantless Entry Into the
Appellant’s Residence? (1)          
The Meaning of “Exigent Circumstances” and
“Impracticable” [26]                         
Before us, no one
disputed that the police officers’ warrantless entry into the appellant’s
residence constituted a search. At issue, however, is whether it was justified
by “exigent circumstances” making it, within the meaning of s. 11(7)  of the CDSA ,
“impracticable” to obtain a warrant. [27]                         
Section 11(7)  states: (7) A peace officer may exercise any of
the powers described in subsection (1), (5) or (6) without a warrant if the
conditions for obtaining a warrant exist but by reason of exigent circumstances
it would be impracticable to obtain one.  (7) L’agent de la paix peut exercer sans mandat les pouvoirs visés aux paragraphes
(1), (5) ou (6) lorsque l’urgence de la situation rend son obtention
difficilement réalisable, sous réserve que les conditions de délivrance en
soient réunies. [28]                         
Subsection (1)  of s. 11 empowers a peace officer to conduct a warranted search
of a place for, inter alia, a controlled substance and to seize it. The
relevant effect of s. 11(7)  to the facts of this appeal, then, was to empower Constables Dykeman and Bell to conduct a
warrantless search of the appellant’s residence for a controlled substance, so
long as conditions for obtaining a warrant existed (which is not disputed
here), and exigent circumstances made it impracticable for them to obtain a
warrant. [29]                         
As to the meaning of
“exigent circumstances”, the appellant points to s. 529.3  of the Criminal
Code , subs. (1) of which authorizes a peace officer to enter a
dwelling-house without a warrant for the purpose of arresting or apprehending a
person reasonably believed to be present therein, where “the conditions for
obtaining a warrant . . . exist but by reason of exigent
circumstances it would be impracticable to obtain a warrant”. Subsection (2)  of
s. 529.3  defines “exigent circumstances” as including circumstances in which
the peace officer: (a)  has reasonable grounds to suspect
that entry into the dwelling-house is necessary to prevent imminent bodily harm
or death to any person; or  (b) has reasonable grounds to believe
that evidence relating to the commission of an indictable offence is present in
the dwelling-house and that entry into the dwelling-house is necessary to
prevent the imminent loss or imminent destruction of the evidence. [30]                         
The appellant’s submission, in essence, is that
the definition of “exigent circumstances” found in s. 529.3(2)  of the Criminal
Code  should be applied to define “exigent circumstances” as it appears in
s. 11(7)  of the CDSA . This would have the effect of requiring police to
demonstrate either that entry is necessary to prevent imminent bodily harm or
death, or that entry is necessary to prevent the imminent loss or destruction
of evidence relating to the commission of an indictable offence — neither of
which could have been established on the facts known to Constables Dykeman and
Bell prior to entry. [31]                         
I reject this submission. Section 11  of the CDSA 
lacks the express language of s. 529.3(2)  limiting its scope, where applied to
the preservation of evidence, to indictable offences. Parliament, which
regularly and expertly legislates pursuant to its criminal law power, could
have easily conditioned warrantless searches under s. 11(7)  in precisely the
same terms as contained in s. 529.3(2) . That it chose not to do so is
unsurprising, when s. 529.3(2)  is considered alongside other provisions in the Criminal
Code  authorizing warrantless entry — an important consideration, given that
statutory interpretation entails discerning Parliament’s intent by examining
the words of a statute in their entire context and in their grammatical and
ordinary sense, in harmony with the statute’s schemes and objects (Rizzo
& Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at para. 21).  For
example, the general provision on warrantless entry by reason of exigent
circumstances (s. 487.11 ) and the provision authorizing warrantless entry to
search for and seize firearms or other weapons in exigent circumstances (s.
117.02(1) ) contain no statutory definition of “exigent circumstances”. In light
of those provisions, there is no good reason to believe that Parliament
intended the definition of “exigent circumstances” in s. 529.3(2)  of the Criminal
Code  to be read into s. 11(7)  of the CDSA . I therefore decline the
appellant’s invitation to “do by ‘interpretation’ what Parliament chose not to
do by enactment” (Canadian Broadcasting Corp. v. SODRAC 2003 Inc., 2015
SCC 57, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 615, at para. 53). [32]                         
All that said, circumstances in which “exigent
circumstances” have been recognized have borne close resemblance to the
definitional categories in s. 529.3(2) . This Court’s jurisprudence considering
s. 10 of the Narcotic Control Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-1 (which was
repealed and replaced by the CDSA ), which permitted a peace officer to
search a place that was not a dwelling-house without a warrant so long as he or
she believed on reasonable grounds that a narcotic offence had been committed,
is instructive. That provision was held in R. v. Grant, [1993] 3 S.C.R.
223 (“Grant 1993”), to be consistent with s. 8  of the Charter  if
it were read down to permit warrantless searches only where there were exigent
circumstances. Such exigent circumstances were then described to exist where
there is an “imminent danger
of the loss, removal, destruction or disappearance of the evidence if the
search or seizure is delayed” (Grant 1993,
at p. 243; R. v. Feeney,
[1997] 2 S.C.R. 13, at para. 153, per L’Heureux-Dubé J., dissenting; and R.
v. Silveira, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 297, at para. 51, per
La Forest J., dissenting). Similarly, circumstances in which “immediate action is required for the safety of
the police” were also found to qualify as “exigent” (Feeney, at
para. 52; see also, in respect of searches to preserve officer safety, this
Court’s statement in R. v. MacDonald, 2014 SCC 3, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 37, at
para. 32, that such searches will be responsive to “dangerous situations
created by individuals, to which the police must react ‘on the sudden’”). In Feeney,
at para. 47, exigency was also said to possibly arise when police
officers are in “hot pursuit” of a suspect (see also R. v. Macooh,
[1993] 2 S.C.R. 802, at pp. 820-21). [33]                         
The common theme
emerging from these descriptions of “exigent circumstances” in s. 11(7)  denotes
not merely convenience, propitiousness or economy, but rather urgency,
arising from circumstances calling for immediate police action to preserve evidence,
officer safety or public safety. This threshold is affirmed by the French
version of s. 11(7) , which reads “l’urgence de la situation”. [34]                         
Even where exigent circumstances are present,
however, they are not, on their own, sufficient to justify a warrantless search
of a residence under s. 11(7) . Those circumstances must render it “impracticable” to obtain a warrant. In this
regard, I respectfully disagree with the Court of Appeal’s understanding of s.
11(7)  as contemplating that the impracticability of obtaining a warrant would
itself comprise exigent circumstances. The text of s. 11(7)  (“by reason of
exigent circumstances it would be impracticable to obtain [a warrant]”) makes
clear that the impracticability of obtaining a warrant does not support a finding
of exigent circumstances. It is the other way around: exigent circumstances
must be shown to make it impracticable to obtain a warrant. In other words,
“impracticability”, howsoever understood, cannot justify a warrantless search
under s. 11(7)  on the basis that it constitutes an exigent circumstance.
Rather, exigent circumstances must be shown to cause impracticability. [35]                         
The appellant says that
the requirement of “exigent circumstances” rendering it “impracticable” to
obtain a warrant requires, in effect, that such circumstances “leav[e] the
police no choice but to proceed with entering a dwelling-house”. In
other words, he maintains that the “impracticability” of obtaining a warrant
should be understood to mean impossibility. Conversely, the Crown submits that
a much lower threshold is indicated, such that obtaining a warrant is not
“realistic” (whatever that may mean) or “practical”. [36]                         
While I am not persuaded that the strict
condition of impossibility urged by the appellant is denoted by Parliament’s
chosen statutory language of impracticab[ility], neither am I satisfied by the
Crown’s argument equating impracticability with mere impracticality. Viewed in
the context of s. 11(7) , however — including its requirement of exigent
circumstances — “impracticability” suggests on balance a more stringent
standard, requiring that it be impossible in practice or unmanageable to obtain
a warrant. The French version
of “impracticable” in s. 11(7)  — “difficilement réalisable” —
is also consistent with a condition whose rigour falls short of impossibility
but exceeds mere impracticality of obtaining a warrant.[3]
So understood, then,
“impracticable” within the meaning of s. 11(7)  contemplates that the exigent
nature of the circumstances are such that taking time to obtain a warrant would
seriously undermine the objective of police action — whether it be preserving evidence,
officer safety or public safety. [37]                         
In sum, I conclude that, in order for a
warrantless entry to satisfy s. 11(7) , the Crown must show that the entry was
compelled by urgency, calling for immediate police action to preserve evidence,
officer safety or public safety.  Further, this urgency must be shown to have
been such that taking the time
to obtain a warrant would pose serious risk to those imperatives. (2)      Was a Warrantless Search Under Section 11(7) Justified in This Case? [38]                         
The trial judge found
that “exigent circumstances” were presented by two factors in this case. First,
the police officers had “reasonable grounds to believe that there was a
quantity, albeit a small quantity, of a controlled substance in the accused’s
apartment” (para. 75). Second, they reasonably believed “that the controlled
substance would be lost, destroyed, or consumed given that they did not
intend to arrest the accused for possession of this amount of marihuana and
accordingly he would have remained in the apartment” (para. 75 (emphasis
added)). Those circumstances, he said (at para. 76, quoting R. v. Erickson,
2003 BCCA 693, 192 B.C.A.C. 203, at para. 33) made it impracticable (understood
as “something less than impossible and import[ing] a large measure of
practicality”) to obtain a warrant, such that the police officers’ actions were
justified by s. 11(7). The Court of Appeal, in reaching the same conclusion,
noted the appellant’s admission to having marihuana in his residence, that the
police had no intention of arresting him but only wanted to seize the roaches
and be on their way, and that, had they left the appellant to obtain a warrant,
“he could have easily destroyed the roaches” (para. 72). [39]                         
With respect, the
prospect of the appellant destroying roaches which the police officers hoped to
seize on a “no case” basis and destroy themselves, with no legal consequences
to the appellant whatsoever, did not remotely approach s. 11(7)’s threshold of
exigency. No urgency compelled immediate action in order to preserve evidence. Nor,
just as importantly, did the circumstances presented by the appellant’s
admission to having some partially consumed roaches, coupled with the police
officers’ wish to seize them on a no case basis, make it impracticable to
obtain a warrant. Inconvenient or impractical, perhaps. But s. 11(7) is
not satisfied by mere inconvenience, but impracticability. In this case,
the police had a practicable option: to arrest the appellant and obtain a
warrant to enter the residence and seize the roaches. If, as the Crown says,
the situation was not serious enough to arrest and apply for a warrant, then it
cannot have been serious enough to intrude into a private residence without a
warrant. [40]                         
There remains the matter of officer safety. As
the Court of Appeal observed, Constable Bell’s entry behind Constable Dykeman
was motivated out of concern for Constable Dykeman’s safety. Given the report
from C.W.’s mother about the possibility of the appellant having a shotgun,
this concern was well-founded. It was not, however, that concern which prompted
Constable Dykeman’s entry itself. While he testified to his concern for officer
safety as well as his fear that the appellant might destroy the roaches, the
trial judge saw officer safety (at para. 80) as being “really related to [Constables Dykeman’s and Bell’s]
attempt to carry out the seizure in a less intrusive way”. In other words,
concern for officer safety did not drive the decision to proceed with
warrantless entry; rather, warrantless entry gave rise to concern for officer
safety. While Constable Dykeman’s concern, like Constable Bell’s, was
well-founded, it was not the basis for the decision to enter, but the result of
the decision to enter. These facts, therefore, do not qualify as exigent
circumstances making it impracticable to obtain a warrant, within the meaning
of s. 11(7)  of the CDSA . [41]                         
It follows that the
warrantless entry by the police into the appellant’s residence was not
authorized by s. 11(7)  of the CDSA , and infringed his right under s. 8 
of the Charter  to be secure against unreasonable search. C.       Exclusion of Evidence Under Section 24(2) [42]                         
Having come to a different
conclusion than the trial judge on the constitutionality of the entry into the
appellant’s residence, I would not defer to his conclusion regarding exclusion
of evidence under s. 24(2)  of the Charter  (R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC
32, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353 (“Grant 2009”), at para. 129). (1)      Seriousness of the Charter -Infringing State Conduct [43]                         
The court’s task in
considering the seriousness of Charter -infringing state conduct is to
situate that conduct on a scale of culpability. As this Court explained in Grant
2009 (at para. 74), “admission of evidence obtained through inadvertent or
minor violations . . . may minimally undermine public confidence in
the rule of law”, while “admitting evidence obtained through a wilful or
reckless disregard of Charter  rights will inevitably have a negative
effect on the public confidence in the rule of law”. The Crown’s submissions
implicitly invoke this distinction, arguing that “the police intended to enter
the apartment solely to seize the marihuana, with no ‘ulterior purpose’”. [44]                         
My colleague Moldaver
J. recalls the trial judge’s finding that the police were acting in good faith
(para. 66; trial reasons, at para. 79). While “‘[g]ood faith’ on the part of
the police will . . . reduce the need for the court to disassociate
itself from the police conduct” (Grant 2009, at para. 75), good faith
errors must be reasonable (R. v. Buhay, 2003 SCC 30, [2003] 1
S.C.R. 631, at para. 59). This Court has cautioned that negligence in meeting Charter 
standards cannot be equated to good faith (Grant 2009, at para. 75).
Even where the Charter  infringement is not deliberate or the product of
systemic or institutional abuse, exclusion has been found to be warranted for
clear violations of well-established rules governing state conduct (R. v.
Harrison, 2009 SCC 34, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 494, at paras. 24-25). [45]                         
My colleague also
places considerable emphasis (at paras. 78-92) on the seizure having been made
on a “no case” basis and, more to the point, on this fact having “played a
crucial role in [the lower courts’] determination that the police entry into
the appellant’s apartment without a warrant was lawful” (paras. 76 and 80).
This, he says, makes this case one of “first impression” (paras. 77 and 88). [46]                         
The intention to effect
a “no case” seizure was indeed mentioned by the trial judge and the Court of
Appeal while considering the police officers’ good faith (trial reasons, at
para. 79) and the level of intrusiveness of the search, relative to an arrest
(C.A. reasons, at paras. 72 and 74). That said, neither the trial judge nor the
Court of Appeal described it as presenting a novel legal issue, nor was this
suggested to us by the Crown.  This is unsurprising, and marks my point of
respectful departure from my colleague.   This is simply not a case of first
impression. These police officers were not operating in unknown legal
territory:  their intention to effect a seizure on a “no case” basis was
legally insignificant, in light of the well-established legal principles
governing the authority of police to enter a residence without a warrant. The
presumptive unreasonableness of warrantless searches, and the high privacy
interest attaching to a person’s residence have long been fundamental to our
understanding of the proper relationship between citizen and state. And,
longstanding judgments of this Court — Grant 1993, Silveira and Feeney
— have, in considering the exigency of circumstances prompting warrantless
entry, required the Crown to show urgency, particularly in the context
of the search of a residence. As the Court observed in Silveira, at
para. 140, “[t]here is no place on earth where persons can have a greater
expectation of privacy than within their ‘dwelling-house’.” Similarly, at para.
41, La Forest J. (in dissent, but not on this point) reiterated the high
value which the law places upon the security of a home from state intrusion. It
is, he said, a “bulwark for the protection of the individual against the state
[which] affords the individual a measure of privacy and tranquillity against
the overwhelming power of the state”. [47]                         
No urgency is
demonstrated or even suggested by the facts of this appeal. Even accepting,
therefore, the Crown’s submission about the absence of an “ulterior purpose”,
the nature of the Charter -infringing state conduct here was, in my view,
and in light of this Court’s prior statements regarding exigent circumstances,
sufficiently serious to favour exclusion of the evidence obtained as a result. (2)      Impact on the Charter -Protected Interests of the Accused [48]                         
The second inquiry
under the s. 24(2)  analysis focusses on whether the admission of the evidence
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute from the standpoint of
society’s interest in respect for Charter  rights. This entails
considering the degree to which a Charter 
infringement undermined the Charter -protected interest. In this regard,
the Court’s statement in Grant 2009 (at para. 76) should be borne in
mind: The impact of a Charter  breach
may range from fleeting and technical to profoundly intrusive. The more serious
the impact on the accused’s protected interests, the greater the risk that
admission of the evidence may signal to the public that Charter  rights,
however high-sounding, are of little actual avail to the citizen, breeding
public cynicism and bringing the administration of justice into disrepute. [49]                         
Where, therefore, the Charter -protected
interest in privacy is at stake (as it is here), infringements arising from
circumstances denoting a “high expectation of privacy” tend to favour exclusion
of evidence, while — all other considerations being equal — infringements of
lesser interests in privacy will not pull as strongly towards exclusion. As the
Court said in Grant 2009 (at para. 78): “An unreasonable search that intrudes on an area in
which the individual reasonably enjoys a high expectation of privacy, or that
demeans his or her dignity, is more serious than one that does not.” [50]                         
The Crown acknowledges
that the warrantless entry into the appellant’s residence was a “relatively
serious intrusion”, but says that any impact on the appellant’s Charter -protected
interests was “attenuated by the relative brevity and focussed nature of the
initial warrantless search”, since the police retreated to obtain a warrant
after observing the firearm and drugs. While I agree that the decision by
police to obtain a warrant before conducting a further search of the
appellant’s residence prevented a serious impact on the appellant’s privacy interest
from becoming even more serious, I also agree with the Crown that this was a
“serious intrusion”, “relativ[e]” to other forms of intrusion. It is well
settled that “[a]n illegal search of a house will therefore be seen as more
serious at this stage of the analysis” (Grant 2009, at para. 113). I
therefore conclude that the impact of the warrantless entry on the appellant’s
rights under s. 8  of the Charter  was significant. This factor strongly
favours exclusion of the evidence. (3)      Society’s Interest in an Adjudication of the Case on Its Merits [51]                         
It remains to consider
the effect of admitting the evidence on the public interest in having a case
adjudicated on its merits. This entails considering the reliability of the
evidence and its importance to the Crown’s case. On these points, the Crown
submits:      Finally, the societal
interest in a trial on the merits weighed in favour of admitting the evidence.
The exclusion of such highly reliable evidence, essential to the prosecution of
serious drug and firearms offences, would exact a heavy toll on the truth
seeking function of the trial, and would tend to bring the administration of
justice into disrepute.  (R.F.,
at para. 105) [52]                         
The charges against the
appellant are indisputably serious. Further, I agree with the Crown’s
submissions: the evidence seized in the appellant’s residence is highly
reliable, and is essential to the Crown’s case against the appellant. This
factor strongly supports admitting the evidence, notwithstanding the
infringement of the appellant’s s. 8  rights. (4)          
The Evidence Should Be Excluded [53]                         
To summarize, the
police conduct, while not egregious, represented a serious departure from
well-established constitutional norms. The impact of the s. 8  infringement on
the appellant’s interests protected thereunder was considerable, intruding into
a place in which he was entitled to repose the highest expectation of privacy.
But the value of the evidence to deciding the truth of the charges against the
appellant is also considerable. [54]                         
This is a close call. As was observed in Grant
2009, at para. 140, “[t]he balancing mandated by s. 24(2)  is qualitative in
nature and therefore not capable of mathematical precision.” Indeed, because
the Grant 2009 factors are mutually incommensurable — balancing
seriousness of state conduct, seriousness of the infringement of Charter 
rights and the impact upon society’s interest in adjudication — the “balancing”
will never be an entirely objective exercise. A reviewing court must, however,
come to a reasoned conclusion. While the effective destruction of the Crown’s
case weighs heavily, so does the warrantless entry into a private residence,
having occurred to prevent the appellant from destroying three roaches which
the police themselves intended to destroy. [55]                         
In weighing these considerations, my colleague
relies on the seriousness of the offence to hold that excluding the evidence
will be “far more likely to cause the public to lose faith and confidence in
our criminal justice system” (para. 94). This is premised, however, upon a
limited view of public confidence which this Court has already rejected. As the
Court observed in Grant 2009 (at para. 84), “seriousness of the alleged
offence . . . has the potential to cut both ways.
. . . [W]hile the public has a heightened interest in seeing a
determination on the merits where the offence charged is serious, it also has a
vital interest in having a justice system that is above reproach, particularly
where the penal stakes for the accused are high.” The public interest in
maintaining a justice system “above reproach” has helpfully been explained by
Doherty J.A. in R. v. McGuffie, 2016 ONCA 365, 348 O.A.C. 365, at para.
73: On the one hand, if the evidence at
stake is reliable and important to the Crown’s case, the seriousness of the
charge can be said to enhance society’s interests in an adjudication on the
merits.  On the other hand, society’s concerns that police misconduct not
appear to be condoned by the courts, and that individual rights be taken
seriously, come to the forefront when the consequences to those whose rights have
been infringed are particularly serious . . . . [Citations
omitted.] [56]                         
It is therefore important not to allow the third
Grant 2009 factor of society’s interest in adjudicating a case on its
merits to trump all other considerations, particularly where (as here) the
impugned conduct was serious and worked a substantial impact on the appellant’s
Charter  right. In this case, I find that the importance of ensuring that
such conduct is not condoned by the court favours exclusion. As Doherty J.A.
also said in McGuffie, at para. 83, “[t]he court can only adequately
disassociate the justice system from the police misconduct and reinforce the
community’s commitment to individual rights protected by the Charter  by
excluding the evidence. . . . This unpalatable result is the
direct product of the manner in which the police chose to conduct themselves.” [57]                         
Having considered these
factors separately and together, I am of the view that the evidence obtained as
a result of the entry and search of the appellant’s residence should be
excluded, as its admission would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. IV.        
Conclusion [58]                         
In view of my
conclusion under s. 24(2) , it is unnecessary for me to consider whether a late
and incomplete filing of the form 5.2 report could itself have constituted an
infringement of s. 8  of the Charter , and whether it did so in this case. [59]                         
I would allow the
appeal, set aside the appellant’s convictions and enter acquittals.                     The reasons of Moldaver and
Gascon JJ. were delivered by [60]                         
Moldaver J. — I have had the benefit of reading the reasons of my colleague
Justice Brown and I agree with his analysis and conclusion on the voluntariness
issue. I also agree with his finding that the police entry into the appellant’s
apartment violated the appellant’s s. 8  privacy rights under the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms . Respectfully, however, I do not
agree with my colleague’s s.
24(2)  Charter  analysis on the admissibility of the firearms and drugs
seized by the police from the appellant’s apartment. Those items, in my view,
were properly admitted into evidence and I would accordingly dismiss the
appeal. In so concluding, like my colleague, I find it unnecessary to decide
the issues surrounding the form 5.2 report to the justice, other than to say
that even if the late and incomplete filing did constitute a breach of the
appellant’s s. 8  Charter  rights, the breach was inadvertent and had no
impact on the appellant’s privacy interest. As such, it could not possibly have
tipped the s. 24(2)  scales in favour of exclusion. I.         
Background Facts [61]                         
My colleague has summarized the background facts
and I see no need to duplicate his efforts. I do, however, consider it
important to identify the specific offences for which the appellant was
convicted and the various items of evidence the police seized from his
apartment. I also consider it important to refer to the trial judge’s
assessment of the police conduct and his findings of fact in this regard. A.           
The Offences and Items of Evidence Seized [62]                         
The appellant was charged with nine offences,
five involving drugs and four involving the illegal possession of handguns. All
of the charges stem from evidence found in the appellant’s apartment. [63]                         
The evidence relating to the drug charges
consists of the following: (a)                              
825 grams of cocaine, valued at $31,200 on the
wholesale market (possession for the purposes of trafficking); (b)                             
200 grams of methamphetamine, valued at $5,850
on the wholesale market (possession for the purposes of trafficking); (c)                              
9,000 ecstasy pills, valued at $17,466 on the
wholesale market (possession for the purposes of trafficking); (d)                             
a small amount of marihuana (simple possession);
and (e)                              
a small amount of oxycodone (simple possession). [64]                         
The evidence relating to the gun charges
consists of the following: (a)                              
a loaded Smith and Wesson 38 special revolver (a
prohibited firearm); (b)                             
a loaded Ruger P85 9-millimeter semi-automatic
pistol (a restricted firearm); (c)                              
a loaded Ruger P90 45-calibre semi-automatic
pistol (a restricted firearm); and (d)                             
a loaded 1M1 Desert Eagle 44-calibre Remington
Magnum semi-automatic pistol (a restricted firearm). [65]                         
In addition to those items, the appellant was
found on arrest to have $4,655 in cash on his person. Another $30,000 in cash
was found in a box located underneath a couch in the living room area. The
police also located a bulletproof vest on the same couch. B.           
Police Conduct [66]                         
In the course of his voir dire ruling on
the admissibility of the evidence seized from the appellant’s apartment, the
trial judge found that the police were acting in good faith when they entered
the appellant’s apartment. He specifically rejected the defence’s suggestion
that their entry into the apartment was a ruse. In his words: Here, there is no suggestion
in the evidence of bad faith or ulterior motive such as might be the case if
the stated intention of the police was a mere excuse or ruse to gain entry for
the purpose of having a look around. Nothing of that sort was made out on the
evidence.  (2011
BCSC 1728, at para. 79 (CanLII)) Rather, the trial judge
accepted that the police were engaged in a “no case” seizure, meaning that they
simply wanted to retrieve the marihuana roaches and leave, without arresting
the appellant or charging him with an offence. [67]                         
In concluding that the police were acting
throughout in good faith, the trial judge observed that in their dealings with
the appellant, they conducted themselves in a way which “demonstrated a measure
of respect for his privacy rights”; that initially, their entry was “very brief
and relatively non-intrusive”; and that once they observed the handgun and
ecstasy pills in plain view, “no further search was done (other than a clearing
search or searches for officer safety purposes) until a search warrant was
sought and obtained” (para. 121). Finally, the trial judge accepted the police
evidence that valid safety concerns prevented them from waiting outside the
door, in the hallway, while the appellant retrieved the roaches on his own. II.       
Analysis [68]                         
The warrantless entry by the police into the
appellant’s apartment in this case is governed by s. 11(7)  of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19  (“CDSA ”). That
provision states: (7) A peace officer may exercise any of
the powers described in subsection (1), (5) or (6) without a warrant if the
conditions for obtaining a warrant exist but by reason of exigent
circumstances it would be impracticable to obtain one.  (7) L’agent de la paix peut exercer sans mandat les pouvoirs visés aux
paragraphes (1), (5) ou (6) lorsque l’urgence de la situation rend son
obtention difficilement réalisable, sous réserve que les conditions de
délivrance en soient réunies. [69]                         
It is uncontroversial that the police had lawful
authority to seize the roaches and that the conditions for obtaining a warrant
existed. The lawfulness of the police entry without a warrant and the
admissibility of the seized evidence under s. 24(2)  of the Charter  are
the central issues in this appeal. [70]                         
The lawfulness of the police entry hinges on
whether the requirements of “exigent circumstances” and “impracticab[ility]”
were satisfied. Contrary to the findings of the trial judge and three judges of
the British Columbia Court of Appeal (2015 BCCA 205, 372 B.C.A.C. 148), Justice
Brown finds, and I agree, that these requirements were not met and the police
entry into the appellant’s apartment breached his s. 8  privacy rights. In so
concluding, however, my colleague finds that the police entry was not just
unlawful; he says that they knew or should have known as much — in other words,
the police should have known what the trial judge and three judges of the Court
of Appeal did not know. [71]                         
 My colleague then turns to s. 24(2)  of the Charter 
and finds that the police conduct in breaching the appellant’s s. 8  rights
was so serious, and the impact on his privacy interests so great, that the
administration of justice would be brought into disrepute if the guns and drugs
and other evidence seized by the police were to be admitted into evidence —
this, despite the strong findings of the trial judge, which no one challenges,
that the police were acting in good faith throughout and that their conduct was
designed to spare the appellant the trouble of being arrested for a few roaches
of marihuana that they intended to seize on a “no case” basis. [72]                         
I see this matter very differently than my
colleague. The function of this Court, in a case like the present one, is to
clarify the law so that police officers, defence and Crown counsel, trial and
appellate judges and the public at large can know what the law is and how it is
to be applied in future cases. It is not to judge the police conduct against a
standard that exceeds the wisdom and training of experienced trial and
appellate judges. [73]                         
In an effort to clarify the law, I accept that
s. 11(7)  of the CDSA  was not available to the police on the facts of this case. Rather,
in the circumstances, the police had three options available to them. They
could have (1) tried to obtain the appellant’s lawful consent to enter his
apartment and seize the roaches; (2) arrested the appellant and obtained a
warrant to search his apartment and seize the roaches; or (3) thrown up their
hands and walked away, in dereliction of their duty to seize illicit drugs,
even if only to catalogue and destroy them. [74]                         
That said, in my respectful view, it is hardly
fair to castigate the police for their conduct when prior to this case, the
legal boundaries of s. 11(7)  in the context of a “no case” seizure were at best
unclear. One need only look to the lower court decisions to realize this. [75]                         
Justice Brown takes a different view. He does
not accept that the “no case” component added any novelty to the legal analysis
of s. 11(7) . In his view, the police “were not operating in unknown legal
territory” (para. 46). According to my colleague (para. 39): . . . the
prospect of the appellant destroying roaches which the police officers hoped to
seize on a “no case” basis and destroy themselves, with no legal consequences
to the appellant whatsoever, did not remotely approach s. 11(7) ’s threshold
of exigency. [Emphasis added.] [76]                         
I cannot accept my colleague’s assessment. It
involves hindsight reasoning on a matter of some complexity — the
interpretation of s. 11(7)  in the context of a “no case” seizure — and does a
disservice to the reasoning of the lower courts in which the “no case”
component played a crucial role in their determination that the police entry
into the appellant’s apartment without a warrant was lawful. [77]                         
That the lower courts focused on the “no case”
component comes as no surprise. To my knowledge, this is the first case in
which a court has been called upon to interpret s. 11(7)  in the context of a
“no case” seizure. In other words, it is a case of first impression. Just as
this Court is now tasked, for the first time, with determining the meaning and
application of the words “exigent circumstances” and “impracticable” in the
context of a “no case” seizure under s. 11(7) , so too were the lower courts.
And as I will explain, their decisions, though ultimately found by this Court
to be in error, were both thoughtful and carefully reasoned. A.           
Reasons of the Trial Judge [78]                         
In concluding that the Crown had made out a case
for exigent circumstances, the trial judge reviewed several authorities from
the British Columbia Court of Appeal and interpreted the words “exigent
circumstances” in terms that closely approximate the interpretation my
colleague ascribes to them. The trial judge then explained why, in his view,
exigent circumstances existed on the facts of this case (para. 75): . . . in the
case at bar the police had: (1) reasonable grounds to believe that there was a
quantity, albeit a small quantity, of a controlled substance in the accused’s
apartment, based on the smell detected when he opened a door as well as his
admission, and thus they had grounds to obtain a search warrant; and (2) there
was a reasonable basis for their belief that the controlled substance would be
lost, destroyed or consumed given that they did not intend to arrest the
accused for possession of this amount of marihuana and accordingly he would
have remained in the apartment. I am therefore satisfied that the
requirement for “exigent circumstances” is met. [Emphasis added.] [79]                         
The trial judge next considered the
impracticability of obtaining a warrant in these circumstances. Following R.
v. Erickson, 2003 BCCA 693, 192 B.C.A.C. 203, he defined the word
“impracticable” as “something less than impossible [that] imports a large
measure of practicality, what may be termed common sense” (para. 76, citing Erickson,
at para. 33). He then stated the following, at para. 77: . . . I
conclude that by reason of the exigent circumstances in this case, it was
impracticable to obtain a search warrant such that seizure of the controlled
substance under s. 11(7)  of the CDSA  was justified. [80]                         
As can be seen, the “no case” component played a
crucial role in the trial judge’s determination that exigent circumstances
existed, making it impracticable for police to obtain a warrant before entering
the appellant’s apartment. To characterize it as being insignificant to the
resolution of the legal issues in this case, as my colleague does, is to ignore
the trial judge’s explicit reasoning to the contrary. B.           
Reasons of the Court of Appeal [81]                         
Nor does my colleague’s characterization conform
with the reasoning of the Court of Appeal. Like the trial judge, the Court of
Appeal was alive to the meaning of “exigent circumstances” and “impracticable”.
Indeed, in defining “exigent circumstances”, the court referred to and quoted
from two of the three authorities which my colleague identifies as governing — R.
v. Grant, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 223, and R. v. Feeney, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 13. [82]                         
In endorsing the trial judge’s finding that
exigent circumstances existed on the facts of this case, the Court of Appeal
considered the appellant’s submission that by taking the approach they did, the
police artificially created their own exigent circumstances and
impracticability. In rejecting that submission, the court quoted from para. 232
of R. v. M. (N.) (2007), 223 C.C.C. (3d) 417 (Ont. S.C.J.), in which
Hill J. catalogued all of the leading authorities, including R. v. Silveira,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 297, to which my colleague refers, dealing with situations of
artificial urgency created by the police. [83]                         
The Court of Appeal then turned its attention to
the existence of exigent circumstances and at para. 72, endorsed the trial
judge’s finding as follows: As there
were clearly grounds to arrest Mr. Paterson and obtain a warrant, I turn to s.
11(7)  of the CDSA . In analyzing whether the trial judge correctly
concluded that s. 11(7)  of the CDSA  applied, I start with the question
of whether there were exigent circumstances. In my view, clearly there were.
The police smelled marihuana and Mr. Paterson admitted having marihuana in the
premises. Mr. Paterson was in the premises, and the police had no intention
of arresting him. I note, parenthetically, that the trial judge was alive to
the possibility that the police were creating a situation so they could enter
the apartment without a warrant, and found that they had not done so. He
accepted their evidence that they only wanted to seize the “roaches”, and then
would be on their way in a “no case” seizure. Had they left Mr. Paterson to
obtain a warrant, he could have easily destroyed the roaches. [Emphasis
added.] As is apparent, the “no
case” component played a central role in the court’s “exigent circumstances”
analysis. [84]                         
The Court of Appeal next considered the issue of
impracticability, which it defined in accordance with its decision in Erickson.
The court then returned to the import of the “no case” seizure and made the
following significant observation at para. 74: In this
case, the police would have had to arrest Mr. Paterson, a much greater
interference with his liberty rights, and obtain a warrant to seize the
roaches. The police weighed these options, and concluded that it was not
practical (in my words) to take those steps for what they believed would be a
“no case” seizure. In these circumstances, the
trial judge concluded that it was impracticable to obtain a warrant, and there
is no basis to interfere with this finding. [Emphasis added.] [85]                         
In other words, according to the Court of
Appeal, in proceeding as they did, the police weighed their options in the
context of a “no case” seizure — (1) arrest the appellant; or (2) enter his
apartment without a warrant for a very limited and narrow purpose — and chose
the second option which in their view, was less intrusive and more respectful
of the appellant’s Charter  rights than the first. C.           
The Admissibility of the Evidence Under Section
24(2) [86]                         
In the face of these observations by British
Columbia’s highest court, I cannot accept my colleague’s position that the “no
case” component added nothing new to the legal analysis. And that brings me to
the feature of this case — legal uncertainty — which I consider to be crucial
in assessing whether the conduct of the police here was so serious and so
intrusive of the appellant’s privacy rights that the drugs and loaded firearms
located in the appellant’s apartment should be excluded under s. 24(2)  of the Charter 
on the basis that their admission would bring the administration of justice
into disrepute. [87]                         
By way of prelude, I accept that the police
entry into the apartment was unlawful. To put the matter succinctly, there was
no immediate risk of the roaches being destroyed that the police could not have
prevented without resorting to a warrantless entry into the appellant’s
apartment. In other words, exigent circumstances did not exist. In my view, the
word “exigent” connotes urgency — nothing more — and there was no genuine
urgency here. The police could have arrested the appellant and obtained a
warrant to search his premises. While proceeding that way would have been
inconvenient and involved an intrusion of some significance on the appellant’s
liberty interest — particularly when this was a “no case” seizure in which the
police did not intend to charge the appellant — inconvenience and the
anticipated loss of liberty occasioned by it cannot convert non-exigent circumstances
into exigent circumstances. As stated earlier, the police had three options
available to them in the circumstances: (1) seek the appellant’s lawful consent
to enter the apartment and seize the roaches; (2) arrest the appellant and
obtain a search warrant; or (3) forget about the roaches and walk away, in
dereliction of their duty to seize illicit drugs, even if only to catalogue and
destroy them. [88]                         
That said, I do not find the legal analysis of
exigency under s. 11(7)  in the context of a “no case” seizure to be
straightforward or obvious at all. In this regard, I have gone to some length
to show how the “no case” component figured prominently in the decisions of the
trial judge and the Court of Appeal — and understandably so. As indicated, this
a case of first impression. The law was unsettled at the time the police
entered the apartment. One only need compare this Court’s analysis of it with
that of the lower courts to realize this. [89]                         
My colleague disagrees. He says this case is not
one of first impression. It posed no new legal issues. The police were not
acting in “unknown legal territory” (para. 46). They were well aware of the
legal principles that governed their entry into a residence in the context of a
“no case” seizure — and, in entering the appellant’s apartment without a
warrant, they either wilfully breached those well-settled principles or ignored
them (paras. 45-46). He further maintains that the “no case” component did not
feature prominently in the legal analysis which led the trial judge and the
Court of Appeal to find that the police entry was lawful. Rather, both courts
merely “mentioned” it “while considering the police officers’ good faith . . .
and the level of intrusiveness of the search, relative to an arrest” (para. 46
(citation omitted)). Like the police, they too were perfectly aware of the
governing law, which was both clear and settled. [90]                         
In the case of the police, my colleague relies
on this line of reasoning to show that their misconduct was very serious — that
they knew or should have known that they had no authority to enter the
appellant’s apartment without a warrant, and yet they did so in wanton or
reckless disregard of his privacy rights. What he does not, and cannot explain,
is why the lower courts, also well versed in the settled law, failed to apply
it. [91]                         
The answer, in my respectful view, is plain. The
law governing a “no case” seizure in the context of s. 11(7)  was not clear and
settled and the decisions of the trial judge and the Court of Appeal attest to
this. They show, clearly and decisively, that both courts placed considerable
emphasis on the “no case” component in determining that the police entry into
the appellant’s apartment was lawful.  Much as my colleague contends otherwise,
he can point to no authority that even addresses the “no case” component in
this context, let alone one that supposedly settles the law. [92]                         
In sum, contrary to my colleague’s assessment,
this case highlights the uncertainty as to the meaning of “exigent
circumstances” and “impracticable” under s. 11(7)  in the context of a “no case”
seizure. I emphasize this uncertainty because over the past number of years,
this Court has consistently held that legal uncertainty is a factor which a
court may take into account in assessing the seriousness of a Charter  breach
occasioned by police conduct. Where the law is evolving or in a state of
uncertainty, and where the police are found to have acted in good faith,
without ignorance or wilful or flagrant disregard of an accused’s Charter  rights,
the seriousness of the breach may be attenuated: see R. v. Cole, 2012
SCC 53, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 34, at paras. 86-89; R. v.
Aucoin, 2012 SCC 66, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 408, at para. 50; R. v. Vu,
2013 SCC 60, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 657, at paras. 69 and 71; R.
v. Spencer, 2014 SCC 43, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 212, at para. 77; and R. v.
Fearon, 2014 SCC 77, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 621, at paras. 93-95. [93]                         
That describes to a tee the situation here. The
seriousness of the breach is, in my view, clearly attenuated by the uncertainty
surrounding the interpretation of s. 11(7)  of the CDSA  in the context of
a “no case” seizure, and the strong findings of the trial judge that the police
were acting in good faith throughout. [94]                         
And once the seriousness of the police conduct
is properly situated and aligned with the unquestioned reliability of the
evidence seized and society’s interest in having the case tried on the merits,
in my respectful view, the s. 24(2)  analysis shifts in favour of admitting the
impugned evidence. The police, acting in good faith, made a mistake about their
authority to enter the appellant’s apartment under the auspices of s. 11(7)  in
a “no case” seizure — the same mistake that both the trial judge and the
British Columbia Court of Appeal made. In these circumstances, I fail to see
how the admission of the evidence found in the appellant’s apartment would
cause the public to lose faith in the criminal justice system and bring the
administration of justice into disrepute.  If anything, it is the exclusion of
reliable and crucial evidence implicating the appellant in very serious gun and
drug offences that is far more likely to cause the public to lose faith and
confidence in our criminal justice system. [95]                         
In so concluding, I do not question that the
police entry into the appellant’s apartment had a significant impact on the
appellant’s privacy interest. However, I note that the impugned evidence was
lawfully discoverable. Had the police obtained a warrant to seize the roaches,
they would have discovered the drugs and guns. Bearing in mind that the police
were acting in good faith throughout and that there was no deliberate flouting
of the appellant’s Charter  rights, this attenuates the impact of the
breach on the appellant’s privacy interests: Cole, at paras. 89 and 93.
I am therefore not persuaded that this factor is sufficient to tip the scales
in favour of exclusion. [96]                         
In sum, it is the cumulative effect of the legal
uncertainty, police good faith, and the discoverability and reliability of
critical evidence needed for there to be a trial on the merits that resolves
the balance in favour of admitting the evidence. [97]                         
In holding that the evidence of the drugs and
guns should be admitted, I should not be taken as condoning police misconduct
or failing to take seriously the individual rights of the appellant. I
recognize that we must be vigilant in protecting against wilful, deliberate,
and even in some cases, negligent misconduct on the part of the police. But
that is not this case. Excluding reliable evidence required to prove serious
criminal charges in circumstances where the police, acting in good faith, made
a mistake in believing that they could enter the appellant’s apartment without
a warrant — the very mistake that the trial judge and the Court of Appeal made
— does nothing to promote public confidence in the administration of justice. 
On the contrary, it betrays that confidence. [98]                         
That said, in a case like this one, where there
was a significant intrusion on the appellant’s privacy interests, albeit one
that occurred in circumstances where the law was unclear and the police were
acting in good faith, I would not foreclose the possibility that a remedy short
of exclusion might be available under s. 24(1)  of the Charter , perhaps
in the form of a sentence reduction. However, as this point was not raised by
the appellant, it must be left for another day. III.         
Conclusion [99]                         
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.                     Appeal
allowed, convictions set aside and acquittals entered, Moldaver and Gascon
JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the
appellant: Sprake Song & Konye, Vancouver; Kenneth S. Westlake,
Vancouver; Anderson Criminal Law, Vancouver.                     Solicitor for the
respondent: Public Prosecution Service of Canada, Vancouver.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Ontario: Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Alberta: Attorney General of Alberta,
Calgary.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association: Blake,
Cassels & Graydon, Vancouver.  [1] In this regard, I respectfully disagree with the Court of Appeal’s
statement, at para. 57, that the confessions rule “ensures that false
confessions are not admitted”. Whether the impugned statement is true or false
is irrelevant to the inquiry. [2]  The Attorney General of Ontario notes that in R. v. Soules,
2011 ONCA 429, 105 O.R. (3d) 561, upon which the appellant relies, police were
prohibited from relying on statutorily compelled statements from the accused for
any purpose, including to establish grounds for further investigative
steps. Without commenting on the correctness of Soules, I observe that Orbanski’s
direction that the police may rely upon roadside statements for the purpose I
have described was categorical. [3]  For this reason, I stress that the foregoing interpretation of
“impracticable” is directed solely to that term as it is employed in s. 11(7) 
of the CDSA  to conditions of a warrantless search thereunder. My
consideration of the meaning of “impracticable” here should not be taken as
applying to that term as it is employed in other criminal statutory provisions,
especially where the French version employs a term other than “difficilement
réalisable”. For example, s. 184.3(1)  of the Criminal Code  allows
telewarrants for intercepting private communications where it would be
“impracticable” to appear personally before a justice. The French version of s.
184.3(1)  employs not “difficilement réalisable” but “peu commode”.
Similarly s. 487.1(4) of the Criminal Code , which requires an
information submitted for the obtaining of a telewarrant to include “a
statement of the circumstances that make it impracticable for the peace officer
to appear personally before a justice”, employs “peu commode”.  