  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Boudreault, 2012 SCC 56, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 157 Date: 20121026 Docket: 34582  Between: Donald
Boudreault Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent -
and - Attorney
General of Ontario Intervener    Coram: LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver and
Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 57)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 58 to 92) Fish J. (LeBel, Deschamps, Abella,
  Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)  Cromwell J.     R. v. Boudreault, 2012 SCC 56, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 157 Donald Boudreault                                                                                         Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Attorney General of Ontario                                                                        Intervener Indexed as:  R. v. Boudreault 2012 SCC 56 File No.:  34582. 2012:  June 6; 2012:  October 26. Present:  LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver and
Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec                     B was inebriated and unfit to
drive when it was time for him to return home after a night of drinking.  At B’s
request, a taxi was called for him, for which he had to wait outside.  It was a
cold and windy February morning.  B got into his truck, started the engine,
turned on the heat and fell asleep.  When the taxi arrived, the driver called
the police.  B was arrested and charged with having care or control of a motor
vehicle (1) while his ability was impaired by alcohol and (2) with
more than 80 mg of alcohol in 100 mL of his blood, contrary to ss. 253(1) (a)
and (b) of the Criminal Code .  He was acquitted on both counts at
trial but the Court of Appeal allowed the Crown’s appeal, set aside the
acquittals and entered convictions.                     Held (Cromwell J.
dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed and the acquittals restored.                     Per LeBel, Deschamps, Fish,
Abella, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.: “Care or control” within the
meaning of s. 253(1)  of the Criminal Code  signifies (1) an
intentional course of conduct associated with a motor vehicle; (2) by a
person whose ability to drive is impaired, or whose blood alcohol level exceeds
the legal limit; (3) in circumstances that create a realistic risk of
danger to persons or property.  With respect to the third element, the risk of
danger must be realistic and not just theoretically possible.  Parliament’s
objective in enacting s. 253  of the Criminal Code  was to prevent
the risk of danger to public safety that normally arises from the mere
combination of alcohol and automobile.  Conduct that presents no such risk
falls outside the intended reach of the offence.  To require that the risk be
“realistic” is to establish a low threshold consistent with Parliament’s
intention.                     The existence of a realistic risk
of danger is a matter of fact.  In the absence of evidence to the contrary, a
realistic risk of danger will normally be the only reasonable inference where
the Crown establishes impairment and a present ability to set the vehicle in
motion.  To avoid conviction, the accused will in practice face a tactical
necessity of adducing evidence tending to prove that no realistic risk of
danger existed in the particular circumstances of the case.  The trial judge
must examine all of the relevant evidence and may consider a number of factors,
including whether the accused took care to arrange an alternate plan to ensure
his safe transportation home.                     In this case, the trial judge,
applying the correct legal test to the evidence he accepted, found as a fact
that there was no realistic risk of danger.  The trial judge’s conclusion on
the facts, however surprising or unreasonable it may appear to another court,
did not give rise to a question of law alone.  This is the only ground upon which
the Crown, pursuant to s. 676(1) (a) of the Criminal Code ,
can appeal the acquittal of an accused.  This Court is therefore bound, as a
matter of law, to allow B’s appeal, to set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal, and to restore the acquittals entered at trial.                     The question of what the expression
“care or control” means in s. 253(1)  of the Criminal Code  is an
issue of statutory interpretation.  “Care or control” are not technical legal
words in the context of the provision.  If the ordinary meaning of these words
applies, one is in care or control of a motor vehicle when one acts to assume
the present ability to operate the vehicle or has its superintendence or
management.  The scheme and object of the provision suggest that Parliament
intended the ordinary meaning to apply.  The purpose of criminalizing having
care or control of a vehicle while impaired is preventive.  While the evil is
the danger of impaired operation of a vehicle, a wider ambit of criminality has
been created to prevent that evil from materializing.                     Section 253  being preventive in
nature, the element of risk will be relevant to the assessment of whether the
person has care or control of a motor vehicle.  Since the intention of driving
the vehicle is not pertinent under the care or control offence, the risk must
be assessed by looking at the accused’s use of the vehicle.  If an accused acts
to assume the present ability to operate the vehicle or its superintendence or
management, there is an inherent risk of danger, unless objectively viewed, the
accused’s use of the vehicle involves no such risk.  Accordingly, not all acts
in relation to a vehicle will necessarily constitute acts of care or control.  The
degree of involvement of the accused with the vehicle will need to be more than
trivial to constitute care or control.  The determination of whether the
accused was in care or control will depend upon a careful consideration of the
particular facts of the case.                     In any event, even if the creation
of risk were an essential element of the offence, the trial judge erred in law
in finding that it had not been proved.  There is no dispute that the absence
of intent to set the vehicle in motion is not a defence, but the trial judge in
effect made it so by basing his conclusion that there was no risk on evidence
that B did not intend to drive.  Having found this legal error, the Court of
Appeal was correct to set aside the acquittals and enter convictions.  When
applying the correct legal test, care or control was amply proved in the
present case. Cases Cited By Fish J.                     Referred to:  R. v.
Biniaris, 2000 SCC 15, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 381; R. v. Wren (2000), 47
O.R. (3d) 544, leave to appeal refused, [2000] 2 S.C.R. xii; R. v. Smits,
2012 ONCA 524, 294 O.A.C. 355; R. v. Decker, 2002 NFCA 9, 209 Nfld.
& P.E.I.R. 44, leave to appeal refused, [2002] 4 S.C.R. vii; R. v.
Burbella, 2002 MBCA 105, 166 Man. R. (2d) 198; R. v. Shuparski, 2003
SKCA 22, [2003] 6 W.W.R. 428, leave to appeal refused, [2003] 2 S.C.R. x; R.
v. Mallery, 2008 NBCA 18, 327 N.B.R. (2d) 130; Saunders v. The Queen,
[1967] S.C.R. 284; R. v. Toews, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 119; R. v. Penno,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 865; R. v. Price (1978), 40 C.C.C. (2d) 378; Ford v.
The Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 231; R. v. Whyte, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 3; R.
v. Lockerby, 1999 NSCA 122, 180 N.S.R. (2d) 115; R. v. Szymanski (2009),
88 M.V.R. (5th) 182; R. v. Ross, 2007 ONCJ 59, 44 M.V.R. (5th) 275. By Cromwell J. (dissenting)                     R. v. Toews, [1985] 2
S.C.R. 119; R. v. Price (1978), 40 C.C.C. (2d) 378; R. v. Johal
(1998), 124 C.C.C. (3d) 249; Saunders
v. The Queen, [1967] S.C.R. 284; R. v. Whyte, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 3; Ford
v. The Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 231; R. v. Penno, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 865;
R. v. Decker, 2002 NFCA 9, 209 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 44, leave to appeal
refused, [2002] 4 S.C.R. vii; R. v. Burbella, 2002 MBCA 105, 166 Man. R.
(2d) 198; R. v. Shuparski, 2003 SKCA 22, [2003] 6 W.W.R. 428, leave to
appeal refused, [2003] 2 S.C.R. x; R. v. Mallery, 2008 NBCA 18, 327
N.B.R. (2d) 130; Bell ExpressVu Limited Partnership v. Rex, 2002 SCC 42,
[2002] 2 S.C.R. 559. Statutes and Regulations
Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
s. 1 .                     Michaël Bourget and Christine Gosselin, for the
respondent.                     Benita Wassenaar, for the intervener.                     The
judgment of LeBel, Deschamps, Fish, Abella, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. was
delivered by                     Fish J. — I [1]                             
Donald Boudreault was too drunk to drive — and
knew it — when he was asked to leave the apartment of Danye Dubois, whom he had
earlier met at a bar.  He therefore asked Ms. Dubois to call for a taxi.  And
she did, not once but twice. [2]                             
Unable to wait in the apartment after the second
call, Mr. Boudreault decided to wait in his pickup truck, rather than outdoors
in the bitter cold and howling wind.  He started the motor and turned on the
heat while awaiting the taxi’s arrival.  At no time did he attempt to set his truck
in motion before the taxi arrived.  Nor, of course, afterward. [3]                             
Approximately 45 minutes after the initial call,
and 20 to 25 minutes after the second, the taxi finally arrived.  The taxi
driver found Mr. Boudreault asleep in the driver’s seat.  That he was
inebriated could hardly have come as a surprise: He would not otherwise have
summoned the taxi to take him home. [4]                             
Instead of awakening Mr. Boudreault so that he
could be driven home, the taxi driver called the police. [5]                             
Mr. Boudreault was arrested and charged with
having care or control of a motor vehicle (1) while his ability was impaired by
alcohol and (2) with more than 80 mg of alcohol in 100 mL of his blood,
contrary to ss. 253(1) (a) and (b) of the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 . [6]                             
He was acquitted on both counts at trial (2010
QCCQ 11443 (CanLII)) but the Court of Appeal, on an appeal by the Crown, set
aside the acquittals and entered convictions instead (2011 QCCA 2071
(CanLII)).  Mr. Boudreault now appeals to this Court, urging us to quash his
convictions by the Court of Appeal and to restore his acquittals at trial. [7]                             
We are required on this appeal to settle an
issue of law that divided the courts below — and has divided other courts
across the country as well.  And we are required to then determine whether the
trial judge, in acquitting Mr. Boudreault, committed an error of “law alone”,
within the meaning of s. 676(1) (a) of the Criminal Code .  If he
did not, the Crown had no right of appeal against his acquittals, however
surprising — even unreasonable — we may find that judgment to be: R. v.
Biniaris, 2000 SCC 15, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 381, at para. 32. [8]                             
Essentially, then, the appeal raises two
distinct issues of law — the first of general application, the second of
particular application here.  Set out interrogatively, these issues can be
framed this way: Is risk of danger an essential element of the offence of care
or control under s. 253(1)  of the Criminal Code ?  And, if it is, did the
trial judge in this case err in law in finding that there was no such risk in
the present circumstances? [9]                             
For the reasons that follow, I have concluded
that “care or control”, within the meaning of s. 253(1)  of the Criminal Code ,
signifies (1) an intentional course of conduct associated with a motor vehicle;
(2) by a person whose ability to drive is impaired, or whose blood alcohol
level exceeds the legal limit; (3) in circumstances that create a realistic
risk, as opposed to a remote possibility, of danger to persons or
property. [10]                         
Only the third element — realistic risk of
danger — is in issue on this appeal.  The Crown submits that risk of danger is
not an element of “care or control” under s. 253(1) of the Code.  The
trial judge found that it is. With respect, I agree with the trial judge. [11]                         
The existence of a realistic risk of danger is a
matter of fact.  In this case, the trial judge, applying the correct legal
test, found as a fact that there was no such risk. [12]                         
I recognize, as the trial judge did, that a
conviction will normally ensue where the accused, as in this case, was found
inebriated behind the wheel of a motor vehicle with nothing to stop the accused
from setting it in motion, either intentionally or accidentally. [13]                         
Impaired judgment is no stranger to impaired
driving, where both are induced by the consumption of alcohol or drugs.  Absent
evidence to the contrary, a present ability to drive while impaired, or with an
excessive blood alcohol ratio, creates an inherent risk of danger.  In
practice, to avoid conviction, the accused will therefore face a tactical
necessity of adducing evidence tending to prove that the inherent risk
is not a realistic risk in the particular circumstances of the case. [14]                         
That is what happened here.  The trial judge was
satisfied that Mr. Boudreault would not, in fact, have set his vehicle in
motion.  And this was the only risk of danger in issue at trial. [15]                         
The judge’s conclusion on the facts, however
surprising or unreasonable it may appear to another court, did not give rise to
a question of law alone.  And, as I indicated earlier, this is the only
ground upon which the Crown, pursuant to s. 676(1) (a) of the Criminal
Code , can appeal the acquittal of an accused at trial. [16]                         
I therefore feel bound, as a matter of law, to
allow Mr. Boudreault’s appeal, to set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal, and to restore his acquittals at trial. II [17]                         
On February 7, 2009, Donald Boudreault went out
drinking.  When the bar closed, he returned to the home of Danye Dubois.  She,
apparently sober, drove Mr. Boudreault’s truck for him from the bar to her
apartment, where the drinking continued well into the morning of February 8. [18]                         
At around 10:00 a.m., Mr. Boudreault decided to
go home.  By his own admission, he was inebriated and unfit to drive.  At Mr.
Boudreault’s request, Ms. Dubois called a taxi for him.  The service she
called, “Taxic”, sends two drivers — one to take the inebriated motorist home,
and the other to drive his vehicle. [19]                         
After 20 to 25 minutes — an unusually long time,
since Mr. Boudreault had used the Taxic service in the past and its drivers had
arrived immediately (“tout de suite” (A.R., vol. II, at p. 86)) — there
was still no sign of the taxi.  Ms. Dubois called Taxic once more.  At that
point, wanting to go to sleep, Ms. Dubois asked Mr. Boudreault to wait outside:
[translation] “. . . go warm up
your truck,” she said, “the taxi is coming” (A.R., vol. II, at p. 69). [20]                         
A February morning in Jonquière, Quebec, it was
minus 15 degrees Celsius outside, with winds blowing at 40 km/h.   Mr.
Boudreault left the apartment and got into his truck — which was in a private
driveway, on level terrain, its automatic transmission set to “park” (A.F., at
para. 30, note 13). He started the engine, turned on the heat, and fell asleep. [21]                         
At 10:44 a.m., the police received a call from
the Taxic driver, who had arrived at Ms. Dubois’s home and reported seeing a
man sleeping in the driver’s seat of a motor vehicle.  The police arrested Mr.
Boudreault shortly thereafter.  His ability to drive was manifestly impaired. [22]                         
Upon arrest, Mr. Boudreault asked that he be
left alone so that he could drive home.  The trial judge attached no probative
weight to this statement and took care to explain his conclusion in this
regard.  At the police station, a breathalyzer test yielded results of 250 mg
of alcohol per 100 mL of blood at 11:40 a.m. and 242 mg of alcohol per 100 mL
of blood at 12:05 p.m. — both over three times the legal limit of 80 mg/100 mL. [23]                         
Daoust J. of the Court of Quebec held that where
there is no risk of putting a motor vehicle in motion, the courts must conclude
that there is no care or control within the meaning of s. 253(1) of the Code. 
In his view, no such risk existed in this case.  Mr. Boudreault, though
intoxicated, knew what he was doing and took all the necessary precautions. 
From his own prior experience, Mr. Boudreault was well aware of the gravity of
driving while impaired.  He had a concrete and reliable plan to get home.  And
finally, the evidence established that his plan would in fact have prevented
him from driving — it was the driver of the taxi he had summoned who called the
police. [24]                         
The Court of Appeal allowed the Crown’s appeal
and entered convictions.  The Court considered that an intention to drive is
not an essential element of the offence.  The trial judge had therefore erred
in considering a lack of intention to drive as proof that there was no risk of
setting the vehicle in motion.  In its view, [translation]
“there was such a risk given the respondent’s advanced state of intoxication,
since his blood alcohol level was more than three times the legal limit and
this might have greatly affected his judgment had he woken up” (para. 6). III [25]                         
I turn now to consider the issue of general
application that concerns us here: Is risk of danger an essential element of
the offence of care or control under s. 253(1)  of the Criminal Code ? [26]                         
As mentioned earlier, I believe that it is. [27]                         
In recent years, five provincial appellate
courts have reached the same conclusion: R. v. Wren (2000), 47 O.R. (3d)
544, leave to appeal refused, [2000] 2 S.C.R. xii (and again, more recently, in
R. v. Smits, 2012 ONCA 524, 294 O.A.C. 355); R. v. Decker, 2002
NFCA 9, 209 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 44, leave to appeal refused, [2002] 4 S.C.R.
vii; R. v. Burbella, 2002 MBCA 105, 166 Man. R. (2d) 198; R. v.
Shuparski, 2003 SKCA 22, [2003] 6 W.W.R. 428, leave to appeal refused,
[2003] 2 S.C.R. x; R. v. Mallery, 2008 NBCA 18, 327 N.B.R. (2d) 130. [28]                         
With respect for those who have adopted an
opposing view, I agree with Robertson J.A. in Mallery, that “[t]he
concept of danger provides a unifying thread which promotes certainty in the
law while balancing the rights of an accused with the objectives of the
legislation” (para. 4). [29]                         
The divergence of opinion on this question may
find its roots nearly a half-century ago in Saunders v. The Queen,
[1967] S.C.R. 284, where the accused, while impaired, was found in the driver’s
seat of an inoperable vehicle but was nonetheless convicted of “care or
control” while impaired.  To the extent that Saunders may be interpreted
to exclude a risk of danger as an element of “care or control”, it has since
been overtaken by subsequent decisions of the Court, notably R. v. Toews,
[1985] 2 S.C.R. 119, and R. v. Penno, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 865. [30]                         
In Toews, McIntyre J. held that                     acts
of care or control, short of driving, are acts which involve some use of the
car or its fittings and equipment, or some course of conduct associated with
the vehicle which would involve a risk of putting the vehicle in motion so
that it could become dangerous. [Emphasis added; p. 126.] [31]                         
And in Penno, citing Toews, Lamer
C.J. reaffirmed the requirement of risk of danger in these terms:                            The
law . . . is not deprived of any flexibility and does not go so far as to
punish the mere presence of an individual whose ability to drive is impaired in
a motor vehicle. In fact, Toews stands for the proposition that when
a person uses a vehicle in a way that involves no risk of putting it in motion
so that it could become dangerous, the courts should find that the actus
reus was not present. [Emphasis added; p. 877.] [32]                         
Parliament’s objective in enacting s. 253 of the
Code was to prevent a risk of danger to public safety: Toews, at
p. 126, citing R. v. Price (1978), 40 C.C.C. (2d) 378 (N.B.S.C., App.
Div.), at p. 384.  Accordingly, conduct that presents no such risk falls
outside the intended reach of the offence. [33]                         
In this light, I think it helpful to set out
once again the essential elements of “care or control” under s. 253(1)  of the Criminal
Code  in this way: (1)        an intentional course of conduct
associated with a motor vehicle; (2)        by a person whose ability to
drive is impaired, or whose blood alcohol level exceeds the legal limit; (3)        in circumstances that create a realistic
risk of danger to persons or property. [34]                         
The risk of danger must be realistic and
not just theoretically possible: Smits, at para. 60. But nor need
the risk be probable, or even serious or substantial. [35]                         
To require that the risk be “realistic” is to
establish a low threshold consistent with Parliament’s intention to prevent a
danger to public safety. To require only that the risk be “theoretically
possible” is to adopt too low a threshold since it would criminalize
unnecessarily a broad range of benign and inconsequential conduct. [36]                         
It is settled law that an intention to set the
vehicle in motion is not an essential element of the offence: Ford v.
The Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 231.  This may appear anomalous in view of the
presumption set out at s. 258(1) (a) of the Criminal Code , which
provides that an accused who was found in the driver’s seat of a motor vehicle                     shall
be deemed to have had the care or control of the vehicle . . . unless the
accused establishes that the accused did not occupy that seat or position for
the purpose of setting the vehicle . . . in motion . . . . [37]                         
Accordingly, an accused found in the driver’s
seat will be presumed, as a matter of law, to have care or control of the
vehicle, unless the accused satisfies the court that he or she had no intention
to drive — an intention that, pursuant to Ford, is not an essential
element of the offence! [38]                         
At a minimum, the wording of the presumption
signifies that a person who was found drunk and behind the wheel cannot, for
that reason alone, be convicted of care or control if that person satisfies the
court that he or she had no intention to set the vehicle in motion.  Dickson
C.J. made this plain in R. v. Whyte, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 3, at p. 19: “It
cannot be said that proof of occupancy of the driver’s seat leads inexorably to
the conclusion that the essential element of care or control exists . . . .” [39]                         
Put differently, s. 258(1) (a)  indicates
that proof of voluntary inebriation and voluntary occupancy of the driver’s
seat do not by their coexistence alone conclusively establish “care or control”
under s. 253(1)  of the Criminal Code . Something more is required and, in
my view, the “something more” is a realistic risk of danger to persons or
property. [40]                         
I agree with Justice Cromwell that Parliament’s
purpose in enacting the care or control provision was preventive, and directed
at the inherent danger that normally arises from the mere “combination of
alcohol and automobile”: Saunders, at p. 290.  With respect, however, I
believe this supports my view that Parliament’s intention in enacting s. 253(1) 
of the Criminal Code  was to criminalize only conduct that creates a
realistic risk of danger. [41]                         
A realistic risk that the vehicle will be set in
motion obviously constitutes a realistic risk of danger. Accordingly, an intention
to set the vehicle in motion suffices in itself to create the risk of
danger contemplated by the offence of care or control.  On the other hand, an
accused who satisfies the court that he or she had no intention to set the
vehicle in motion will not necessarily escape conviction:  An inebriated
individual who is found behind the wheel and has a present ability to set the
vehicle in motion — without intending at that moment to do so — may
nevertheless present a realistic risk of danger. [42]                         
In the absence of a contemporaneous intention to
drive, a realistic risk of danger may arise in at least three ways. First, an
inebriated person who initially does not intend to drive may later, while still
impaired, change his or her mind and proceed to do so; second, an inebriated
person behind the wheel may unintentionally set the vehicle in motion; and
third, through negligence, bad judgment or otherwise, a stationary or
inoperable vehicle may endanger persons or property. [43]                         
The only risk of danger alleged by the Crown in
this case was that Mr. Boudreault would, at some point, set his vehicle in
motion intentionally. [44]                         
The Crown contends that a risk of danger is not
an essential element of care or control under s. 253(1) of the Code.  It
submits that, even where the presumption of care or control under s. 258(1) (a)
is not engaged, the Crown need only prove voluntary consumption of alcohol
beyond the legal limit (or leading to impairment) and “some use of the car or
its fittings and equipment” (R.F., at para. 32, citing Toews, at p.
126).  Accordingly, in the Crown’s submission, an inebriated accused found
behind the wheel of a car, with the key in the ignition and the motor running,
is subject to automatic conviction. [45]                         
As I mentioned at the outset, anyone found
inebriated and behind the wheel with a present ability to drive will — and should
— almost invariably be convicted.  It hardly follows, however, that a
conviction in these circumstances is, or should be, “automatic”.  A conviction
will be neither appropriate nor inevitable absent a realistic risk of danger in
the particular circumstances of the case. [46]                         
The care or control offence captures a wide
ambit of dangerous conduct:  Anyone who is intoxicated and in a position to
immediately set the vehicle in motion faces conviction on those facts alone. [48]                         
I need hardly reiterate that “realistic risk” is
a low threshold and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, will normally
be the only reasonable inference where the Crown establishes impairment and a
present ability to set the vehicle in motion.  To avoid conviction, the accused
will in practice face a tactical necessity of adducing credible and reliable
evidence tending to prove that no realistic risk of danger existed in the
particular circumstances of the case. [49]                         
The accused may escape conviction, for example,
by adducing evidence that the motor vehicle was inoperable or, on account of
its location or placement, could, under no reasonably conceivable
circumstances, pose a risk of danger.  Likewise, use of the vehicle for a
manifestly innocent purpose should not attract the stigma of a criminal
conviction.  As Lamer C.J. observed in Penno, “The law . . . is not
deprived of any flexibility and does not go so far as to punish the mere
presence of an individual whose ability to drive is impaired in a motor
vehicle” (p. 877). [50]                         
The existence or not of a realistic risk of
danger is a finding of fact: see R. v. Lockerby, 1999 NSCA 122, 180
N.S.R. (2d) 115, at para. 13; Smits, at para. 61.  The trial judge must
examine all of the relevant evidence to this end and may consider a number of
factors: see, e.g., R. v. Szymanski (2009), 88 M.V.R. (5th) 182 (Ont.
S.C.J.), at para. 93, per Durno J.; R. v. Ross, 2007 ONCJ 59, 44
M.V.R. (5th) 275, at para. 14, per Duncan J. [51]                         
One of the factors of particular relevance in
this case is that the accused took care to arrange what some courts have called
an “alternate plan” to ensure his safe transportation home. [52]                         
The impact of an “alternate plan” of this sort
on the court’s assessment of the risk of danger depends on two considerations:
first, whether the plan itself was objectively concrete and reliable; second,
whether it was in fact implemented by the accused.  A plan may seem watertight,
but the accused’s level of impairment, demeanour or actions may demonstrate
that there was nevertheless a realistic risk that the plan would be abandoned
before its implementation.  Where judgment is impaired by alcohol, it cannot be
lightly assumed that the actions of the accused when behind the wheel will
accord with his or her intentions either then or afterward. [53]                         
For example, even where it is certain that the
taxi will show up at some point, if the accused occupied the driver’s seat
without a valid excuse or reasonable explanation, this alone may persuade the
judge that “his judgment [was] so impaired that he [could not] foresee the
possible consequences of his actions”: Toews, at p. 126, again citing Price,
at p. 384.  The converse, however, is not necessarily true.  Even where it
is probable that the taxi will appear at some point and the accused occupied
the driver’s seat with a valid excuse or reasonable explanation, the
trial judge may nonetheless be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that there
remained a realistic risk of danger in the circumstances. IV [54]                         
The trial judge in this case committed no error
of principle in outlining the applicable law.  He recognized that the absence
of an intention to drive is not a defence and is only relevant to rebutting the
presumption in s. 258(1) (a) of the Criminal Code .  He also
correctly noted that a risk of danger is an essential element of the offence. 
Finally, the trial judge turned his mind to the possibility that the risk may
materialize by setting the vehicle in motion, either intentionally or
unintentionally.  In this latter regard, the trial judge recognized that the
risk of [translation] “the vehicle
being set in motion involuntarily” is a danger the offence is designed to
prevent (para. 35).  He did not, however, expressly address that danger in this
case.  This is hardly surprising: At no point during the trial did the Crown
allude at all to any such risk in this case. [55]                         
The parties do not dispute any aspect of the
evidence relied on by the trial judge in his reasons. [56]                         
Finally, applying the correct legal test to the
evidence he accepted, the trial judge concluded there was no risk that
Mr. Boudreault would at any point intentionally set the vehicle in motion. As
earlier mentioned, this finding of fact, however unsatisfactory or unreasonable
it may appear to others, was not reviewable on an appeal by the Crown. [57]                         
I therefore feel bound, as a matter of law, to
allow Mr. Boudreault’s appeal, to set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal, and to restore his acquittals at trial.                     The following are the reasons
delivered by                     Cromwell J. (dissenting) — I.       Introduction [58]                         
It is an offence to have “care or control” of a
motor vehicle while one’s blood alcohol ratio exceeds the legal limit of 80 mg
of alcohol per 100 mL of blood (“.08”) or while one’s ability to operate the
vehicle is impaired. This appeal concerns whether the trial judge properly
interpreted and applied the elements of the care or control offence in the
appellant’s case. [59]                         
The trial judge found that in order for the
accused to be in “care or control” of a vehicle, his acts in relation to it
must give rise to a risk of danger.  In other words, creation of a risk of
danger is an essential element of the offence.  The judge also found that there
was no such risk here because the appellant did not intend to drive. My
colleague Fish J. would uphold these findings. I respectfully disagree. [60]                         
My view is that risk of danger is not an element
of the offence.  My colleague attempts to limit by means of statutory
interpretation the potentially wide ambit of the care or control offence by
reading in both this new essential element and a new evidentiary rule that
operates against the accused.  Respectfully, this result is not consistent with
well-settled principles of statutory interpretation. In addition, this
approach, in my respectful view, seriously undercuts the provision’s preventive
purpose.  In any event, even if the creation of risk were an essential element
of the offence, the trial judge erred in law in finding that it had not been
proved.  There is no dispute that the absence of intent to set the vehicle in
motion is not a defence. But the trial judge in effect made it so by
basing his conclusion that there was no risk on evidence that the appellant did
not intend to drive (2010 QCCQ 11443 (CanLII)). [61]                         
In my view, the Court of Appeal for Quebec was
correct to set aside the acquittals entered by the trial judge and to enter
convictions (2011 QCCA 2071 (CanLII)). I would therefore dismiss the appeal. II.     Analysis [62]                         
The appeal raises two issues:  first, did the
trial judge err in law by finding that the risk of danger is an essential
element of the care or control offence in s. 253(1)  of the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , and second, did he err in finding that there was no such
risk here? [63]                         
My colleague Fish J. has admirably set out the
facts and decisions so that I can proceed immediately to my analysis of these
issues. A.     Is a Risk of Danger an Essential Element of the Care or
Control Offence? [64]                         
The relevant provision is  s. 253(1) of the Code:                               253. (1)      Every one commits an offence who operates a
motor vehicle or vessel or operates or assists in the operation of an aircraft
or of railway equipment or has the care or control of a motor vehicle,
vessel, aircraft or railway equipment, whether it is in motion or not,                               (a)     while
the person’s ability to operate the vehicle, vessel, aircraft or railway
equipment is impaired by alcohol or a drug; or                               (b)     having
consumed alcohol in such a quantity that the concentration in the person’s
blood exceeds eighty milligrams of alcohol in one hundred millilitres of blood. [65]                         
In R. v. Toews, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 119,
McIntyre J. noted that the mens rea of the care and control offence is
the intent to assume care or control after the voluntary consumption of alcohol
or a drug and that the actus reus is the act of assumption of care or
control when the voluntary consumption of alcohol or a drug has impaired the
ability to drive (p. 124). [66]                         
The question of what the expression “care or
control” means in this section is of course an issue of statutory
interpretation.  The approach to the issue is not controversial:  we are to
read the words in their entire context, in their grammatical and ordinary sense
harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act and the
intention of Parliament. We are not to apply a presumption of Charter 
compliance absent ambiguity.                     (1)      Ordinary
Meaning and Statutory Purpose [67]                         
In this case, the presumption of care or control
in s. 258 of the Code was rebutted. Thus, the discussion that follows is
only concerned with the interpretation of care or control in the context where
the presumption does not apply. [68]                         
I begin with the text of the provision. “[C]are
or control” are not technical legal words in this context. The ordinary sense
of the word “care” denotes charge or protection while “control” denotes command
and direction: see, e.g., R. v. Price (1978), 40 C.C.C. (2d) 378 (N.B.S.C.,
App. Div.), at pp. 383-84; R. v. Johal (1998), 124 C.C.C. (3d) 249 (Ont.
Ct. (Gen. Div.)), at p. 253. It follows that if the ordinary meaning of these
words applies, one is in care or control of a motor vehicle when one acts to
assume the present ability to operate the vehicle or has its superintendence or
management. [69]                         
The scheme and object of the provision suggest
that Parliament intended the ordinary meaning to apply. The purpose of
criminalizing having care or control of a vehicle while impaired (or over .08)
is preventive.  While the evil is the danger of impaired operation of a
vehicle, a wider ambit of criminality has been created to prevent that evil
from materializing. The unanimous Court, speaking through Fauteux J., commented
on this preventive purpose in Saunders v. The Queen, [1967] S.C.R. 284,
at pp. 289-90:                            Obviously, every one agrees that the true
object of the provisions . . . is to cope with and protect the person and the
property from the danger which is inherent in the driving, care or
control of a motor vehicle by anyone who is intoxicated . . . . . . .                            .
. . these and the other related provisions of the Code manifest the
determination of Parliament to strike at the very root of the evil, to wit: the
combination of alcohol and automobile, that normally breeds this element of
danger which this preventive legislation is meant to anticipate.  [Emphasis
added; italics in original.] [70]                         
In R. v. Whyte, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 3, when discussing the
constitutionality of the presumption of care or control now found at s. 258 of
the Code, Dickson C.J. held that “Parliament wished to discourage
intoxicated people from even placing themselves in a position where they
could set a vehicle in motion” (p. 26 (emphasis added); see also Ford v.
The Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 231, at p. 249; Toews, at p. 126). [71]                         
I conclude that the provision’s preventive
purpose supports giving the expression “care or control” in this context its
ordinary meaning. [72]                         
Further, this view is reinforced by the
well-settled proposition that the intent to set the vehicle in motion is not an
element of the care or control offence. The contrary interpretation, which was
adopted in dissent by Dickson J. in Ford, was expressly rejected by the
majority reasons, written by Ritchie J.:                            Nor, in my opinion, is it necessary
for the Crown to prove an intent to set the vehicle in motion in order to
procure a conviction on a charge under s. 236(1) [now s. 253(1) ] . . . . Care
or control may be exercised without such intent where an accused performs
some act or series of acts involving the use of the car, its fittings or
equipment, such as occurred in this case, whereby the vehicle may
unintentionally be set in motion creating the danger the section is designed to
prevent. [Emphasis added; pp. 248-49.] (See also Toews, at p.
123; R. v. Penno, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 865, at pp. 875-77 and 895.) Dickson J. adopted the
majority position in Ford when writing for the unanimous Court in Whyte:                     Is
the intention to set the vehicle in motion an ingredient of the offence of
having care or control of a motor vehicle while impaired, or is the absence of
such intention simply a way for an accused to rebut the presumption of care or
control? This Court settled the question in Ford v. The Queen, [1982] 1
S.C.R. 231, when Ritchie J. for the majority held that the intention to set the
vehicle in motion is not an element of the offence. Proof of lack of
intention is simply an evidentiary point that rebuts the presumption of care or
control of the vehicle established by s. 237(1)(a). The Court
recently reaffirmed Ford in R. v. Toews, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 119.
[Emphasis added; p. 17.] In Toews, McIntyre
J. also held that the absence of intent to drive did not afford the accused any
defence to the infraction of care or control (p. 124). [73]                         
Section 253  being preventive in nature, the
element of risk will be relevant to the assessment of whether the person has
care or control of a motor vehicle. Since the intention of driving the vehicle
is not pertinent under the care or control offence, the risk must be assessed
by looking at the accused’s use of the vehicle.  Indeed, risk should not be
assessed on the premise that the accused’s actions will accord with his or her
intentions. In my view, if an accused acts to assume the present ability to
operate the vehicle or its superintendence or management, there is an inherent
risk of danger, unless objectively viewed, the accused’s use of the vehicle
involves no such risk.  As Lamer C.J. wrote in Penno, at p. 877, “when a
person uses a vehicle in a way that involves no risk of putting it in motion so
that it could become dangerous, the courts should find that the actus reus was
not present”. [74]                         
Not all acts in relation to a vehicle will
necessarily constitute acts of care or control.  The degree of involvement of
the accused with the vehicle will need to be more than trivial to constitute
care or control. Courts should not assess mechanistically the numbers and
nature of the acts performed by the accused. Rather, the determination of
whether the accused was in care or control will depend upon a careful
consideration of the particular facts of the case. As this Court held in Toews,
at p. 126, “Each case will
depend on its own facts and the circumstances in which acts of care or control
may be found will vary widely.” [75]                         
With respect, the approach adopted by my
colleague significantly undermines this preventive purpose as the acquittals on
the facts of this case demonstrate.  The accused got in his vehicle while
drunk, sat behind the wheel, started the engine and fell asleep.  When
awakened, still very drunk, by the police and with the engine of his vehicle
still running, he asked to be left alone so that he could drive home. It
is difficult to imagine a case falling more squarely within the preventive
purpose of the care and control provision.  The preventive function of the
provision is not to encourage finely tuned legal debates about the
characterization of a risk that could materialize: the provision seeks to
prevent the risk from materializing by criminalizing a wider array of conduct
in which that risk is likely to be, but may not in fact be present.                     (2)      Authority [76]                         
Some appellate courts have taken the view that a
risk of danger constitutes an essential element of this offence: see, e.g., R.
v. Decker, 2002 NFCA 9, 209 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 44, at paras. 25-31, leave
to appeal refused, [2002] 4 S.C.R. vii; R. v. Burbella, 2002 MBCA 105,
166 Man. R. (2d) 198, at para. 22; R. v. Shuparski, 2003 SKCA 22, [2003]
6 W.W.R. 428, at paras. 46-47, leave to appeal refused, [2003] 2 S.C.R. x;  R.
v. Mallery, 2008 NBCA 18, 327 N.B.R. (2d) 130, at paras. 52-53. As
discussed in the previous section of my reasons, this interpretation is not in
my view supported by the text or the purpose of the provision. Nor is it
supported by the governing authorities from this Court. [77]                         
My colleague is of the view that the Court’s
decisions in Toews and Penno incorporate a risk of danger as an
element of the offence. I respectfully disagree. There was a clear statement to
the contrary in Saunders, where Fauteux J. ruled, at p. 290, that
nothing in this provision “indicate[d] an intent of Parliament to exact, in every case, as being one of the ingredients
of the offences, the proof of the presence of some element of actual or
potential danger or to accept, as a valid defense, the absence of any” (emphasis added). We ought not to assume that later decisions of the
Court intended to depart from this statement absent some clear intention to do
so.  However, as I see it, no subsequent decision of the Court evidences any
disagreement with Saunders on this point. [78]                         
Saunders has not been
overtaken by subsequent decisions of this Court. Rather, as stated above, this
Court has consistently interpreted the object of this provision as preventing
the risk of danger that arises when alcohol and motor vehicles are combined.
Thus, the provisions on drinking and driving seek to address a social problem
which our society has been struggling with for years. As Lamer C.J. noted in Penno,
at pp. 882-83:                     The measure is part of the scheme set up by
Parliament to protect the security and property of the public that are put to
risk by persons whose ability to drive is impaired but who are, in any event,
in care or control of a motor vehicle. . . . The social concern, common to the
“drinking and driving” family of offences, is the severe risk to life, security
or property of the public that is posed by persons whose ability to drive is
impaired, but who are nevertheless in control of a motor vehicle. This concern
was recognised by this Court to be of great importance in Curr v. The Queen,
[1972] S.C.R. 889, R. v. Hufsky, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 621, R. v. Thomsen,
[1988] 1 S.C.R. 640, and in Whyte, supra, at p. 27.                     (See
also Whyte, at pp. 20-21.) [79]                         
Viewed in this light, I do not agree that the
Court’s previous decisions have incorporated a risk of danger, realistic or
otherwise, as an essential element of the offence. [80]                         
In Ford, the evidence was that the
intoxicated accused had been in and out of his stationary vehicle a number of
times and had started and turned it off on a number of occasions over the
course of the evening. The trial judge found as fact that the accused had
agreed that someone else would drive the car when it came time to move it and
that he had no intention of driving the vehicle. Nonetheless, the trial judge
was found to have erred in law because he found that the accused’s absence of
any intention to drive was a defence and the case was remitted for trial. 
Ritchie J. held there was care or control where “an accused performs some act
or series of acts involving the use of the car, its fittings or equipment, such
as occurred in this case, whereby the vehicle may unintentionally be set in
motion creating the danger the section is designed to prevent” (p. 249). There
was no expression of any disagreement with Saunders. Given the facts of
the case and the absence of disagreement with Saunders, I would read the
decision as simply referring to the purpose of the broad definition of care or
control in the provision rather than as reading in a new essential element of
the offence. [81]                         
In Toews, McIntyre J. held that acts of
care or control were “acts which involve some use of the car or its fittings
and equipment, or some course of conduct associated with the vehicle which
would involve a risk of putting the vehicle in motion so that it could become
dangerous” (p. 126). The accused had been found asleep in a sleeping bag on the
front seat of his truck. While the key was in the ignition, the evidence was
that the last driver of the vehicle was a friend. The Court concluded that the
accused was unconscious and therefore not in de facto care or control
and, given that there was no evidence that it had been the accused who had put
the key in the ignition, it had not been shown that the accused had performed any
acts of care or control. The case did not turn on the absence of risk and there
was no disapproval of the Court’s earlier decision in Saunders. In my
opinion, the Court simply linked the element of care or control to its
objective; the Court did not read into the provision a new essential element. [82]                         
In Penno, the issue was whether the
accused could raise the defence of intoxication to the care or control
offence.  On the issue of what constitutes care or control, Lamer C.J., writing
for himself, noted that Toews “stands for the proposition that when a
person uses a vehicle in a way that involves no risk of putting it in
motion so that it could become dangerous, the courts should find that the actus
reus was not present” (p. 877 (emphasis added)).  Importantly, however,
Lamer C.J. added that the Court in Toews “did not base its
decision on the absence of mens rea that would derive from the accused’s
intent to use the vehicle for another purpose than to use it as a motor
vehicle, that is to use it as a bedroom” (p. 877 (emphasis added)).  Rather Mr.
Toews’ acquittal was based on the fact that there was no evidence that he
had performed any acts of care or control and therefore had not performed
the actus reus (p. 877). [83]                         
I conclude that the authorities of this Court do
not support incorporating risk as an essential element of the offence.                     (3)      Charter
Considerations [84]                         
There is a final interpretative consideration
which I find to be important. Some of the appellate courts which have favoured
reading in risk as an essential element have done so to avoid what they
perceive to be the over-inclusiveness that may result from giving the 
expression “care or control” its ordinary meaning in this provision. For
example, in Mallery, at para. 47, the court relied on Charter 
considerations in adopting danger as an element of the offence. My colleague
Fish J. cites Robertson J.A., at para. 4 of that case, to the effect that
incorporating the concept of risk of danger serves to balance the rights of an
accused with the objectives of the legislation. My colleague also notes that
interpreting the provision to mean that the risk of danger is merely
theoretically possible as opposed to realistic would be “to adopt too low a
threshold since it would criminalize unnecessarily a broad range of benign and
inconsequential conduct” (para. 35). Respectfully, however, this approach to
interpretation is wrong in law. [85]                         
It is well established that absent ambiguity in
the statutory text, the courts should not apply an interpretative presumption
of Charter  compliance: see, e.g., Bell ExpressVu Limited Partnership
v. Rex, 2002 SCC 42, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 559, at para. 62. Applying such a
presumption pre-empts judicial review and the possibility of resort to the
justification of limiting provisions under s. 1  of the Charter .  The
appropriate context in which to assess whether Parliament has appropriately
balanced the rights of the accused is in a Charter  challenge to the
legislation, not in the course of interpreting an unambiguous statutory text. [86]                         
In this case, Parliament chose to use the words
“care or control” which are everyday words with a well-settled meaning. No one
has suggested that they are in any way ambiguous. Moreover, as discussed
earlier, the broad meaning of care or control is consistent with Parliament’s
preventive purpose: the net of criminality has been cast widely in order to
avoid the inherent risk of the interaction of alcohol and automobiles. My
colleague, however, would interpret the expression “care or control” in order
to narrow it, so that it means that the circumstances must give rise to a
realistic risk of danger to persons or property. Having read in this new
essential element to narrow the ordinary meaning of the words “care or
control”, my colleague would then create a new evidentiary rule.  As my
colleague expresses it at para. 13, “Absent evidence to the contrary, a present
ability to drive while impaired, or with an excessive blood alcohol ratio,
creates an inherent risk of danger.” Or, as expressed at para. 46, “[a]nyone
who is intoxicated and in a position to immediately set the vehicle in motion
faces conviction on those facts alone.” It is unclear what sort of burden the
accused bears under this approach.  At para. 13, it appears that the accused
simply bears a tactical burden of adducing evidence tending to prove that the
inherent risk is not a realistic risk in the particular circumstance. However,
one gets a different impression from para. 41.  There, it is proposed that “an
intention to set the vehicle in motion suffices in itself to create the risk of
danger contemplated by the offence of care or control.  On the other hand, an
accused who satisfies the court that he or she had no intention to set
the vehicle in motion will not necessarily escape conviction” (underlining
added; italics deleted). I understand this to mean that once the Crown has
proved an intention to drive, the accused must disprove it but even then will
not necessarily escape conviction. Thus, the intention to drive, which under
our consistent jurisprudence is not an essential element of the offence,
becomes a fact that if established by the Crown, requires conviction unless the
accused establishes the contrary — and even then, he or she may not be
acquitted. In my respectful view, this is not a result that can be reached through
statutory interpretation. [87]                         
I would emphasize that to give the expression
“care or control” its normal meaning does not result in an offence of strict
liability.  There can be no care or control where, as for example in Toews,
there are no acts of care or control by the accused. The issue of whether an
accused, whose only acts in relation to the vehicle occurred while it was
inoperable, can be said to be in care or control has not been resolved by this
Court; Saunders simply held that an inoperable motor vehicle was
nonetheless a motor vehicle within the definition then contained in the
Criminal Code . In this case the vehicle was operable and I would leave the
issue of care or control in the case of an inoperable vehicle to another day
when the point is both pertinent and fully argued. [88]                         
I conclude that the trial judge erred in law by
holding that the risk of danger was an essential element of the offence. B.     Did the Trial Judge Err in Finding That There Was no Risk
Here? [89]                         
Even if, contrary to my view, risk is an essential
element of the offence, I would uphold the Court of Appeal’s decision to
reverse the acquittals entered by the trial judge. The trial judge erred in law
in holding that there was no risk of putting the vehicle in motion since the
accused did not have the intention to do so. Although the trial judge correctly
noted at para. 38 of his reasons that the absence of intention to put the
vehicle in motion did not constitute a defence for the accused, he in effect
made it so. He held that there was no risk because the accused did not
intend to drive:                            [translation]
At no time would the accused have left with his vehicle, as he had no
intention whatsoever of driving it. In the Court’s opinion, since the
accused had taken every necessary precaution and had his wits about him when he
got into his pickup and since, what is more, it was the taxi driver he had
called who reported him, there was no risk that he would use the vehicle.                            In
these circumstances, the actus reus has not been made out, since there
was no risk. [Emphasis added; paras. 39-40.] [90]                         
On this point, I adopt as my own the following
comments of the Court of Appeal:                            [translation]
Since proof of an intention to drive is not an essential element of the offence
of having the care or control of a motor vehicle, the trial judge erred in
finding that there was no risk of the respondent’s setting his vehicle in
motion on the basis that he had no intention to drive. [para. 7] [91]                         
Having found this legal error, the Court of
Appeal was correct to set aside the acquittals and enter convictions. When
applying the correct legal test, care or control was amply proved here. When
the police found the appellant, he was sleeping behind the driver’s seat, the
keys in the ignition, the engine running. The evidence was that he was the one
who turned on the engine of the vehicle. By his presence in the driver’s seat
of a running vehicle that he had started, he had the ability to operate the
vehicle, and had its superintendence or management. By placing himself behind
the wheel of the truck and by starting the engine, he clearly committed acts of
care or control in relation to the vehicle. On being awakened by the police
behind the wheel of his vehicle with its engine running, he asked that he be
left alone so that he could drive home.  There is no dispute that his
blood alcohol ratio was over the legal limit at the time. The evidence
was that the first test undertaken by the police officers revealed a blood
alcohol content of 250 mg per 100 mL of blood and the second test revealed a
blood alcohol content of 242 mg per 100 mL of blood. III.    Disposition [92]                         
I would dismiss the appeal, uphold the Court of
Appeal’s decision to enter convictions and remit the matter to the trial judge
for sentencing.                     Appeal allowed, Cromwell J. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the appellant:  Fradette,
Gagnon, Têtu, Le Bel, Girard, Chicoutimi.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Directeur des poursuites criminelles et pénales du
Québec, Chicoutimi.                     Solicitor for the intervener:  Attorney
General of Ontario, Toronto.  