SCC Case Information: 36435   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 1000 Appeal
  heard: March 21, 2016 Judgment
  rendered: July 29, 2016 Docket: 36435  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant  and  Oswald
Oliver Villaroman Respondent  - and -  Attorney
General of Ontario, Attorney
General of British Columbia and Criminal
Lawyers’ Association (Ontario) Interveners   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner, Gascon, Côté and Brown JJ.  Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to
  73) Cromwell J. (McLachlin C.J. and Abella,
  Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner, Gascon, Côté and Brown JJ. concurring)    R. v. Villaroman, 2016 SCC 33, [2016] 1
S.C.R. 1000 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Oswald Oliver Villaroman                                                                          Respondent and Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney General of British Columbia and Criminal Lawyers’ Association
(Ontario)                                                  Interveners Indexed as: R. v. Villaroman 2016 SCC 33 File No.: 36435. 2016: March 21; 2016: July 29. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis, Wagner, Gascon, Côté and Brown JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for alberta                     Criminal
law — Evidence — Circumstantial evidence — Inferences — Reasonable verdict —
Accused found guilty on charge of possession of child pornography —
Whether trial judge erred in his analysis of circumstantial evidence by
requiring that inference supporting conclusion other than guilt be based
on evidence rather than upon lack of evidence — Whether guilty verdict was
unreasonable.                     V
was having problems with his laptop computer, so he left it with a repair shop.
The repair technician found child pornography on the laptop. He called the
police, whose search of the laptop confirmed the presence of child pornography.
V was charged with a number of pornography related offences, including
possession of child pornography. The trial judge found that the mainly
circumstantial evidence against V proved guilt on the charge of possession of
child pornography beyond a reasonable doubt. The trial judge also disagreed
with V that the police search of the laptop violated s. 8  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms . The Court of Appeal concluded that the
judge had misstated the current law respecting circumstantial evidence and that
the verdict of guilt based on that evidence was unreasonable. The Court of
Appeal therefore set aside the conviction and entered an acquittal. The Court
of Appeal declined to consider the Charter  issues because its acquittal
of V made those issues academic.                     Held: The appeal should be allowed, the acquittal set aside and the case
remanded to the Court of Appeal for hearing and disposition of the Charter  ss. 8  and 24(2) 
issues.                     No
particular form of instruction to the jury is required where the evidence on
one or more elements of the offence is entirely or primarily circumstantial.
However, where proof of one or more elements of the offence depends solely or
largely on circumstantial evidence, it may be helpful for the jury to receive instructions
that will assist them to understand the nature of circumstantial evidence and
the relationship between proof by circumstantial evidence and the requirement
of proof beyond reasonable doubt.                     An
explanation of the difference between direct and circumstantial evidence is
included in most criminal jury charges and rarely causes difficulty. An
instruction concerning the use of circumstantial evidence and the reasonable
doubt instruction have different, although related, purposes. The reasonable doubt
instruction describes a state of mind — the degree of persuasion that
entitles and requires a juror to find an accused guilty. An instruction about
circumstantial evidence, in contrast, alerts the jury to the dangers of the
path of reasoning involved in drawing inferences from circumstantial evidence.
Telling the jury that an inference of guilt drawn from circumstantial evidence
should be the only reasonable inference that such evidence permits will often
be a succinct and accurate way of helping the jury to guard against the risk of
“filling in the blanks” by too quickly overlooking reasonable alternative
inferences. While this Court has used the words “rational” and “reasonable”
interchangeably to describe the potential inferences, there is an advantage of
using the word “reasonable” to avoid the risk of confusion between the
reasonable doubt standard and inferences that may arise from circumstantial
evidence. However, using the traditional term “rational” is not an error as the
necessary message may be imparted in different ways.                     A
view that inferences of innocence must be based on proven facts is no longer
accepted. In assessing circumstantial evidence, inferences consistent with
innocence do not have to arise from proven facts. The issue with respect to
circumstantial evidence is the range of reasonable inferences that can be drawn
from it. If there are reasonable inferences other than guilt, the Crown’s
evidence does not meet the proof beyond the reasonable doubt standard. A
certain gap in the evidence may result in inferences other than guilt. But
those inferences must be reasonable given the evidence and the absence of
evidence, assessed logically, and in light of human experience and common
sense. When assessing circumstantial evidence, the trier of fact should
consider other plausible theories and other reasonable possibilities which are
inconsistent with guilt. The Crown thus may need to negative these reasonable
possibilities, but certainly does not need to disprove every possible
conjecture which might be consistent with innocence. Other plausible theories
or other reasonable possibilities must be based on logic and experience applied
to the evidence or the absence of evidence, not on speculation.                     The
Court of Appeal found that the trial judge erred because he failed to consider
reasonable inferences inconsistent with guilt that could have arisen from a
lack of evidence. While there are certainly some problematic statements in the
trial judge’s reasons, when the reasons are read as a whole and these passages
are read in their proper context, he made no reversible error. The judge
correctly stated the law in relation to circumstantial evidence. Contrary to V,
the judge did not lose sight of proper process of inference-drawing, the
overall burden of proof, or the difference between the standard applied to a
committal for trial and the reasonable doubt standard applied to a finding of
guilt.                     The
judge’s conclusions that a user of V’s computer knowingly downloaded
pornography and that V was knowingly in possession of
the child pornography that had been saved on his computer were reasonable. While there were gaps in the Crown evidence about V’s possession and
control of the computer, the Court of Appeal’s analysis of these gaps in effect
retried the case. It was for the trial judge to decide whether the evidence of
V’s possession and control, when considered in light of human experience and
the evidence as a whole and the absence of evidence, excluded all reasonable
inferences other than guilt. While not every trier of fact would inevitably
have reached the same conclusion as did the trial judge, that conclusion was a
reasonable one. Cases Cited                     Considered:
Hodge’s Case (1838), 2 Lewin 227, 168 E.R. 1136; approved: R.
v. Dipnarine, 2014 ABCA 328, 584 A.R. 138; referred to: R. v.
Daniels, 2004 NLCA 73, 242 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 290; R. v. Lifchus,
[1997] 3 S.C.R. 320; R. v. Morrissey (1995), 22 O.R. (3d) 514;
R. v. Laboucan, 2010 SCC 12, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 397; R. v.
R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3; R. v. C.L.Y., 2008
SCC 2, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 5; McLean v. The King, [1933]
S.C.R. 688; R. v. Mitchell, [1964] S.C.R. 471; R. v. Cooper,
[1978] 1 S.C.R. 860; R. v. Griffin, 2009 SCC 28, [2009]
2 S.C.R. 42; R. v. Mayuran, 2012 SCC 31, [2012]
2 S.C.R. 162; R. v. Fleet (1997), 120 C.C.C. (3d) 457; R.
v. Tombran (2000), 142 C.C.C. (3d) 380; John v. The Queen, [1971]
S.C.R. 781; Mezzo v. The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 802; Schuldt
v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 592; Boucher v. The Queen,
[1955] S.C.R. 16; Fraser v. The King, [1936] S.C.R. 1; Lizotte
v. The King, [1951] S.C.R. 115; R. v. McIver, [1965] 2 O.R.
475, aff’d [1966] S.C.R. 254; R. v. Khela, 2009 SCC 4,
[2009] 1 S.C.R. 104; R. v. Defaveri, 2014 BCCA 370, 361
B.C.A.C. 301; R. v. Bui, 2014 ONCA 614, 14 C.R. (7th) 149; R. v.
Comba, [1938] O.R. 200, aff’d [1938] S.C.R. 396; R. v. Baigent, 2013
BCCA 28, 335 B.C.A.C. 11; R. v. Mitchell, [2008] QCA 394; R. v.
Bagshaw, [1972] S.C.R. 2; Martin v. Osborne (1936), 55 C.L.R.
367; R. v. Paul, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 181; R. v. Biniaris, 2000
 SCC 15, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 381; R. v. Yebes, [1987]
2 S.C.R. 168; R. v. Mars (2006), 205 C.C.C. (3d) 376; R. v.
Liu (1989), 95 A.R. 201; R. v. S.L.R., 2003 ABCA 148; R. v.
Cardinal (1990), 106 A.R. 91; R. v. Kaysaywaysemat (1992), 97 Sask.
R. 66; R. v. Morelli, 2010 SCC 8, [2010]
1 S.C.R. 253. Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 8 , 24(2) . Authors Cited Berger, Benjamin L. “The Rule in Hodge’s Case: Rumours of its
Death are Greatly Exaggerated” (2005), 84 Can. Bar Rev. 47. Canadian Judicial Council. Model Jury Instructions, 10.2
Direct and Circumstantial Evidence (online: https://www.nji-inm.ca/index.cfm/publications/model-jury-instructions/,
last updated June 2012). Canadian Oxford Dictionary,
2nd ed., by Katherine Barber, ed. Don Mills, Ont.: Oxford University
Press, 2004, “rational”, “reasonable”. Dufraimont, Lisa. “R. v. Griffin and the Legacy of Hodge’s
Case” (2009), 67 C.R. (6th) 74. Gans, Arthur M. “Hodge’s Case Revisited” (1972-73), 15 C.L.Q.
127. Scott, Eric. “Hodge’s Case: A Reconsideration” (1965-66), 8 C.L.Q.
17. Wills, William. Wills’ Principles of Circumstantial Evidence,
7th ed. London: Butterworth & Co., 1937.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Alberta Court of Appeal (Côté and O’Ferrall JJ.A.
and Macleod J. (ad hoc)), 2015 ABCA 104, 599 A.R. 294, 13 Alta.
L.R. (6th) 369, 320 C.C.C. (3d) 50, 643 W.A.C. 294, [2015] A.J. No. 293
(QL), 2015 CarswellAlta 436 (WL Can.), setting aside the conviction for
possession of child pornography entered by Yamauchi J., 2013 ABQB
279, 562 A.R. 105, 83 Alta. L.R. (5th) 297, [2013] A.J. No. 538 (QL), 2013
CarswellAlta 857 (WL Can.), and entering an acquittal. Appeal
allowed.                     Jolaine
Antonio and Jason Wuttunee, for the
appellant.                     Ian D.
McKay and Heather Ferg, for the respondent.                     Matthew
Asma, for the intervener the Attorney General of
Ontario.                     Written submissions only by Daniel M. Scanlan, for the
intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia.                     Sharon E.
Lavine and Naomi M. Lutes, for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association (Ontario).                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     Cromwell J. — I.             
Introduction [1]                             
The respondent, Mr. Oswald Villaroman, was
having problems with his laptop computer, so he left it with a repair shop. The
repair technician found child pornography on the laptop. He called the police,
whose search of the laptop confirmed the presence of child pornography. Mr.
Villaroman was charged with a number of pornography-related offences, including
possession of child pornography contrary to s. 163.1(4)  of the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , the only charge relevant to this appeal. [2]                             
At trial, Yamauchi J. found that the mainly
circumstantial evidence against the accused proved guilt on the charge of
possession of child pornography beyond a reasonable doubt: 2013 ABQB 279, 562
A.R. 105. The Court of Appeal, however, concluded that the judge had misstated
the current law respecting circumstantial evidence and that the verdict of
guilt based on that evidence was unreasonable: 2015 ABCA 104, 599 A.R. 294, at
paras. 20 and 38. The Court of Appeal therefore set aside the conviction and
entered an acquittal. The Crown appeals, submitting that the Court of Appeal
erred by requiring the Crown in effect to disprove all innocent possibilities
and, more specifically, by requiring the Crown to prove either that the accused
had downloaded the pornography or that he had exclusive access to the computer
where it was stored. The Crown maintains that the judge did not make any legal
error in his treatment of the circumstantial evidence and that the verdict of
guilt was reasonable. The respondent supports the decision and reasoning of the
Court of Appeal and points to a number of what he says are clear legal errors
in the trial judge’s analysis. [3]                             
I would allow the appeal. As I see it, the trial
judge’s reasons, read as a whole, do not contain any legal errors and his
finding of guilt was reasonable. II.          
Issues [4]                             
The Court of Appeal found that the case law in
relation to circumstantial evidence “may not be readily consistent” and “seems
to have changed in very recent years”: paras. 8 and 20. This appeal is an
opportunity to provide any needed clarification. For the purposes of my
analysis, I have found it helpful to approach the case by answering two
questions: 1.              
Did the Court of Appeal err in finding a legal
error in the trial judge’s analysis in relation to the circumstantial evidence? 2.              
Was the guilty verdict unreasonable? [5]                             
Some issues related to whether the police search
of the laptop violated s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  were
argued at trial and before the Court of Appeal.  The trial judge found that
the police search was lawful (2012 ABQB 630, 557 A.R. 1), while the Court of
Appeal declined to consider the search issues because its acquittal of Mr.
Villaroman made those issues academic: paras. 38-39. On appeal before this
Court, the parties agreed that if we accept the Crown’s position with respect
to the circumstantial evidence, the case should be remanded to the Court of
Appeal to deal with those issues.   I accept the parties’ position and would
remand these issues back to the Court of Appeal. III.       
Overview of the Facts and Decisions A.          
Background [6]                             
Mr. Villaroman took his laptop computer to a
MyMacDealer shop for repairs to the power button and battery. (While it was not
conceded at trial that Mr. Villaroman was the person who delivered the
computer, it is for the purposes of this appeal.) He provided his name,
address, and telephone number to the repair shop. The technician, Alan Sopczak,
examined the computer, which was not password-protected, and identified the
necessary repairs.  He then telephoned Mr. Villaroman, who authorized the work. [7]                             
After completing some repairs, Mr. Sopczak
checked some files randomly to test whether the computer’s software was
operating properly. While checking the music files, he discovered child pornography
files in the music folder of the iTunes library folder. He thought the number
of files ruled out a random occurrence and called the police, who seized the
computer. Days later, when Mr. Villaroman came to the shop to get the laptop,
Mr. Sopczak informed him that the police had seized it. [8]                             
Mr. LaFontaine, a forensic analyst, testified
that there was only one user account associated with the computer, named
“oswaldvillaroman”. The user account was set up on the computer on July 1, 2007
and there had been almost daily activity on it from that date until November
29, 2009, a couple of days before the computer was brought to the shop. [9]                             
Mr. LaFontaine’s evidence was that the
computer’s hard drive contained 36 child pornography files: one picture and 35
videos. Two of the file names appeared to be in an Asian language, but all of
the rest suggested or expressly described underage pornographic content.  The
files were downloaded using a peer-to-peer downloading software called
“Limewire”. Eighteen of the videos were partial or incomplete downloads located
in the Limewire “incomplete” folder. Seventeen were complete downloads that
were found, along with the one picture, in the computer’s music folder. The
user had viewed some videos from each folder using two different media-playing
programs. [10]                         
Mr. Villaroman admitted that the computer was
his and that the 36 files found on it constituted child pornography as defined
in the Criminal Code . The main factual issue at trial in relation to the
possession of child pornography charge was whether the evidence established
that Mr. Villaroman had been in possession of the child pornography. As the
trial judge noted, this required the Crown to prove that he knew the nature of
the material, had the intention to possess it, and had the necessary control
over it: para. 26, citing R. v.  Daniels, 2004 NCLA 73, 242 Nfld. & P.E.I.R.
290. B.           
Trial Findings [11]                         
The trial judge noted that the Crown’s case
depended on the circumstantial evidence provided by the technician, Mr.
Sopczak, and the forensic analyst, Mr. LaFontaine. Asking himself whether the
inferences drawn from the evidence satisfied him beyond a reasonable doubt that
Mr. Villaroman had committed the offence: para. 43, citing R. v. Lifchus, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 320, the
trial judge concluded that they did. He found that Mr. Villaroman “knew the
nature of the material, had the intention to possess it, and had the necessary
control over it”: para. 68. C.           
Court of Appeal Decision [12]                         
The Court of Appeal found that the trial judge
had “misstated the current law” on weighing circumstantial evidence and that
the verdict was unreasonable: para. 20. In the Court of Appeal’s opinion, there
was not sufficient evidence to raise a case for the defence to answer: para.
38.  The conviction was set aside and an acquittal entered. IV.       
Analysis A.          
First Question: Did the Court of Appeal Err in
Finding a Legal Error in the Trial Judge’s Analysis in Relation to the
Circumstantial Evidence? (1)          
The Alleged Errors [13]                         
At the core of the errors identified by the
Court of Appeal, and elaborated upon by the respondent, is that the trial judge
erred in his treatment of circumstantial evidence, a subject that dates back at
least to Hodge’s Case (1838), 2 Lewin 227, 168 E.R. 1136.  That case
contains a jury instruction about how the jury should assess circumstantial
evidence of identity. The jury was told that in order to convict, they must be
satisfied not only that the circumstantial evidence was consistent with guilt
but rationally inconsistent with any other conclusion than guilt. The nub of
the issue in this case is whether the trial judge erred by requiring that “any
other conclusion than guilt” be based on the evidence. [14]                         
The Court of Appeal, as I read its reasons,
found that the trial judge erred by requiring that an inference or hypothesis
supporting a conclusion other than guilt be based on evidence rather than upon
a lack of evidence: para. 10.  The respondent (as he is entitled to do in
seeking to uphold the Court of Appeal’s order), relies on what he claims are
additional errors made at trial: that the trial judge relied on inapplicable
sources; erroneously analyzed the requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt;
and wrongly reversed the burden of proof. But at the core of all of these
alleged errors is the point taken by the Court of Appeal: that the trial judge
was wrong to exclude from consideration innocent explanations which had no
foundation in the evidence. [15]                         
Before turning to a more detailed analysis, it
is important to remember that a trial judge’s reasons for judgment should not
be “read or analyzed as if they were an instruction to a jury”: R. v.
Morrissey (1995), 22 O.R. (3d) 514 (C.A.), at p. 525. Rather, the reasons
must be “read as a whole, in the context of the evidence, the issues and the
arguments at trial, together with ‘an appreciation of the purposes or functions
for which they are delivered’”: R. v. Laboucan, 2010 SCC 12, [2010] 1
S.C.R. 397, at para. 16, citing R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51, [2008] 3 S.C.R.
3, at para. 16; see also R. v. C.L.Y., 2008 SCC 2, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 5, at
para. 11. (2)          
Did the Trial Judge Err by Requiring Innocent
Explanations to be Based on the Evidence? [16]                         
The Court of Appeal’s concern with the trial
judgment arises from some ongoing difficulties caused by the old rule in Hodge’s
Case. While that case was not mentioned by name, the principle that it
enunciated cast a long shadow over the judgments at trial and on appeal. I will
turn first to some of the troublesome aspects of the jurisprudence flowing from
Hodge’s Case and then return to the errors of law the trial judge is
alleged to have committed. (a)          
The Current Status of the “Rule” in Hodge’s Case [17]                         
In Hodge’s Case, the evidence of
identification was made up entirely of circumstantial evidence: p. 1137.  Baron
Alderson, the trial judge, instructed the jury that in order to convict, they
must be satisfied “not only that those circumstances were consistent with [the
accused] having committed the act, but they must also be satisfied that the
facts were such as to be inconsistent with any other rational conclusion than
that the [accused] was the guilty person”: p. 1137.  This sort of jury
instruction came to be required in circumstantial cases: see, e.g., McLean v.
The King, [1933] S.C.R. 688. [18]                         
Over time, this requirement was relaxed: see,
e.g., R. v. Mitchell, [1964] S.C.R. 471; R. v. Cooper, [1978] 1
S.C.R. 860.  It is now settled that no particular form of instruction to the
jury is required where the evidence on one or more elements of the offence is
entirely or primarily circumstantial.  As Charron J. writing for a majority of
the Court put it in R. v. Griffin, 2009 SCC 28, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 42, at para. 33: We
have long departed from any legal requirement for a “special instruction” on
circumstantial evidence, even where the issue is one of identification: R. v. Cooper, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 860. The essential
component of an instruction on circumstantial evidence is to instill in the
jury that in order to convict, they must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the only rational inference that can be drawn from the circumstantial
evidence is that the accused is guilty. Imparting the necessary message to
the jury may be achieved in different ways: R. v. Fleet
(1997), 120 C.C.C. (3d) 457 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 20. See also R. v. Guiboche, 2004 MBCA 16, 183 C.C.C. (3d) 361, at
paras. 108-10; R. v. Tombran
(2000), 142 C.C.C. (3d) 380 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 29.
[Emphasis added.]  [19]                         
There may be some tension between the first and
the second sentence of this passage from Griffin: see, e.g., L.
Dufraimont, “R. v. Griffin and the Legacy of Hodge’s Case”
(2009), 67 C.R. (6th) 74. While the first sentence states that there is no
required special instruction, the second sentence makes it an “essential
component” of a jury instruction to ensure that the jury understands that they
must be persuaded beyond reasonable doubt that the only rational inference is
guilt. However, the cases cited with approval by Charron J. in this passage and
our subsequent decision in R. v. Mayuran, 2012 SCC 31, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 162,
at para. 38, clear up any doubt about what was intended. [20]                         
In the above passage, Charron J. cited with
approval R. v. Fleet (1997), 120 C.C.C. (3d) 457 (Ont. C.A.), at para.
20. It is worth quoting that paragraph at length as in my view it makes Charron
J.’s meaning clear: It will be recalled that, in Cooper,
Ritchie J. specifically rejected the necessity for any formula of words to be
used in a case of circumstantial evidence of identity. In our view, he can
hardly have intended to reject the mandatory recitation of one formula only to
substitute another in its place. We read the object of both judgments in
Cooper to be the eradication of any formulaic approach to such cases so
long as the jury is clearly made aware of the necessity to find the guilt of
the accused to be established beyond a reasonable doubt. This object may be
achieved in more ways than one. Thus, the trial judge, reviewing the evidence
and setting out the position of the defence and relating the substantial parts
of the evidence to that position, may frame the requisite instruction in the
manner he or she considers most appropriate in the circumstances, for example,
by:  (a)    charging the jury in accordance with the traditional language of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt (per Laskin C.J.C. in Cooper);  (b)   charging the jury in accordance with that language and pointing out
to the jury the other inferences that the defence says should be drawn from the
evidence and the necessity to acquit the accused if any of those inferences
raises a reasonable doubt (as the trial judge did in Cooper in the final
portion of his recharge); or  (c)    charging the jury that it must be satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that the guilt of the accused is the only reasonable inference to be
drawn from the proven facts (per Ritchie J. in Cooper and Dubin
J.A. in Elmosri). [21]                         
Charron J. also cited with approval R. v.
Tombran (2000), 142 C.C.C. (3d) 380 (Ont. C.A.), (a decision in which she
participated as a member of the Ontario Court of Appeal), at para. 29. Once
again, it is worth quoting that paragraph: The modern approach to the problem of
circumstantial evidence, enunciated clearly in Cooper, supra, and
reiterated and reinforced by Fleet, supra, is to reject a
formulaic approach and to deal with all the evidence in terms of the general
principles of reasonable doubt. Trial judges are given a degree of latitude to
formulate the appropriate instruction as befits the circumstances of the case.
Trial judges are not required to adopt any specific language or wording,
provided the charge conveys to the jury in a clear fashion the central point,
namely, the necessity to find the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.
In particular, trial judges are not required to deliver to the jury a general,
abstract lecture on the nature of circumstantial evidence or on the steps of
logic to be followed in assessing circumstantial as distinct from direct
evidence. An academic exercise along those lines may well confuse rather than
assist the jury. Trial judges are entitled to conclude that the essential
message of the need to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt can be better
conveyed in other ways. [22]                         
These paragraphs, quoted with approval in Griffin,
are consistent with what Charron J. conveyed in her reasons. This reading of
the judgment is confirmed by our subsequent decision in Mayuran in which
the Court reiterated the statement from Griffin that “[w]e have long
departed from any legal requirement for a ‘special instruction’ on
circumstantial evidence”: per Abella J., writing for a unanimous Court, at
para. 38. There is therefore no particular form of mandatory instruction.
However, where proof of one or more elements of the offence depends solely or
largely on circumstantial evidence, it may be helpful for the jury to receive
instructions that will assist them to understand the nature of circumstantial
evidence and the relationship between proof by circumstantial evidence and the
requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt. I will touch briefly on both of
these aspects. (i)                
An Explanation of the Difference Between Direct
and Circumstantial Evidence [23]                         
An explanation of the difference between direct
and circumstantial evidence is included in most criminal jury charges and
rarely causes difficulty.  One example of how this distinction may be conveyed
to a jury is found in s. 10.2 of the Model Jury Instructions (online) prepared
by the National Committee on Jury Instructions of the Canadian Judicial
Council: [1] As
I explained at the beginning of the trial, you may rely on direct evidence and
on circumstantial evidence in reaching your verdict. Let me remind you what
these terms mean. [2] Usually, witnesses tell us what they personally
saw or heard. For example, a witness might say that he or she saw it raining
outside. That is called direct evidence. [3] Sometimes, however, witnesses say things from
which you are asked to draw certain inferences. For example, a witness might
say that he or she had seen someone enter the courthouse lobby wearing a
raincoat and carrying an umbrella, both dripping wet. If you believed that
witness, you might infer that it was raining outside, even though the evidence
was indirect. Indirect evidence is sometimes called circumstantial evidence. [24]                         
While there is no particular required form of
explanation, something along these lines will usually be helpful when one or
more elements of the Crown’s case depends solely or mainly on circumstantial
evidence. (ii)           
The Relationship Between Circumstantial Evidence
and Proof Beyond Reasonable Doubt [25]                         
The Court has generally described the rule in Hodge’s
Case as an elaboration of the reasonable doubt standard: Mitchell;
John v. The Queen, [1971] S.C.R. 781, per Ritchie J., at pp. 791-92; Cooper;
Mezzo v. The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 802, at p. 843. If that is all that Hodge’s
Case was concerned with, then any special instruction relating to
circumstantial evidence could be seen as an unnecessary and potentially
confusing addition to the reasonable doubt instruction. [26]                         
However, that is not all that Hodge’s Case
was concerned with. There is a special concern inherent in the inferential
reasoning from circumstantial evidence. The concern is that the jury may
unconsciously “fill in the blanks” or bridge gaps in the evidence to support
the inference that the Crown invites it to draw. Baron Alderson referred to
this risk in Hodge’s Case. He noted the jury may “look for — and often
slightly . . . distort the facts” to make them fit the inference that they are
invited to draw: p. 1137. Or, as his remarks are recorded in another report,
the danger is that the mind may “take a pleasure in adapting circumstances to
one another, and even straining them a little, if need be, to force them to
form parts of one connected whole”: W. Wills, Wills’ Principles of
Circumstantial Evidence (7th ed. 1937), at p. 45; cited by Laskin J. in John,
dissenting but not on this point, at p. 813. [27]                         
While this 19th century language is not suitable
for a contemporary jury instruction, the basic concern that Baron Alderson
described — the danger of jumping to unwarranted conclusions in circumstantial
cases — remains real. When the concern about circumstantial evidence is understood
in this way, an instruction concerning the use of circumstantial evidence and
the reasonable doubt instruction have different, although related, purposes:
see B. L. Berger, “The Rule in Hodge’s Case: Rumours of its Death are Greatly
Exaggerated” (2005), 84 Can. Bar Rev. 47, at pp. 60-61. [28]                         
The reasonable doubt instruction describes a
state of mind — the degree of persuasion that entitles and requires a juror to
find an accused guilty: Berger, at p. 60. Reasonable doubt is not an inference
or a finding of fact that needs support in the evidence presented at trial:
see, e.g. Schuldt v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 592, at pp. 600-610. A
reasonable doubt is a doubt based on “reason and common sense”; it is not
“imaginary or frivolous”; it “does not involve proof to an absolute certainty”;
and it is “logically connected to the evidence or absence of evidence”: Lifchus,
at para. 36. The reasonable doubt instructions are all directed to describing
for the jurors how sure they must be of guilt in order to convict. [29]                         
An instruction about circumstantial evidence, in
contrast, alerts the jury to the dangers of the path of reasoning involved in
drawing inferences from circumstantial evidence: Berger, at p. 60.  This is the
danger to which Baron Alderson directed his comments. And the danger he
identified so long ago — the risk that the jury will “fill in the blanks” or
“jump to conclusions” — has more recently been confirmed by social science
research: see Berger, at pp. 52-53.  This Court on occasion has noted this
cautionary purpose of a circumstantial evidence instruction: see, e.g., Boucher
v. The Queen, [1955] S.C.R. 16, per Rand J., at p. 22; John, per
Laskin J., dissenting but not on this point, at p. 813. [30]                         
It follows that in a case in which proof of one
or more elements of the offence depends exclusively or largely on
circumstantial evidence, it will generally be helpful to the jury to be
cautioned about too readily drawing inferences of guilt.  No particular
language is required. Telling the jury that an inference of guilt drawn from
circumstantial evidence should be the only reasonable inference that such
evidence permits will often be a succinct and accurate way of helping the jury
to guard against the risk of “filling in the blanks” by too quickly overlooking
reasonable alternative inferences. It may be helpful to illustrate the concern
about jumping to conclusions with an example. If we look out the window and see
that the road is wet, we may jump to the conclusion that it has been raining.
But we may then notice that the sidewalks are dry or that there is a loud noise
coming from the distance that could be street-cleaning equipment, and
re-evaluate our premature conclusion. The observation that the road is wet, on
its own, does not exclude other reasonable explanations than that it has been
raining. The inferences that may be drawn from this observation must be
considered in light of all of the evidence and the absence of evidence,
assessed logically, and in light of human experience and common sense. [31]                         
I emphasize, however, that assistance to the
jury about the risk of jumping to conclusions may be given in different ways
and, as noted in Fleet, trial judges will provide this assistance in the
manner they consider most appropriate in the circumstances: p. 549. (iii)               
“Rational” v. “Reasonable” Inferences [32]                         
I have suggested the use of the word
“reasonable” to describe the potential inferences rather than the word
“rational” used by Baron Alderson in Hodge’s Case and in many other
cases including Griffin.  Which of these words should be used was one of
the issues touched on by the Court of Appeal (at para. 9) and I should explain
why I think that the word “reasonable” is preferable. The
following comments also apply to the adjective “logique”, which has been
frequently used in the French version of this Court’s jurisprudence on this
issue. [33]                         
The words “rational” and “reasonable” are
virtually synonyms: “rational” means “of or based on reasoning or reason”;
“reasonable” means “in accordance with reason”: Canadian Oxford Dictionary
(2nd ed. 2004). While some have argued that there is a significant difference,
I do not find that position convincing: see, e.g., E. Scott, “Hodge’s Case: A
Reconsideration” (1965-66), 8 C.L.Q. 17, at p. 25; A. M. Gans, “Hodge’s
Case Revisited” (1972-73), 15 C.L.Q. 127, at p. 132. It seems that our
jurisprudence has used the words “rational” and “reasonable” interchangeably
with respect to inferences: see McLean; Fraser v. The King,
[1936] S.C.R. 1, at p. 2;  Boucher, at pp. 18, 22 and 29; John,
at p. 792; Cooper, at p. 881; Lizotte v. The King, [1951]
S.C.R. 115, at p. 132; Mitchell, at p. 478; Griffin, at para.
33.  This, in addition to the dictionary definitions, suggests that there is no
difference in substance between them. [34]                         
There is an advantage of using the word
“reasonable”. It avoids the risk of confusion that might arise from using the
word “reasonable” in relation to “reasonable doubt” but referring to “rational”
inferences or explanations when speaking about circumstantial evidence: see John,
per Laskin J., dissenting but not on this point, at p. 815.  In saying this, I
do not suggest that using the traditional term “rational” is an error: the
Court has said repeatedly and recently that the necessary message may be
imparted in different ways: see, e.g., Griffin, at para. 33. (iv)         
Whether the Inference Must Be Based on “Proven
Facts” [35]                         
At one time, it was said that in circumstantial
cases, “conclusions alternative to the guilt of the accused must be rational
conclusions based on inferences drawn from proven facts”: see R. v. McIver,
[1965] 2 O.R. 475 (C.A.), at p. 479, aff’d without discussion of this point
[1966] S.C.R. 254. However, that view is no longer accepted. In assessing
circumstantial evidence, inferences consistent with innocence do not have to
arise from proven facts: R. v. Khela, 2009 SCC 4, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 104,
at para. 58; see also R. v. Defaveri, 2014 BCCA 370, 361 B.C.A.C. 301,
at para. 10; R. v. Bui, 2014 ONCA 614, 14 C.R. (7th) 149, at para. 28. 
Requiring proven facts to support explanations other than guilt wrongly puts an
obligation on an accused to prove facts and is contrary to the rule that
whether there is a reasonable doubt is assessed by considering all of the
evidence. The issue with respect to circumstantial evidence is the range of
reasonable inferences that can be drawn from it. If there are reasonable
inferences other than guilt, the Crown’s evidence does not meet the standard of
proof beyond a reasonable doubt. [36]                         
I agree with the respondent’s position that a
reasonable doubt, or theory alternative to guilt, is not rendered “speculative”
by the mere fact that it arises from a lack of evidence.  As stated by this
Court in Lifchus, a reasonable doubt “is a doubt based on reason
and common sense which must be logically based upon the evidence or lack of
evidence”: para. 30 (emphasis added).  A certain gap in the evidence may
result in inferences other than guilt. But those inferences must be reasonable
given the evidence and the absence of evidence, assessed logically, and in
light of human experience and common sense. [37]                         
When assessing circumstantial evidence, the
trier of fact should consider “other plausible theor[ies]” and “other
reasonable possibilities” which are inconsistent with guilt:  R. v. Comba,
[1938] O.R. 200 (C.A.), at pp. 205 and 211, per Middleton J.A., aff’d [1938]
S.C.R. 396; R. v. Baigent, 2013 BCCA 28, 335 B.C.A.C. 11, at para. 20; R.
v. Mitchell, [2008] QCA 394 (AustLII), at para. 35. I agree with the
appellant that the Crown thus may need to negative these reasonable
possibilities, but certainly does not need to “negative every possible
conjecture, no matter how irrational or fanciful, which might be consistent
with the innocence of the accused”: R. v. Bagshaw, [1972] S.C.R. 2, at
p. 8. “Other plausible theories” or “other reasonable possibilities” must be
based on logic and experience applied to the evidence or the absence of
evidence, not on speculation. [38]                         
Of course, the line between a “plausible theory”
and “speculation” is not always easy to draw. But the basic question is whether
the circumstantial evidence, viewed logically and in light of human experience,
is reasonably capable of supporting an inference other than that the accused is
guilty. [39]                         
I have found two particularly useful statements
of this principle. [40]                         
The first is from an old Australian case, Martin
v. Osborne (1936), 55 C.L.R. 367 (H.C.), at p. 375: In the inculpation of an accused person
the evidentiary circumstances must bear no other reasonable explanation.
This means that, according to the common course of human affairs, the degree
of probability that the occurrence of the facts proved would be accompanied by
the occurrence of the fact to be proved is so high that the contrary cannot
reasonably be supposed. [Emphasis added.] [41]                         
While this language is not appropriate for a
jury instruction, I find the idea expressed in this passage — that to justify a
conviction, the circumstantial evidence, assessed in light of human experience,
should be such that it excludes any other reasonable alternative — a helpful
way of describing the line between plausible theories and speculation. [42]                         
The second is from R. v. Dipnarine, 2014
ABCA 328, 584 A.R. 138, at paras. 22 and 24-25. The court stated that “[c]ircumstantial
evidence does not have to totally exclude other conceivable inferences”; that
the trier of fact should not act on alternative interpretations of the
circumstances that it considers to be unreasonable; and that alternative
inferences must be reasonable, not just possible. [43]                         
Where the line is to be drawn between
speculation and reasonable inferences in a particular case cannot be described
with greater clarity than it is in these passages. (b)          
Did the Trial Judge Err? [44]                         
I return to the question of whether the Court of
Appeal was wrong to find a legal error in relation to circumstantial evidence
in the trial judge’s reasons. [45]                         
The Court of Appeal found that the trial judge
erred because he failed to consider reasonable inferences inconsistent with
guilt that could have arisen from a lack of evidence.  The court found
that, by failing to give the accused the benefit of “gaps” in the evidence, the
trial judge had, in effect, put a burden on the accused to prove something:
paras. 19-20. The respondent supports that conclusion and makes two additional
points. He submits that the trial judge erred in relying on McIver which
wrongly required inferences alternative to guilt to be supported by the
evidence and that the trial judge relied on inapplicable sources — certiorari
applications to quash committals to stand trial, where the beyond a
reasonable doubt standard does not apply.  In doing so, it is submitted, the
judge failed to appreciate the burden of proof on the Crown and the difference
between the standard applied when deciding to commit someone to stand trial at
a preliminary inquiry and the reasonable doubt standard applied at trial. [46]                         
I respectfully disagree with the Court of
Appeal’s conclusion and I cannot accept the respondent’s submissions. [47]                         
There are certainly at first glance some
problematic statements in the trial judge’s reasons.  He mentions that
“inferences are drawn from the evidence that the Crown presents to [the court]”:
para. 45; that speculation is “forming a theory or conjecture without
factual basis”: para. 46; and that “it is evidence that ‘bridges’
the inferential gap”: para. 49.   He cites a number of cases which state that
inferences must be drawn from facts or evidence: paras. 45-49. He cites McIver,
which states that conclusions alternative to guilt must be founded on proven
facts: para. 49. And he wrote that the “Court has no evidence before it
that would support these hypothetical scenarios [of innocence]”: para. 81
(emphases added). [48]                         
However, when the trial judge’s reasons are read
as a whole and these passages are read in their proper context, I am not
persuaded that he made any reversible error. [49]                         
For example, most of the references to the
effect that inferences must arise from evidence concern the Crown’s burden
to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  Of course, there is no error in this
regard as the Crown cannot rely on a gap in the evidence to prove an element of
the offence. [50]                         
When dealing with the defence position, the
judge correctly stated the law, in my opinion.  The judge properly noted that
“the accused cannot ask this Court to rely on supposition or conjecture, that
flows from a purely hypothetical narrative to conclude that the Crown has not
proven he is guilty of the offences with which the Crown has charged him”:
para. 47.  The judge’s citation of McIver was intended to make the same
point, i.e. that a reasonable doubt cannot arise from speculation or
conjecture. This is perfectly correct. As the Court said in Lifchus, “a
reasonable doubt must not be imaginary or frivolous”; need not be proof to an
absolute certainty; and must be based on “reason and common sense”: paras. 31
and 36. The burden on the Crown does not extend to “negativing every
conjecture”:  R. v. Paul, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 181, at p. 191. [51]                         
The respondent submits that the judge erred by
relying on a number of cases dealing with committals for trial at a preliminary
inquiry, a context in which the reasonable doubt standard does not apply.
However, the judge referred to these authorities in relation to his assessment
of the range of available and reasonable inferences. He did not, as the
respondent claims, fail to recognize and apply the beyond reasonable doubt
standard of proof. The trial judge stated the proper standard in his reasons,
and there is nothing in his reasons to show that he departed from this
standard: The
Crown’s counsel and the accused spent a great deal of time arguing about the
inferences that this Court may or may not draw from the evidence that Mr.
Sopczak and Mr. LaFontaine provided. Essentially, the arguments may be boiled
down to the simple question of whether the totality of the evidence that the
Crown has presented to this Court supports an inference that the accused
committed the offences with which the Crown has charged him.  Of course, the
inferences that this Court draws from the evidence must satisfy it beyond a
reasonable doubt that the accused committed the offences with which the Crown
has charged him . . . . [Emphasis added; para. 43.]  [52]                         
Finally, the respondent submits that, by
misapprehending the law in relation to innocent inferences and in applying the
law relating to committals to trials, the trial judge improperly reversed the
burden of proof and applied the wrong standard of proof.  For the reasons I
have just given, the trial judge did not apply the wrong law in these areas,
and properly put the burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt solely on the
Crown. [53]                         
A fair reading of the judge’s reasons as a whole
does not support the respondent’s position that the judge somehow lost sight of
proper process of inference-drawing, the overall burden of proof, or the
difference between a committal for trial and a finding of guilt. The judge did
not err in this regard. [54]                         
I conclude that the judge did not make any legal
error in relation to his assessment of the circumstantial evidence. B.           
Second Question: Was the Verdict of Guilt Reasonable? (1)          
Legal Principles [55]                         
A verdict is reasonable if it is one that a
properly instructed jury acting judicially could reasonably have rendered: R.
v. Biniaris, 2000 SCC 15, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 381. Applying this standard
requires the appellate court to re-examine and to some extent reweigh and
consider the effect of the evidence: R. v. Yebes, [1987] 2 S.C.R. 168,
at p. 186. This limited weighing of the evidence on appeal must be done in
light of the standard of proof in a criminal case. Where the Crown’s case
depends on circumstantial evidence, the question becomes whether the trier of
fact, acting judicially, could reasonably be satisfied that the accused’s guilt
was the only reasonable conclusion available on the totality of the evidence:  Yebes,
at p. 186; R. v. Mars (2006), 205 C.C.C. (3d) 376 (Ont. C.A.), at para.
4; R. v. Liu (1989), 95 A.R. 201 (C.A.), at para. 13; R. v. S.L.R.,
2003 ABCA 148 (CanLII); R. v. Cardinal (1990), 106 A.R. 91 (C.A.); R.
v. Kaysaywaysemat (1992), 97 Sask. R. 66 (C.A.), at paras. 28 and 31. [56]                         
The governing principle was nicely summarized by
the Alberta Court of Appeal in Dipnarine, at para. 22. The
court noted that “[c]ircumstantial evidence does not have to totally exclude
other conceivable inferences” and that a verdict is not unreasonable simply
because “the alternatives do not raise a doubt” in the jury’s mind.  Most
importantly, “[i]t is still fundamentally for the trier [of] fact to decide if
any proposed alternative way of looking at the case is reasonable enough to
raise a doubt.” (2)          
Analysis [57]                         
In order to establish possession of child
pornography, the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the respondent
was aware that he had physical custody of the pornography and that he was aware
of what it was: see, e.g., R. v. Morelli, 2010 SCC 8, [2010] 1 S.C.R.
253, at paras. 16 and 136. There can be no serious question about the fact that
the respondent had physical possession of the material in the sense discussed
by the majority of the Court in Morelli: it had been downloaded on to
his computer and he had physical possession of the computer. The real question
is whether it was reasonable for the judge to find that the respondent knew
that he had physical possession of the pornography that was in fact in his
computer’s memory. [58]                         
I have found it helpful to consider this issue
in two steps. At the first, the question is whether a user of the respondent’s
computer knowingly downloaded pornography. The judge found that a user of this
computer had done so and, in my view, that conclusion was reasonable: para. 67. [59]                         
The evidence was that Limewire, a file-sharing
software, was installed on the computer on the same day that the only user
account (named “oswaldvillaroman”) was created. Limewire, the evidence
disclosed, does not download files or other material without the user taking
some action to download the file or material. The user must enter keywords and
double click on the desired search result.  The evidence further showed that a
user of this computer had changed the default saved folder so that completed
files would be saved in the computer’s iTunes music folder.  A user of the
computer had viewed some of the videos from both the Limewire “incomplete”
folder and iTunes music folder through two different media-playing programs.
These viewed files were not automatically opened by either of these
media-playing programs. The evidence was also to the effect that the titles of
downloaded files were “explicit, disturbing, and would logically indicate that
the associated files are child pornography”: para. 62. All of this evidence
tended to show that the offending material would not be downloaded and viewed
without the user’s consent or knowledge, and that the nature of the material
would be obvious to the user. [60]                         
These facts were recited in the trial judge’s
reasons, and his conclusion at para. 67 that the “oswaldvillaroman” user
account downloaded the child pornography onto the computer using the Limewire
program was reasonable. [61]                         
The second step is to ask whether it was
reasonable to conclude that the respondent was knowingly in possession of the
child pornography that had been saved on his computer. [62]                         
The trial judge found that the respondent was
the user who had downloaded the material, but I agree with the Crown that this
finding was not essential to proof of the respondent’s knowledge. The judge
also found — and this is the critical finding — that the respondent was aware
of the pornography on his computer: para. 85.  The trial judge considered and
rejected the respondent’s submission that the evidence was not sufficient to
establish the respondent’s knowledge of the nature of the material on his
computer. Noting that the Crown does not have to negative every conjecture, he
found that the evidence as a whole persuaded him beyond a reasonable doubt that
the respondent “was aware that the child pornography resided on the Computer”:
para. 85. [63]                         
Contrary to the respondent’s submission, the
trial judge did not merely consider the fact that the accused owned the
computer in coming to this conclusion.  He relied on the evidence of Mr. LaFontaine
and Mr. Sopczak, and referred to the following pieces of evidence before the
court in particular: (a)    two people with whom the accused lives did not download child
pornography to the Computer;  (b)   the child pornography was in the iTunes “Music” folder, which is
accessible to the Computer’s user;  (c)    the Computer belongs to the accused;  (d)   the Computer was used “almost daily” from July 1, 2007, to November
29, 2009;  (e)    the user name that was established on the same day that Limewire was
installed is “oswaldvillaroman”;  (f) the Computer was left at the MyMac on December 2, 2009, and the
accused’s name and home address are shown on the Service Repair Order; and  (g)   the specific problems that the Computer was suffering are listed
under “Problem Description” on the Service Repair Order and specifically refers
to the fact that the “client reports” the problems.  . .
. the clock on the Computer was accurate [which meant that some of the
pornography had been on the computer for about three months before Mr.
Villaroman took the computer in for repairs.] [paras. 82-83] [64]                         
Was the conclusion that the respondent knew this
material was on his computer reasonable? In my view, it was. [65]                         
As noted, Mr. Villaroman admitted that the
laptop was his. He had possession and control of it for the purposes of having
it repaired. He delivered it to the shop, paid for the repairs, tried to pick
it up, stated that he was the person who could authorize the work and
authorized the required repairs. The only user account on the computer,
“oswaldvillaroman”, was created using his name. The Limewire software was
installed on the computer the same day. There had been almost daily use of the
computer since. Some of the pornography had been stored on the computer for
about three months before Mr. Villaroman took it in for repairs.  As discussed
earlier, the nature of the material would be obvious to a user of the computer
who saw the file names. Mr. Villaroman admitted that he resided at the same
address as Benigno and Maxima Villaroman, and that neither of them had put the
child pornography on the computer. There was no evidence that anyone else lived
there or that anyone else had the opportunity to download pornography onto the
computer.  While the accused need not lead evidence to show that another person
had such access to his laptop, based on the evidence and lack of evidence
before the Court, it is speculative to consider whether another person had such
an opportunity, let alone to assume that Mr. Villaroman would be ignorant of
the presence of the material on his computer. [66]                         
The judge did not ignore hypothetical
alternative explanations advanced by the respondent’s counsel. He found that
they were speculative, noting that the Crown does not have the burden “of negativing
every conjecture to which circumstantial evidence might give rise and which
might be consistent with the innocence of the accused”: para. 81; citing Paul,
at p. 191. [67]                         
The Court of Appeal, in my respectful view,
erred by focusing on hypothetical alternative theories and, at times, engaging
in speculation rather than on the question of whether the inferences drawn by
the trial judge, having regard to the standard of proof, were reasonably open
to him. [68]                         
It is true, as the Court of Appeal noted, that
there was no evidence about where the computer was kept or used and that anyone
who had temporary physical access to the laptop computer could work the laptop,
and could access or transmit the child pornography on it: paras. 25-26. The
Court of Appeal found that the pornography was not “accompanied by any email or
similar communication”, nor was there any evidence about whether an ordinary
user of the computer would notice the child pornography in the music folder:
paras. 34-35. It further found that the pornography was not downloaded very
frequently, at an average of a little over one file per month, which does not
“make actions by another user impossible, nor even highly unlikely”: para. 32. 
I note that this last point is not only speculative, but inaccurate.  The
evidence shows that the pornography was downloaded over a three-month period. [69]                         
These were gaps in the Crown evidence about Mr.
Villaroman’s possession and control of the computer that the trial judge had to
take into account in weighing the evidence. However, the Court of Appeal, in
its analysis of these gaps, in effect retried the case. It was for the trial
judge to decide, as he did, whether the evidence of Mr. Villaroman’s powers of
control and direction over the computer; the coincidence of his name and the
only user name on the computer; the file names descriptive of their
pornographic contents; the admission in relation to the non-involvement of two
other people with whom he lived; and the length of time the pornography had
been on the computer, when considered in light of human experience and the
evidence as a whole and the absence of evidence, excluded all reasonable
inferences other than guilt. In my view, while not every trier of fact would
inevitably have reached the same conclusion as did the trial judge, that
conclusion was a reasonable one. [70]                         
At certain points in its analysis, the Court of
Appeal crossed the line from considering the effects of gaps in the Crown
evidence to raising purely speculative possibilities. For example, the Court of
Appeal considered questions such as whether the “laptop [went] to work” or
“during the day to a school, college, or university” or “may have sat much of
each day in a location or locations frequented by many friends, coworkers, or
fellow students”: paras. 28 and 31. These particular factual scenarios are
purely speculative and postulating them goes beyond the bounds of properly
considering the impact of the gaps in the Crown evidence about the physical
location of the laptop. [71]                         
The Court of Appeal’s analysis overlooks the
important point made in Dipnarine that it is fundamentally for the trier
of fact to draw the line in each case that separates reasonable doubt from
speculation. The trier of fact’s assessment can be set aside only where it is
unreasonable. While the Crown’s case was not overwhelming, my view is that it
was reasonable for the judge to conclude that the evidence as a whole excluded
all reasonable alternatives to guilt. [72]                         
In my view, the judge’s finding that this
evidence proved that Mr. Villaroman had possession of the child pornography
found on his computer was not unreasonable. V.          
Disposition [73]                         
I would allow the appeal, set aside the
acquittal entered by the Court of Appeal and remand the case to the Court of
Appeal for hearing and disposition of the Charter  ss. 8  and 24(2)  issues
raised by Mr. Villaroman.                     Appeal
allowed.                     Solicitor for the
appellant: Attorney General of Alberta, Calgary.                     Solicitors for the
respondent: Evans Fagan Rice McKay, Calgary.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Ontario: Attorney General of Ontario,
Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia: Attorney General of
British Columbia, Victoria.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association (Ontario): Greenspan Humphrey
Lavine, Toronto.  