SCC Case Information: 35669   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Araya, 2015 SCC 11, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 581 Date: 20150313 Docket: 35669  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant and Nahoor
Araya Respondent   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and
Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 72) Rothstein J. (McLachlin C.J. and
  Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)    r. v.
araya, 2015 SCC 11, [2015] 1
S.C.R. 581 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Nahoor Araya                                                                                              Respondent Indexed as: R. v. Araya 2015 SCC 11 File No.: 35669. 2014: October 17; 2015: March 13. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis
JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                     Criminal
law — Charge to jury — Evidence — Admissibility — Limiting instructions — Characterization
of witness’s testimony — Accused convicted of manslaughter — Accused’s
appearance changing between time of offence and time of trial — Whether
photographs of accused taken days after offence admissible — Whether trial
judge’s instructions to jury on use it could make of photographs of accused
insufficient — Whether trial judge erred in jury instructions by referring to
witness’s account of conversation with accused as confession.                     A
was convicted of manslaughter for his alleged involvement in a shooting that took
place in a Toronto park. The victim and some friends were socializing in the
park when a group of men entered the park and attempted to rob some of them. The
victim was shot and killed while chasing after the assailants who fled the
scene. Eyewitnesses only provided general descriptions of the assailants — young,
black, thin and clean-shaven — and described the shooter as being between 5’4”
and 5’8”. A, who was 6’1” at the time, was not identified as being among the
assailants. He was arrested five days after the shooting, when a teacher of his
notified the police that A had approached him and confessed to being present at
the shooting but not to having fired the gun.                     Because
A’s appearance had changed between the time of the shooting and his trial, the
Crown sought to have admitted two photographs of him taken five days after the
shooting in order to establish what he looked like at the time. The defence
objected, arguing that the photographs were highly prejudicial. The trial judge
admitted the photographs for the purpose of allowing the jury to consider
whether A had any of the physical attributes described by the eyewitnesses,
subject to a limiting instruction that warned the jury that it could not
conclude that A was among the assailants solely because his appearance fit
within the general description provided by the eyewitnesses. In his
instructions to the jury, the trial judge also summarized the Crown’s position
that the conversation which took place between A and his teacher should be
viewed as a confession of guilt. A appealed his conviction and sentence. A
majority of the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and remitted the matter for
a new trial.                     Held:
The appeal should be allowed, A’s conviction for manslaughter restored, and the
matter remanded to the Court of Appeal for consideration of the sentencing
appeal.                     There
is no reason to disturb the trial judge’s finding that the photographs were admissible.
Whether A could have been among the assailants was a critical issue in this
case, because he denied being in the park the night of the shooting. Moreover,
A did not concede that his appearance fit within the general eyewitness
descriptions. Accordingly, the photographs were relevant to the limited
question of whether A’s appearance at the time of the shooting fit within the
general descriptions provided by witnesses. Regarding the potential prejudicial
effect of the photographs, there are particular dangers involved in showing
eyewitnesses a single photograph to determine if the individual shown is the
individual they saw, because the witness’s memory may be tainted by exposure to
that photograph. However, this concern is not relevant where it is the jury who
has been exposed to the photograph of a single person and asked to consider
whether the person shown falls within a general description. The jury has no
pre-existing memory of the person’s appearance to corrupt, nor is the concern
about the over-persuasiveness of tainted witness testimony relevant in this
context. In light of the deference afforded to trial judges on questions of
balancing probative effect against prejudice, there is no reason to disturb the
trial judge’s finding that the risk associated with the photographs could be
appropriately mitigated by a limiting instruction, and thus that the probative
value of the photographs outweighed their prejudicial effect.                     The
trial judge’s limiting instruction with respect to the use it could make of the
photographs was adequate. Parsing the language in one particular sentence to
determine whether it was sufficient to warn of an impermissible line of
reasoning, without taking into consideration the greater context of the jury
instructions and the trial itself, represents the kind of dissection and minute
scrutiny this Court has warned against. In this case, there does not appear to
be a considerable risk that the jury would have, as a consequence of minor
imperfections with the jury instructions, abandoned their common sense and
adopted clearly flawed reasoning. Moreover, the risk of a juror actually using
the photographs as the basis for an impermissible line of reasoning in the
context of this case was appropriately minimized both by the fact that Crown
counsel did not urge the jury to adopt impermissible lines of inference and by
the trial judge’s charge to the jury as a whole.                     The
trial judge’s use of the word “confession” in his jury instructions does not
constitute a toxic instruction such that a new trial should be ordered. Indeed,
the trial judge did not himself label A’s statements to his teacher as
confessions. Rather, he repeatedly described the school exchange as a conversation.
Moreover, the trial judge only referred to the exchanges as a confession when
reiterating the Crown’s position, which was that the school conversation should
be viewed as a confession of guilt. When viewed in light of the trial judge’s
other cautions to the jury, including the caution that the teacher’s testimony
be evaluated only for its evidence of what A said, rather than the teacher’s
interpretation of his statements, as well as the caution that confession to
mere presence at the scene was not sufficient to establish guilt, a single use
of the word “confession” in describing the Crown’s submissions would not have
been so toxic as to call for a correcting instruction. The trial judge fairly
described the conversation between A and his teacher and it was properly for
the jury to conclude whether the conversation amounted to a confession.                     Since
the jury instructions were adequate, it is not necessary to consider whether
the facts of this case would warrant the application of the curative proviso
provided in s. 686(1) (b)(iii) of the Criminal Code . Cases Cited                     Distinguished:
R. v. Proctor (1992), 69 C.C.C. (3d) 436; referred to: R. v.
Hay, 2013 SCC 61, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 694; R. v. Shearing, 2002 SCC 58,
[2002] 3 S.C.R. 33; R. v. Rodney, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 687; R. v. Goldhar
(1941), 76 C.C.C. 270; R. v. Smierciak, [1947] 2 D.L.R. 156; R. v.
Jaw, 2009 SCC 42, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 26; R. v. Avetysan, 2000 SCC 56, [2000]
2 S.C.R. 745; R. v. Jacquard, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 314; R. v. Cooper,
[1993] 1 S.C.R. 146; R. v. Daley, 2007 SCC 53, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 523; R.
v. Corbett, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 670; R. v. Hibbert, 2002 SCC 39, [2002]
2 S.C.R. 445; R. v. Samuels (2005), 196 C.C.C. (3d) 403. Statutes and Regulations Cited Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, ss.
21(2) , 686(1) (a), (b)(iii).                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Laskin, Gillese and Strathy JJ.A.),
2013 ONCA 734, 312 O.A.C. 284, 305 C.C.C. (3d) 14, [2013] O.J. No. 5546 (QL),
2013 CarswellOnt 16738 (WL Can.), setting aside the accused’s conviction for
manslaughter. Appeal allowed.                     Michael
Bernstein, for the appellant.                     James
Lockyer and Richard Posner, for the
respondent.                     The judgment of the Court was
delivered by [1]                             
Rothstein J. — Nahoor Araya was tried by a judge and jury
for second degree murder and convicted of the included offence of manslaughter
for his alleged involvement in a shooting that took place in a Toronto park on
October 3, 2008. The Ontario Court of Appeal (Strathy J.A. (as he then was),
dissenting) overturned that conviction and ordered a new trial, finding that
the jury instructions given at trial were insufficient to warn the jury against
making improper inferences with regard to certain photographs of Mr. Araya
taken a few days after the shooting and admitted at trial. The Crown appeals
this decision and asks that the manslaughter conviction be restored. In the
alternative, the Crown argues that the majority of the Court of Appeal erred in
failing to apply the curative proviso in s. 686(1) (b)(iii) of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 . [2]                             
In supporting the decision of the majority of
the Court of Appeal, Mr. Araya proffered two additional arguments: first, that
the photographs had no probative value whatsoever and were thus inadmissible,
and second, that the jury instructions were also flawed with respect to the
testimony of Cordel Browne, Mr. Araya’s high school English teacher, with whom
Mr. Araya spoke after the shooting. [3]                             
On the issue of the jury instructions regarding
the photographs, I agree with Strathy J.A. that the trial judge’s instructions
were adequate. While not perfectly phrased, the totality of the instructions,
viewed in the context of the case as a whole, adequately guarded against the
possibility that the jurors might use the photographs as the basis for
impermissible reasoning. [4]                             
On the issue of admissibility, I do not agree
with Mr. Araya’s contention that the photographs had no probative value.
Identity was a key issue in this case. Mr. Araya’s appearance had changed from
the time of the shooting to the time of his trial. The defence never conceded
that Mr. Araya fell within the admittedly broad descriptions of the assailants
given by eyewitnesses to the events in the park. Thus, the burden remained on
the Crown to establish identity, and the trial judge found that the photographs
were probative in showing that Mr. Araya fit within the class of individuals
described by the eyewitnesses. I agree with the Court of Appeal that the trial
judge’s decision on admissibility should not be disturbed. [5]                             
Finally, on the issue of Mr. Browne’s testimony,
I do not agree with Mr. Araya’s contention that the trial judge erred in
instructing the jury with regard to the proper uses or characterization of Mr.
Browne’s testimony. The trial judge fairly described the conversation between
Mr. Araya and Mr. Browne in the jury charge, and it was properly for the jury
to conclude whether this conversation amounted to a confession. [6]                             
I would allow the appeal and remand the matter
to the Court of Appeal for consideration of the sentencing issue. It is thus
unnecessary to consider the issue of the curative proviso. I.             
Factual Background [7]                             
On the evening of October 3, 2008, 17-year-old
Boris Cikovic and a group of friends were drinking and socializing in and
around the tennis courts in Buttonwood Park in west Toronto. According to
witnesses, a second group of around three or four men entered the park at about
10:30 p.m., got into a confrontation with some of the individuals in Mr.
Cikovic’s group, and attempted to rob some of them. Mr. Cikovic resisted and
used a taser against one of the assailants. The assailants then fled the scene
and Mr. Cikovic chased after them, at which point one of the assailants turned
and shot Mr. Cikovic, killing him. [8]                             
The lighting near the tennis courts was dim, and
eyewitnesses were only able to provide broad, general descriptions of the
unknown men: young, black, thin, and clean-shaven. Some witnesses recalled some
of the men wearing bandanas over their faces. The shooter was described as
being between 5’4” and 5’8”. Mr. Araya was 6’1” at the time. None of the
witnesses specifically identified Mr. Araya as being among the assailants. [9]                             
On October 7, four days after the shooting, Mr.
Araya approached Mr. Browne, his English teacher, and asked to speak to him in
private. There was disagreement at trial over the nature of the conversation.
Mr. Araya testified at trial that while he did have a conversation with Mr.
Browne, he did not mention being in Buttonwood Park or having any involvement
with the shooting. Instead, he testified that he made up a fabricated story
about a confrontation at a different location, in the hopes that Mr. Browne
would worry about Mr. Araya’s well-being and offer him a place to stay that
night. According to Mr. Browne, Mr. Araya said that he had been with the group
of people who robbed and shot Mr. Cikovic at Buttonwood Park on October 3, but
that he had not fired the gun and wanted Mr. Browne’s advice on what to do. Mr.
Browne told Mr. Araya that he should inform the authorities, and subsequently
notified the police of his conversation with Mr. Araya. Mr. Araya was arrested
on October 8. Mr. Browne also gave the police a statement on October 8 about
his conversation with Mr. Araya at school the previous day. II.          
Procedural History A.          
Trial Proceedings [10]                         
Mr. Araya was tried before a jury in 2011 on the
basis that he was among the assailants on the night of the shooting, and was
thus liable for second degree murder pursuant to s. 21(2)  of the Criminal
Code . The Crown did not allege that Mr. Araya was the shooter. Eyewitnesses
to the event testified to their recollections about the description of the
assailants. As noted above, these descriptions were limited to vague, general
characteristics – young, black, thin, and clean-shaven. [11]                         
Mr. Araya testified that he was not in
Buttonwood Park on the night of October 3, 2008, but was instead at a friend’s
house several kilometres away from the park. He admitted to having a
conversation with Mr. Browne at school on October 7, but disputed the nature of
that conversation. His position was that he made up a story related to a
different robbery to get Mr. Browne’s attention and concern, but that even in
this fabricated story, he did not admit to having been at Buttonwood Park on
the night of October 3. [12]                         
Mr. Araya pointed to a number of discrepancies
that had arisen between Mr. Browne’s statement to police the day after the
school conversation and his testimony at trial. Specifically, while Mr. Browne
testified that Mr. Araya had admitted to being in the group of assailants at
the park on October 3, Mr. Araya said that discrepancies in this testimony,
such as whether he had told Mr. Browne “I was involved” or “I wasn’t involved”,
and “we rolled up” or “they rolled up”, undermined the value of Mr. Browne’s inculpatory
testimony (Mr. Browne testified that he understood “roll up” in this context to
mean to rob the individuals in the tennis court). [13]                         
The question of whether Mr. Araya was in
Buttonwood Park was thus central to the case against Mr. Araya. He disputed
that he was among those at the park, and never conceded that his appearance on
October 3, 2008 fit within the general description provided by the
eyewitnesses. [14]                         
Mr. Araya’s appearance had changed between the
events in 2008 and his trial: by 2011, he had gained weight, had shorter hair,
was clean-shaven, and wore glasses. The Crown sought to admit two photographs
of Mr. Araya taken five days after the shooting in order to establish what he
looked like at the time. The defence objected to the admission of the
photographs, arguing at trial that they were highly prejudicial. The concern
was that the jury might hear the vague eyewitness descriptions of the
assailants, note that the photographs of Mr. Araya showed that he fit those
descriptions, and impermissibly conclude that Mr. Araya must have been one of
the assailants as a result. The trial judge, McMahon J., admitted the
photographs for the limited purpose of allowing the jury to consider whether
Mr. Araya had any of the physical attributes described by the eyewitnesses,
subject to a limiting instruction that warned against improperly concluding
that Mr. Araya was among the assailants based solely on his appearance fitting
within the general eyewitness descriptions. [15]                         
Before the jury retired to consider their
verdict, the trial judge issued lengthy jury instructions that addressed, inter
alia, the photographs at issue and Mr. Browne’s testimony. [16]                         
Mr. Araya was convicted of manslaughter and
sentenced to eight years in prison, less credit for the time he had spent in
pre-trial custody. B.           
Ontario Court of Appeal, 2013 ONCA 734, 312
O.A.C. 284 [17]                         
Mr. Araya appealed his conviction and sentence
to the Ontario Court of Appeal, where he argued that the trial judge erred in
admitting the photographs and, in the alternative, that if the photographs were
properly admitted, the limiting instructions to the jury were insufficient to
protect against prejudice. (1)        
The Majority (per Gillese J.A., Laskin J.A.
Concurring) [18]                         
The majority found no error in the trial judge’s
finding that the photographs were relevant and had some probative value (para.
31), but agreed with Mr. Araya that this probative value was minimal in light of
the fact that the defence did not challenge the allegation that Mr. Araya’s
appearance in 2008 fit within the general description provided by eyewitnesses
(para. 32). [19]                         
The majority then found that the use of the
photographs could have had a significant prejudicial effect by leading jurors
to engage in a flawed and impermissible line of reasoning in the following
manner: “The photos of the appellant at the time of the shooting reveal a
young, thin, relatively clean-shaven black male. Thus, at the time of the
shooting, the appellant fit the eyewitness generic descriptions of the robbers
in the tennis courts. Therefore, the appellant was in the park and/or one of
the robbers” (para. 33). [20]                         
Given the potential prejudice that would arise
if a juror were to engage in such reasoning, the majority found that clear jury
instructions were required, and that the instructions had to meet two
requirements. First, they had to indicate the permissible use that could have
been made of the photos, and second, they had to explain the dangers of
impermissible lines of reasoning (para. 42). The majority found that the first
of these requirements was met (para. 45), but found the instructions
insufficient with regard to the second requirement because they did not
“clearly explain to the jury the chain of impermissible reasoning” (para. 47).
The majority also took issue with the specific wording of the trial judge’s
limiting instruction, finding it “confusing” (para. 46). [21]                         
In light of the insufficiency of the limiting
instruction, the majority found that there was a “risk of a serious miscarriage
of justice” (para. 50), and allowed the appeal on this ground. The majority
thus did not find it necessary to address Mr. Araya’s other asserted grounds
for appeal, including the trial judge’s treatment of Mr. Browne’s testimony. [22]                         
The majority allowed the appeal and remitted the
matter for a new trial. (2)        
Strathy J.A., Dissenting [23]                         
Strathy J.A. dissented. He agreed with the
majority that the photographs were probative. He stated that in the absence of
an admission from Mr. Araya that he fit within the general eyewitness
descriptions in 2008, his appearance “remained a live issue” (para. 154). He
reviewed the trial judge’s jury charge and found it adequate to guard against
the risk of a miscarriage of justice. Specifically, he found that the risk of
prejudice needed to be evaluated “having regard to all the evidence before the
jury, the arguments of counsel, and the trial judge’s charge, taken as a whole”
(para. 157, citing R. v. Hay, 2013 SCC 61, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 694, at para.
47). [24]                         
Looking at the trial proceedings as a whole,
Strathy J.A. found that the impugned photographs played a minor role in the
Crown’s case. They were also referred to by the defence as serving to exclude
Mr. Araya from the general eyewitness descriptions, because some of the
witnesses had described the assailants as clean-shaven, while Mr. Araya had
facial hair at the time (para. 158). He also noted that the defence did not
object to the jury instruction on this issue (para. 171). He found that the
majority’s view that there was significant risk that jurors would make
impermissible use of the photos “gives no credit to the jury’s common sense and
no weight to the trial judge’s instruction that it was precisely what they
should not do” (paras. 178-79). [25]                         
Strathy J.A. also considered several other
arguments raised by Mr. Araya at the Court of Appeal. Most relevant to the
arguments before this Court, he considered whether the trial judge erred in his
instructions pertaining to Mr. Browne’s testimony. Strathy J.A. summarized both
Mr. Browne’s version and Mr. Araya’s version of the conversation they had at
school on October 7, 2008 (paras. 93-109), as well as their respective versions
of a subsequent conversation at the Metro West Detention Centre on October 23,
2008 (paras. 116-22). He acknowledged that there were apparent discrepancies
between Mr. Browne’s police statement and his testimony at trial (para. 104),
but that the trial judge “thoroughly reviewed the evidence of both the appellant
and Browne concerning their two conversations” (para. 246), that the jury
instructions explained how the jury should consider the differences between Mr.
Browne’s police statement and his testimony at trial (para. 247), and that the
jury was told to consider Mr. Browne’s testimony as to what Mr. Araya said, not
what Mr. Browne interpreted those statements to mean (para. 249). [26]                         
Strathy J.A. concluded that the apparent
discrepancies between Mr. Browne’s police statement and trial testimony about
the school conversation and between Mr. Browne’s and Mr. Araya’s
characterization of the detention centre conversation arose because of
ambiguous language (paras. 253-54). Thus, “it was for the jury to consider the
explanation of the alleged inconsistency and to determine what to make of the
evidence” (para. 255). The trial judge’s explanation of the jury’s duties and
his caution that Mr. Browne’s testimony be considered only for Mr. Araya’s
words, rather than Mr. Browne’s interpretation of them, were sufficient to render
the jury instructions adequate (para. 255). [27]                         
Strathy J.A. would have dismissed the appeal
from conviction. III.       
Issues [28]                         
The Crown raises the following issues on appeal: (1)        Whether the trial judge’s jury instructions regarding the
permissible and impermissible uses of the two photographs of Mr. Araya were
insufficient; and (2)        Whether the majority at the Court of Appeal erred in
failing to apply the curative proviso in s. 686(1) (b)(iii) of the Criminal
Code . [29]                         
Mr. Araya seeks to uphold the decision of the majority
of the Court of Appeal and raises the following additional issues: (3)        Whether the photographs were inadmissible because they
lacked any probative value whatsoever; and (4)        Whether the trial judge erred in failing to instruct the
jury that Mr. Browne’s account of the October 7, 2008 conversation with Mr.
Araya could not be relied upon as a confession of his involvement in the
robbery. This issue was raised by Mr. Araya before the Court of Appeal but not
addressed by the majority. IV.       
Analysis [30]                         
Under s. 686(1)(a) of the Criminal
Code , a court of appeal may allow an appeal against a conviction where the
verdict is unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence, where there has been a
wrong decision on a question of law, or where a miscarriage of justice has
occurred. Mr. Araya asserts that the trial judge’s decision to admit the
photographs, his instructions to the jury regarding the permissible use of the
photographs, and his instructions regarding the use of Mr. Browne’s testimony
each amounted to a miscarriage of justice. Based on the grounds raised, I am of
the opinion that these arguments are properly understood as assertions that the
trial judge engaged in misdirection or non-direction of the jury amounting to
errors of law. A.          
Admissibility of Photographs [31]                         
It is a basic principle of the law of evidence
that the probative value of a particular piece of evidence depends on the
context in which it is proffered. In assessing whether evidence was admissible
at trial, the trial judge’s weighing of probative value and prejudicial effect
is entitled to significant deference. Though this deference is not unlimited,
“the trial judge’s advantage of being able to assess on the spot the dynamics
of the trial and the likely impact of the evidence on the jurors” provides good
reason to defer to his or her weighing of the probative value against any
prejudicial effect that might arise as a result of admission: R. v. Shearing,
2002 SCC 58, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 33, at para. 73. [32]                         
Under s. 21(2) of the Criminal Code , an
accused may be found culpable of an offence if that person shares a common
intent to commit an unlawful act with one or more other people, and one of
those other people commits an offence that the defendant knew or ought to have
known was a probable consequence of the plan.[1]
In this case, Mr. Araya was convicted of manslaughter under this party
liability provision; while the Crown did not assert that Mr. Araya was the
shooter, it did argue that Mr. Araya was among the group of assailants, and
that the shooting was a probable consequence of their plan to accost Mr.
Cikovic’s group in the park. Accordingly, the Crown needed to establish that
Mr. Araya was in Buttonwood Park at the time of the shooting, as well as the
extent of his involvement in the assailants’ common intent to commit robbery
and that he knew or should have known that the shooting was a probable
consequence of that plan. [33]                         
Whether Mr. Araya could have been among the
assailants was a critical issue in this case, because he denied being in
Buttonwood Park the night of the shooting. The Crown sought to admit the
post-arrest photographs of Mr. Araya as bearing on the question of identity,
and defence counsel objected on the ground that the photographs were highly
prejudicial. The trial judge, in ruling on the admissibility of the
photographs, remarked that the jury was presented with testimony from multiple
witnesses that established a set of vague physical attributes possessed by the
assailants. He then noted that the jury had been able to observe Mr. Araya’s
appearance at trial over several weeks, and that this appearance differed
considerably from Mr. Araya’s appearance in 2008. He found that the photos were
circumstantially relevant to the limited question of whether Mr. Araya’s
appearance in 2008 fit within the general descriptions provided by witnesses. [34]                         
Mr. Araya contends that the photos were not
relevant to a live issue at trial, and thus were improperly admitted, because
it was “apparent” that he did not dispute that his appearance had changed
significantly between 2008 and 2011. However, even if this Court were to accept
this implied concession, the issue of whether his appearance had changed is a
distinct matter from the issue of whether his appearance in 2008 fit within the
eyewitness descriptions. Here, Mr. Araya did not concede that his appearance
fit within the general eyewitness descriptions. Accordingly, I see no reason to
challenge the trial judge’s finding that the photographs were relevant for this
particular purpose. [35]                         
Mr. Araya relies on R. v. Proctor (1992),
69 C.C.C. (3d) 436 (Man. C.A.), for the proposition that the Crown may not
adduce prejudicial evidence that bears on matters that are not in dispute. This
reliance is misplaced. Proctor concerned the Crown’s refusal to accept a
“crystal clear” defence admission as to identity in order to artificially
preserve an issue at trial such that highly inflammatory evidence could be
adduced with reference to that issue: pp. 440 and 447. Here, there was no clear
admission that Mr. Araya’s appearance fit within the eyewitness descriptions,
nor did the Crown reject an admission in an attempt to adduce inflammatory
evidence; the trial judge in this case remarked that the photographs were
relatively innocuous in and of themselves, and did not feature the defendant in
an overtly prejudicial light. In addition, at the time the Crown sought to
admit the photographs, it could not have known what would or would not be said
with regard to Mr. Araya’s appearance and the general eyewitness descriptions
when the defence’s evidence was adduced or in defence counsel’s closing
address. Thus, Proctor does not bear on the circumstances at issue in
this case. [36]                         
Mr. Araya also asserts that, because it would
have been impermissible to show the photographs of a single individual to the
eyewitnesses and ask them if the person shown was the person they observed, it
was impermissible to show the photographs to the jury in this case. I agree
that there are particular dangers involved in showing eyewitnesses a single
photograph to determine if the individual shown is the individual they saw. In
such a case, there is a distinct possibility that “the person who has seen the
photograph will have stamped upon his memory the face he has seen in the
photograph, rather than the face he saw on the occasion of the crime”: R. v.
Goldhar (1941), 76 C.C.C. 270 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 271. But this danger
relates to the fact that the witness’s memory, which may be given
considerable persuasive weight by the jury if found to be credible and
reliable, may be tainted by exposure to a single photograph: Goldhar, at
p. 271; R. v. Smierciak, [1947] 2 D.L.R. 156 (Ont. C.A.), at pp. 157-58.
This concern is not relevant where it is the jury who has been exposed to
photographs of a single person and asked to consider whether the person shown
falls within a general description. The jury has no pre-existing memory of the
person’s appearance to corrupt, nor is the concern about the
over-persuasiveness of tainted witness testimony relevant in this context. [37]                         
Regarding the weighing of probative value and
prejudicial effect, the trial judge was satisfied that “there is probative
value to the jury knowing in an identification case what the accused looked
like at the time of the event”. He also acknowledged Mr. Araya’s argument that
the photos may have a prejudicial effect: Since none of the eyewitnesses can
identify the accused, the jury, armed with the photos, could improperly use the
photos to conclude that the accused may have been there because he may have fit
a general description of some eyewitnesses who could only provide vague
descriptions. It is submitted by the defence that this is the risk of prejudice
to the accused. [A.R., vol. VII, at p. 88] He found that this
prejudicial effect could be appropriately mitigated by a limiting instruction,
and thus concluded that “the probative value of these photographs outweigh[s]
the prejudicial effect”. [38]                         
In light of the deference afforded to trial
judges on questions of balancing probative effect against prejudice, I agree
with the Court of Appeal that there is no reason to disturb the finding of the
trial judge that the photos were admissible. B.           
Adequacy of Limiting Instruction [39]                         
When considering an alleged error in a trial
judge’s jury instructions, “[a]n appellate court must examine the alleged error
in the context of the entire charge and of the trial as a whole”: R. v. Jaw,
2009 SCC 42, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 26, at para. 32, per LeBel J. Further, trial
judges are to be afforded some flexibility in crafting the language of jury
instructions: see Hay, at para. 48, citing R. v. Avetysan, 2000
SCC 56, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 745, at para. 9. While trial judges must seek to ensure
that their instructions adequately prepare the jury for deliberation, the
standard for jury instructions is not perfection. Appellate review of jury
instructions is meant to “ensure that juries are properly — not perfectly —
instructed”: R. v. Jacquard, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 314, at para. 62, per Lamer
C.J. This Court has emphasized that the charge generally should not be
“endlessly dissected and subjected to minute scrutiny and criticism”: R. v.
Cooper, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 146, at p. 163. As Bastarache J. has summarized it
in R. v. Daley, 2007 SCC 53, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 523, at para. 30: The cardinal rule is that it is the
general sense which the words used must have conveyed, in all probability, to
the mind of the jury that matters, and not whether a particular formula was
recited by the judge. The particular words used, or the sequence followed, is a
matter within the discretion of the trial judge and will depend on the
particular circumstances of the case. Appellate courts should
not examine minute details of a jury instruction in isolation. “It is the
overall effect of the charge that matters”: Daley, at para. 31. [40]                         
I begin with an examination of the jury
instructions. Justice McMahon’s comprehensive jury charge was delivered over a
total of approximately four hours, and discussed a considerable number of
factual and legal issues relevant to the jury’s deliberations, including the
issue of the eyewitness descriptions and their relationship to the photographs.
Because of the importance of taking a functional and contextual approach to
reviewing jury instructions on appeal, the relevant portions of the charge that
address the question of whether Mr. Araya was in Buttonwood Park are reproduced
here. Regarding the eyewitness accounts, the trial judge instructed: Now, members of the jury,
along with all the evidence I have already reviewed on this issue about whether
or not he was in the park that night, you should also consider how the people
that were in the tennis court that night described the black males that came
in. I want to remind you that none of the young people in the park can identify
Mr. Araya as being there. Many of the people in the tennis court told you
because of how dark it was, how the black males were dressed and how quickly
events took place, they could not tell you what any of the males’ faces looked
like.  Some of them were, however,
able to provide vague descriptions of clothing, height and skin colour. Some
were able to provide descriptions of hair style, and my recollection is none of
the people described the males as having facial hair. I also believe none of
the witnesses say they saw any of the males, when I say the males, the black
males that came in, as having a bag or knapsack when they arrived. As you
heard, these descriptions were very vague. [A.R., vol. I, at p. 94] [41]                         
The trial judge then instructed the jury with
regard to the permissible and impermissible uses that could be made of the
photographs: Now, you have photographs of
what Mr. Araya looked like five days after the shooting. I believe his evidence
and Ms. Cooke’s [sic] was that is what he looked like about that time of
October 3. You can consider whether he fits or does not fit the vague
descriptions provided by the various witnesses. You cannot, of course, however,
conclude based only on the vague descriptions of what Mr. Araya looked like in
the photographs, that he must be the person. That would be completely improper
since the descriptions are so vague and people can’t identify anyone. If there
are features described which are dissimilar to the accused, they may be used to
demonstrate that the accused was not present.  You will recall that none of
the witnesses described seeing facial hair. Now, you will have a picture of Mr.
Araya taken five days later which witnesses say reflect[s] how he looked on
October 3. It would appear he has some facial hair on his chin. Obviously he
does not have a bushy beard. It is what it is in the picture. It will be for
you to decide whether that is something that the witnesses would have noticed
considering the opportunity to observe, the condition of the witnesses and the
lighting conditions. [A.R., vol. I, at pp. 94-95] [42]                         
Finally, the trial judge instructed the jury on
how the eyewitness and photographic evidence bearing on Mr. Araya’s presence or
absence in the park related to broader issues of culpability: If you believe and accept the
witnesses that the males were all clean shaven, then Mr. Araya could not have
been one of the males. Later in my review of the witnesses, I will go over each
witness’ evidence and their brief description.  You can, however, consider
how the accused looked and the vague descriptions of the males as but one piece
of circumstantial evidence, whether the accused’s physical appearance fit or
did not fit the vague descriptions. You would consider this along with the
totality of the evidence to determine whether the Crown has satisfied you
beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Araya was one of the black males who
attended the tennis court.  After you consider all that
evidence, if on the totality of the evidence you are not satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that Mr. Araya was in Buttonwood Park that night, the night
that Mr. Boris Cikovic was shot, then you will find the accused not guilty and
your deliberations would be over, and you won’t go through any further steps on
the decision tree.  If on the totality of the
evidence you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Araya was in that
park that night, then you must go on to determine if he committed any criminal
offence. As I mentioned earlier, simply being present at the scene of a crime
is not enough to find a person guilty of an offence. So assuming you are
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused was in the park, you would
go to the next step. [A.R., vol. I, at pp. 95-97] [43]                         
In finding the jury instructions to be
insufficiently clear, the majority at the Court of Appeal placed significant
emphasis on the following sentence from para. 41 above: “You cannot, of course,
however, conclude based only on the vague descriptions of what Mr. Araya looked
like in the photographs, that he must be the person.” The majority found this
sentence confusing for two reasons. First, the phrase “vague descriptions of
what Mr. Araya looked like in the photographs” appears incongruous. The vague
descriptions were of the assailants the eyewitnesses saw in the park, and not
the photographs of Mr. Araya. Second, the majority found the use of the phrase
“he must be the person” unclear, because it did not specify whether the jury
was barred from inferring that he was only in the park or inferring that he was
one of the robbers (para. 46). [44]                         
With respect, these concerns are overstated when
viewed in the context of the broader instructions. Regarding the apparent
ambiguity about the phrase “vague descriptions of what Mr. Araya looked like in
the photographs”, this phrasing appears to be a minor misstatement. A clarified
articulation in the judge’s oral charge would have stated that the jurors could
not draw conclusions about identity based only on the general descriptions and
what Mr. Araya looked like in the photographs. Indeed, the written charge to
the jury stated exactly this in instructing that the jury could not “conclude
based only on the vague descriptions and what Mr. Araya looked like in
the photographs, that he must be the person” (emphasis added). I would not go
so far as to suggest that all flaws in oral jury instructions may be remedied
by corrected written instructions alone, as some jurors may place significant
weight on what they hear in the courtroom. But where the criticism of oral jury
instructions rests on the possibility that the jurors may have been confused,
including unambiguous language in the written instructions helps ensure that
jurors who found themselves confused would have had access to that clarified
language for reference. [45]                         
Further, in the context of the oral jury charge
itself, the trial judge adopted a clear phrasing moments later when he instructed
the jury that “[y]ou can, however, consider how the accused looked and
the vague descriptions of the males as but one piece of circumstantial
evidence, whether the accused’s physical appearance fit or did not fit the
vague descriptions” (emphasis added). This statement further clarifies the
logical relationship between the photos and the vague descriptions. [46]                         
Regarding the second issue, that the jury may
have been confused by the phrase “he must be the person”, the majority at the
Court of Appeal was concerned that this phrasing did not make it clear exactly
which inferences would be improper to draw based only on the eyewitness
descriptions and the photos. Specifically, given the general nature of the
evidence, it would have been impermissible to infer from the eyewitness
descriptions and the photos alone whether Mr. Araya was in the park or part of
the group of assailants. However, two paragraphs later in the trial judge’s
instructions, he notes that “[i]f you believe and accept the witnesses that the
males were all clean shaven, then Mr. Araya could not have been one of the
males.” Not only does this latter statement emphasize the exculpatory features
of the photographs in a way that would seem to help minimize the danger that
they would be highly prejudicial to Mr. Araya, it further emphasizes that the
inferences relevant to the photographs are those that would place Mr. Araya
with the assailants in the park. [47]                         
From the entirety of the jury instructions and
the context of the trial, it is clear that “the males” refers to the group of
male assailants in Buttonwood Park. While I do not dispute that the phrase “he
must be the person” could have been made more explicit, it seems reasonably
clear in the context of this case that inferring that Mr. Araya was “the
person” meant inferring that he was in Buttonwood Park and among the
assailants. Having regard to the context of the jury instructions, I am not
persuaded that the jury would have been confused by the phrase “he must be the
person”. [48]                         
Before this Court, counsel for Mr. Araya argued
that the trial judge erred further in instructing the jury with regard to the
extent of Mr. Araya’s facial hair at the time of the shooting, and whether the
witnesses would have observed it. The trial judge instructed that “[i]t will be
for you to decide whether [Mr. Araya’s facial hair, as shown in the post-arrest
photographs,] is something that the witnesses would have noticed considering
the opportunity to observe, the condition of the witnesses and the lighting
conditions.” [49]                         
It was asserted by Mr. Araya’s counsel that this
instruction is problematic because it amounts to an assumption that Mr. Araya
was in the park. I cannot agree. Taken in context, it cannot fairly be said to
expressly or impliedly assume that he was in the park. The very next sentence
in the jury charge instructs the jury that if they believe the witnesses that
all of the assailants were clean-shaven, Mr. Araya could not have been among
them. Thus, the possibility that Mr. Araya may not have been in the park or
among the assailants was expressly acknowledged. Reading these two statements
together, I do not find that there was a significant risk that the jury may
have been improperly swayed by the instruction regarding whether the witnesses
would have been able to observe Mr. Araya’s facial hair. It remained
sufficiently clear that the question of whether Mr. Araya was in the park or
among the assailants was one for the jury to decide. [50]                         
It is worth noting that neither counsel invited
the jury to follow the impermissible line of reasoning or use the photographs
in the problematic manner suggested by the majority of the Court of Appeal.
That is not to say that a flawed instruction could not by itself give rise to a
miscarriage of justice, but it is a relevant consideration in evaluating the
context of the jury instructions. [51]                         
It is also relevant that Mr. Araya’s trial
counsel (not counsel on appeal) — the person in the courtroom most attuned to
Mr. Araya’s interests — did not object to the allegedly confusing and insufficient
instruction at trial. This failure to object suggests that the phrasing of this
instruction, heard in its full context in the courtroom, did not sound likely
to confuse or to invite improper reasoning. This Court has stated that while
defence counsel’s failure to object to jury instructions is not determinative
on appeal, it nonetheless “says something about both the overall accuracy of
the jury instructions and the seriousness of the alleged misdirection”: Jacquard,
at para. 38. [52]                         
Parsing the language in one particular sentence
to determine whether it was sufficient to warn of an impermissible line of
reasoning, without taking into consideration the greater context of the jury
instructions and the trial itself, represents the kind of dissection and minute
scrutiny this Court warned against in Cooper. While the instruction
regarding impermissible use was not perfect, I would emphasize Dickson C.J.’s
comments in R. v. Corbett, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 670, at p. 692, that “it
would be quite wrong to make too much of the risk that the jury might
use the evidence for an improper purpose. This line of thinking could seriously
undermine the entire jury system” (emphasis in original). In this case, there
does not appear to be a considerable risk that the jury would have, as a
consequence of minor imperfections with the jury instructions, abandoned their
common sense and adopted the clearly flawed reasoning that because Mr. Araya’s
appearance fit within a broad description that could have encompassed a great
many individuals, he must have been in Buttonwood Park. [53]                         
Finally, in assessing the overall adequacy of
the jury instructions, the majority of the Court of Appeal emphasized that
“this was not a strong Crown case” (para. 49). Before this Court, Mr. Araya’s
counsel further urged that the adequacy of the jury instructions should be
evaluated in light of the strength of the Crown’s case. I agree with the Crown
that the strength of its case was not a proper consideration in evaluating the
adequacy of the jury instructions. As this Court observed in R. v. Hibbert,
2002 SCC 39, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 445, at para. 43, per Arbour J., the proper order
of inquiry in evaluating jury instructions requires judges first to look to the
adequacy of the instructions. Only then, if they are found inadequate, must the
nature and effect of the error in the instructions be determined with reference
to the strength of the Crown case, in the context of the curative proviso
framework of s. 686(1)(b)(iii). [54]                         
In my opinion, the foregoing establishes that
the risk of a juror actually using the photographs as the basis for an
impermissible line of reasoning in the context of this case was appropriately
minimized both by the fact that Crown counsel did not urge the jury to adopt
impermissible lines of inference and by the trial judge’s charge to the jury.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the limiting instruction, taken in context,
was adequate. C.           
Characterization of the Testimony of Mr. Browne [55]                         
Mr. Araya emphasizes certain inconsistencies
between Mr. Browne’s testimony and police statement about the school
conversation on October 7, 2008 and argues that, in light of these
inconsistencies, it was an error for the trial judge to refer to that conversation
as a “confession” in the jury instructions. Three questions are relevant in
addressing this argument: first, what was the nature of the alleged
inconsistencies between Mr. Browne’s police statement and his testimony at
trial? Second, did the trial judge err in his consideration of those
inconsistencies? Third, did the trial judge err in labeling the school
conversation a “confession” in the jury instructions? (1)        
Inconsistencies Between Mr. Browne’s Police
Statement and His Trial Testimony [56]                         
Mr. Araya points to several phrases that he
argues establish significant inconsistencies between Mr. Browne’s police
statement and his testimony at trial. Further, he says that Mr. Browne’s
testimony contained his interpretation of Mr. Araya’s words, rather than the exact
words used by Mr. Araya during the school conversation (R.F., at para. 53), and
that the manner in which the testimony was framed for the jury in the jury
instructions constituted a miscarriage of justice. (As indicated earlier, I am
of the opinion that this is better characterized as an allegation that the
trial judge erred in law.) I will first consider each of the alleged
inconsistencies. I will then consider whether the jury instructions respecting
those alleged inconsistencies were adequate given the potentially inconsistent
nature of Mr. Browne’s statements. However, in considering each alleged
inconsistency, it is important to observe that the analysis of any particular
phrase, removed from the context of the trial record and jury instructions, should
not be given undue weight in evaluating the adequacy of the jury charge as a
whole. Rather, analysis of these phrases informs the broader contextual inquiry
into whether the jury was adequately instructed on how, as a matter of law,
they could consider Mr. Browne’s statements. [57]                         
First, Mr. Browne indicated in his police
statement that Mr. Araya told him “[t]hey rolled up on these guys” in
the park, while at trial he testified that Mr. Araya said “[w]e rolled
up on these guys” (R.F., at para. 55 (emphasis in factum)). Mr. Araya asserts
that the first phrasing indicates that he was not participating in the robbery
that led to the shooting, while the second phrasing suggests he was an active
participant (R.F., at para. 55). He argues that the two statements are
fundamentally inconsistent, and that the critical implication that he was a
participant in the robbery arose out of Mr. Browne’s interpretation of Mr.
Araya’s comments, and not from Mr. Araya’s actual words during the school
conversation. Put briefly, Mr. Araya argues that Mr. Browne’s police statement
should be taken as accurate and exculpatory, while his statements at trial
should be viewed as an impermissible interpretive spin on Mr. Araya’s actual
words. [58]                         
Examining these two phrases in greater context,
I am not persuaded that they are irreconcilable. During his police statement,
Mr. Browne occasionally spoke in sentence fragments and mixed his recollections
of Mr. Araya’s actual words with his own summaries of Mr. Araya’s words and
with recollections of his own words. Regarding the issue of who rolled up on
Mr. Cikovic’s group in the park, Mr. Browne described this portion of the
conversation to the police as follows: “And [Mr. Araya] went on to explain
basically that he said, no, he didn’t want to be involved in it but they rolled
up on the guys anyway.” By contrast, Mr. Browne’s testimony at trial was that
“the summary would be I was there, I was involved. We rolled up on some guys. I
didn’t have the gun, things went down, someone got hit, but I wasn’t the one
carrying the gun.” [59]                         
In my view, Mr. Browne’s police statement that
“they rolled up on the guys” could have been a direct recollection of Mr.
Araya’s specific use of the word “they” — doing so could have been Mr. Araya’s
way of distancing himself from the assailants by removing himself from the
group. Alternately, this phrase could have been Mr. Browne speaking about Mr.
Araya and the rest of the group of assailants rolling up on Mr. Cikovic’s group
together after Mr. Araya’s initial protest. It does not seem unreasonable that
the jury could have interpreted Mr. Browne’s use of “they” in this latter
sense. Nor do these statements necessarily establish that Mr. Browne was
spinning Mr. Araya’s words during his testimony at trial to make them seem more
inculpatory than the statements he initially reported to police. [60]                         
Second, Mr. Araya emphasizes that at trial, Mr.
Browne described his recollection of Mr. Araya’s statement as follows: “Well,
you know, someone got shot but I -- I didn’t do it. I was there, I was
involved, but I didn’t do it. I didn’t have the gun” (emphasis added). By
contrast, during his police statement, Mr. Browne described Mr. Araya’s
statement as follows: . . . I said what about [the
shooting in Buttonwood Park] and he’s like well I was there but I wasn’t
involved and I said what do you mean Nahoor? And he’s like, I was there but
I wasn’t involved, I didn’t have the gun and he went on to explain
basically that um he had said no he didn’t want to be involved in it but they
rolled up on the guys anyway. [Emphasis added; A.R., vol. VII, at pp. 138-39.] Mr. Araya asserts that
Mr. Browne’s initial statement to the police (“I was there but I wasn’t
involved”) was his recollection of what Mr. Araya said to him, while what Mr.
Browne said at trial (“I was there, I was involved, but I didn’t do it”) was
his interpretation of Mr. Araya’s statements (see R.F., at para. 53). [61]                         
Mr. Browne gave additional testimony that
creates some ambiguity about whether Mr. Araya actually admitted to
“involvement” in the robbery, despite his protestations that the group should
not go through with it. Mr. Browne testified that he understood Mr. Araya’s
statement that he was present in the park as implying involvement in the
robbery: “. . . him being there, I’m interpreting it as he’s
involved” (emphasis added). However, when asked by defence counsel immediately
after that statement whether “it’s only your interpretation that he was
involved in rolling up”, Mr. Browne clarified: “No, he said that he was there
and that they decided to roll up on this guy. He was one of the guys saying no.
Something went down, someone was hit, and now he’s seeking my advice as to what
he should do about his involvement in this matter.” While Mr. Browne expressly
denied that his testimony contained any interpretive spin, it appears that his
testimony contained both efforts to recall Mr. Araya’s actual words as well as
statements that could be read as Mr. Browne’s interpretation of the meaning of
those words. Even if this statement to the police were to be considered
inconsistent, however, it must nonetheless be considered in the context of the
rest of Mr. Browne’s testimony and the trial judge’s instructions to the jury
in this regard. [62]                         
Third, regarding Mr. Browne’s own statements to
Mr. Araya during the school conversation, Mr. Araya argues that there is an
important difference between Mr. Browne’s testimony that he told him to “inform
the authorities” and his testimony that he told him to “turn [your]self in”
(R.F., at para. 55). Mr. Araya argues that the phrase “inform the authorities”
is more appropriately said to a witness, rather than a participant in a crime,
and that this inconsistency, combined with the other alleged inconsistencies in
Mr. Browne’s testimony, made it wrong for the trial judge to use the word
“confession” in the jury instructions (R.F., at para. 57). I am not persuaded
by Mr. Araya’s argument that the use of the phrase “inform the authorities”
should be given significant weight on appeal in determining whether the trial judge
acted improperly in using the word “confession” as he did in the jury
instructions. Examining Mr. Browne’s testimony regarding the school
conversation as a whole, his memory of his words to Mr. Araya was imperfect,
but he recalls telling him to inform the authorities with the understanding
that this phrase meant to turn himself in. [63]                         
The context of Mr. Browne’s testimony thus
indicates some uncertainty about the exact words he and Mr. Araya used in their
conversation at school, as well as his explanation for that uncertainty, which
the jury was entitled to consider. Further, the trial judge did take note of
inconsistencies in Mr. Browne’s testimony in his jury instructions, framing
them as follows: Cordel Browne told you in
examination-in-chief that Mr. Araya told him he was there and involved in the
robbery but not the shooting. In cross-examination he was asked about the video
statement he gave to the police the day after that conversation. He admitted
telling the police that Mr. Araya said he was not involved. He also admitted
that what he told the police was the truth. He also provided an explanation for
the difference between what he said here and what he said in his earlier
statement. Since it would appear Mr. Browne adopted his prior statement, you may
consider that as part of his evidence. You must also consider his explanation
for the differences. [A.R., vol. I, at p. 38] [64]                         
Given the possible interpretations of Mr.
Browne’s police statement and testimony, and of his testimony regarding the
meaning of the inconsistencies, I do not find that the trial judge’s
instruction regarding how the jury was to consider Mr. Browne’s evidence
amounted to misdirection. Where there were possible inconsistencies between Mr.
Browne’s police statement and trial testimony, the jury was properly instructed
to evaluate these differences. [65]                         
Even if one were to find some amount of
interpretive spin in Mr. Browne’s testimony about Mr. Araya’s statements on
October 7, 2008, as, for example, where he discusses the meaning of the word
“involved”, the trial judge’s jury instructions also expressly warned the jury
about the dangers of such testimony. The jury was instructed that it was “what
Mr. Browne was told that is relevant, not what Mr. Browne thinks Mr. Araya
meant by what he said”. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that the trial judge
misdirected the jury in relation to Mr. Browne’s evidence. (2)        
Characterizing the School Conversation as a
“Confession” [66]                         
Mr. Araya argues that the inconsistencies in Mr.
Browne’s testimony and the exculpatory nature of Mr. Araya’s statements as
initially recounted by Mr. Browne during his police statement make it
impermissibly prejudicial to describe the school conversation as a
“confession”. In this regard, Mr. Araya takes issue with the following jury instruction: It is submitted that on October 7,
2008, Mr. Araya confessed to being one of the group of males who “rolled up” to
rob Mr. Cikovic and his friends in Buttonwood Park on the evening of October 3,
2008. It is submitted he told his teacher, Mr. Browne, that he did not have the
gun, he did not fire the shot, but that he was part of the group that “rolled
up.” It is the Crown’s position that in this context, Mr. Araya was using the
term “roll up” to mean they were going to commit a robbery. [A.R., vol. I, at
p. 159] [67]                         
According to counsel for Mr. Araya, the use of
the word “confession” in this context was a “toxic instruction” that should
give rise to a new trial under the reasoning of R. v. Samuels (2005),
196 C.C.C. (3d) 403 (Ont. C.A.) (R.F., at para. 58). I do not agree. This case
is not like Samuels; in that case, the defendant’s statements were
largely exculpatory, but the trial judge himself instructed the jury that “the
statements of the accused Samuels contain both admissions or confessions as well
as excuses which tend to exonerate him”: para. 27. The trial judge went on to
suggest that greater weight should be placed on the defendant’s inculpatory
statements than his exculpatory ones. Armstrong J.A. held that the instruction
in that case was “seriously flawed. The statements of the appellant are largely
exculpatory and support his defence of accident. It is therefore wrong and
prejudicial to describe the statements as containing ‘admissions’ or
‘confessions’”: Samuels, at para. 28. Samuels thus found it
prejudicial for the trial judge, in the context of that case, to label
certain statements of the defendant as “confessions”. [68]                         
By contrast, the trial judge in this case did
not himself label Mr. Araya’s statements as confessions. Indeed, he repeatedly
described the school exchange as a “conversation”, rather than a confession,
elsewhere in the charge. In the portion of the jury instructions emphasized by
Mr. Araya, the trial judge remarked that “[i]t is submitted that . . .
Mr. Araya confessed” (emphasis added). This statement amounts to a reiteration
of the Crown’s position, which was that the school conversation should be
viewed as a confession of guilt. When viewed in light of the trial judge’s
other cautions to the jury, including the caution that Mr. Browne’s testimony
should be evaluated only for its evidence of what Mr. Araya said, rather than
Mr. Browne’s interpretation of his statements, as well as the caution that
confession to mere presence at the scene was not sufficient to establish guilt,
I do not find that the single use of the word “confession” in describing the
Crown’s submissions would have been so “toxic” an instruction as to call for a
correcting instruction. D.          
Grounds of Appeal Before the Ontario Court of
Appeal [69]                         
Before the Court of Appeal, Mr. Araya asserted
that the trial judge had made seven errors. The majority of the Court of Appeal
found that the alleged flaws in the jury instructions pertaining to the
permissible use of the photographs were sufficient to allow the appeal, and thus
did not address the remaining alleged errors. Two of the seven errors
originally asserted — the admissibility of the photographs and the associated
jury instructions, and the trial judge’s treatment of Mr. Browne’s testimony —
were argued before this Court. The other five grounds that Mr. Araya asserted
before the Court of Appeal were that the trial judge erred in: (b) failing to caution the
jury concerning how to use disbelief of the appellant’s alibi;  (c) failing to give a Vetrovec
caution with respect to the evidence of one eyewitness, George Athens;  (d) failing to properly
instruct the jury regarding party liability under s. 21(2)  of the Criminal
Code  . . .;  . . .  (f) failing to instruct the
jury that it was improper for the Crown to ask the appellant to comment on why
his teacher would lie and implicate him in the shooting, given their positive
relationship; and  (g) permitting the Crown to
lead evidence of the appellant’s demeanour at the time he learned of the
warrant for his arrest, and following his arrest, as after the fact conduct
capable of supporting an inference of guilt. (Court
of Appeal reasons, at para. 68, per Strathy J.A., dissenting) [70]                         
For the reasons of Strathy J.A., I agree that
the trial judge did not err in regard to any of these five additional grounds
of appeal. E.           
Curative Proviso [71]                         
Because I find the jury instructions to have
been adequate, it is not necessary to consider whether the facts of this case
would warrant the application of the curative proviso provided in s. 686(1) (b)(iii)
of the Criminal Code . V.          
Conclusion [72]                         
The appeal is allowed and the respondent’s
conviction for manslaughter is restored. The matter is remanded to the Ontario
Court of Appeal for consideration of the sentencing appeal.                     Appeal
allowed.                     Solicitor for the
appellant: Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
respondent: Lockyer Campbell Posner, Toronto.  [1]   Section 21(2)  operates somewhat differently where a conviction is
sought on a charge of murder. Under this Court’s decision in R. v. Rodney,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 687, “[a] conviction for murder must be based on proof of
subjective foresight of death” (p. 692). Thus, culpability for murder under s.
21(2)  only exists where a defendant knew the killing was a probable consequence
of the common plan in which he or she was a participant.  