SCC Case Information: 36537   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Bradshaw, 2017 SCC 35, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 865 Appeal
  Heard: November 3, 2016 Judgment
  Rendered: June 29, 2017 Docket: 36537  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant  and  Robert
David Nicholas Bradshaw Respondent  - and -  Attorney
General of Ontario, British Columbia Civil Liberties Association and
Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario Interveners     Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner,
Côté and Brown JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 97) Karakatsanis J. (McLachlin C.J. and
  Abella, Wagner and Brown JJ. concurring)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 98 to 188) Moldaver J. (Côté J. concurring)     R. v. Bradshaw, 2017 SCC 35,
[2017] 1 S.C.R. 865 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Robert David Nicholas Bradshaw                                                               Respondent and Attorney General of Ontario, British Columbia Civil Liberties
Association and Criminal Lawyers’ Association
of Ontario                                                  Interveners Indexed as: R. v.
Bradshaw 2017 SCC 35 File No.: 36537. 2016: November 3; 2017: June 29. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner, Côté and Brown JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for british columbia                     Held (Moldaver and Côté JJ. dissenting): The
appeal should be dismissed.                     Per
McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Karakatsanis,
Wagner and Brown JJ.: Hearsay evidence is
presumptively inadmissible because it is often difficult for the trier of fact
to assess its truth. However, it can be admitted under the principled exception
if the criteria of necessity and threshold reliability are met on a balance of
probabilities.                     A
trial judge can only rely on corroborative evidence to establish substantive
reliability if it shows, when considered as a whole and in the circumstances of
the case, that the only likely explanation for the hearsay statement is the
declarant’s truthfulness about, or the accuracy of, the material aspects of the
statement.                     First,
corroborative evidence must go to the truthfulness or accuracy of the material
aspects of the hearsay statement. Since hearsay is
tendered for the truth of its contents, corroborative evidence must go to the
truthfulness or accuracy of the content of the statement that the moving party
seeks to rely on.                     In
sum, to determine whether corroborative evidence is of assistance in the
substantive reliability inquiry, a trial judge should: (1) identify the
material aspects of the hearsay statement that are tendered for their truth;
(2) identify the specific hearsay dangers raised by those aspects of the statement
in the particular circumstances of the case; (3) based on the
circumstances and these dangers, consider alternative, even speculative, explanations
for the statement; and (4) determine whether, given the circumstances of
the case, the corroborative evidence led at the voir dire rules out
these alternative explanations such that the only remaining likely explanation
for the statement is the declarant’s truthfulness about, or the accuracy of,
the material aspects of the statement.                     The
threshold reliability of the hearsay statement is not otherwise established. Jury
warnings about the dangers of hearsay evidence or Vetrovec testimony do
not provide a satisfactory basis for the trier of fact to rationally evaluate
the truth and accuracy of the hearsay statement. Instructing a jury on how to
evaluate a statement that it lacks the means to evaluate does not address
the hearsay dangers that underlie the exclusionary rule. Given
that the trier of fact could not adequately test the trustworthiness of T’s
statement, and there were no circumstances or corroborative evidence showing
that this statement was inherently trustworthy, it should not have been
admitted into evidence.                     The
principled approach to hearsay recognizes that threshold reliability can be met
in three ways: (1) where a statement has sufficient features of
substantive reliability; (2) where the statement has adequate features of
procedural reliability; or (3) where the statement does not satisfy either
of the first two ways, but incorporates features of both which, in combination,
justify its admission. Under this third way, where a statement has a sufficient
level of trustworthiness, relative to the strength of the procedural safeguards
for the trier of fact to evaluate its ultimate reliability, the statement is
safe to admit.                     In
reaching a different conclusion, the majority has departed from the functional
approach to threshold reliability by unduly restricting the extrinsic evidence
that a court can consider when assessing a statement’s substantive reliability and
by adopting a narrow view of the procedural safeguards available at trial that
can equip the jury with the tools it needs to assess the ultimate reliability
of a statement.                     The
majority’s unwillingness to consider these various procedural safeguards relied
upon by the trial judge in this case leads it to skirt the third way of
establishing threshold reliability — the one applied by the trial judge in this
case — in which features of substantive and procedural reliability may, in
conjunction, justify the admission of a hearsay statement. Cases Cited By Karakatsanis J.                     Applied:
R. v. Khelawon, 2006 SCC 57, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 787; referred to: Vetrovec
v. The Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 811; R. v. Hart, 2014 SCC 52, [2014] 2
S.C.R. 544; R. v. B. (K.G.), [1993] 1 S.C.R. 740; R. v. Baldree,
2013 SCC 35, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 520; R. v. Youvarajah, 2013 SCC 41, [2013]
2 S.C.R. 720; R. v. Hawkins, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 1043; R. v. U. (F.J.),
[1995] 3 S.C.R. 764; R. v. Couture, 2007 SCC 28, [2007] 2 S.C.R. 517; R.
v. Smith, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 915; R. v. Blackman, 2008 SCC 37, [2008] 2
S.C.R. 298; R. v. Starr, 2000 SCC 40, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 144; R. v. R.
(D.), [1996] 2 S.C.R. 291; R. v. Khan, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 531; R. v.
Khela, 2009 SCC 4, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 104; R. v. Smith, 2009 SCC 5,
[2009] 1 S.C.R. 146; R. v. Salah, 2015 ONCA 23, 319 C.C.C. (3d) 373. By Moldaver J. (dissenting)                     R. v. Baldree, 2013 SCC 35, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 520; R. v. Khelawon, 2006 SCC
57, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 787; R. v. Devine, 2008 SCC 36, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 283;
R. v. Blackman, 2008 SCC 37, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 298, aff’g (2006), 84 O.R.
(3d) 292; R. v. Youvarajah, 2013 SCC 41, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 720; R. v.
Couture, 2007 SCC 28, [2007] 2 S.C.R. 517; R. v. Khan, [1990] 2
S.C.R. 531; R. v. Hawkins, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 1043; R. v. B. (K.G.),
[1993] 1 S.C.R. 740; R. v. Hamilton, 2011 ONCA 399, 271 C.C.C. (3d) 208;
R. v. U. (F.J.), [1995] 3 S.C.R. 764; R. v. Hart, 2014 SCC 52,
[2014] 2 S.C.R. 544; R. v. Abbey, 2009 ONCA 624, 246 C.C.C. (3d) 301; R.
v. Carroll, 2014 ONCA 2, 304 C.C.C. (3d) 252; R. v. McNamara (No. 1)
(1981), 56 C.C.C. (2d) 193; R. v. R. (T.), 2007 ONCA 374, 85 O.R. (3d)
481; R. v. Lowe, 2009 BCCA 338, 274 B.C.A.C. 92; R. v. Goodstoney,
2007 ABCA 88, 218 C.C.C. (3d) 270; R. v. Smith, 2009 SCC 5, [2009] 1
S.C.R. 146; R. v. Adjei, 2013 ONCA 512, 309 O.A.C. 328; R. v.
Stirling, 2008 SCC 10, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 272; R. v. Corbett, [1988] 1
S.C.R. 670; R. v. Carroll, 1999 BCCA 65, 118 B.C.A.C. 219; R. v. Noël,
2002 SCC 67, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 433; R. v. S. (S.), 2008 ONCA 140, 232
C.C.C. (3d) 158; R. v. Post, 2007 BCCA 123, 217 C.C.C. (3d) 225; R.
v. Tash, 2013 ONCA 380, 306 O.A.C. 173; R. v. Kimberley (2001), 56
O.R. (3d) 18. Authors Cited Akhtar, Suhail. “Hearsay: The Denial of Confirmation” (2005), 26
C.R. (6th) 46. Lacelle, Laurie. “The Role of Corroborating Evidence in Assessing
the Reliability of Hearsay Statements for Substantive Purposes” (1999), 19 C.R.
(5th) 376. Lederman, Sidney N., Alan W. Bryant and Michelle K.
Fuerst. The Law of Evidence in Canada, 4th ed. Markham, Ont.:
LexisNexis, 2014. Paciocco, David M., and Lee Stuesser. The Law of Evidence,
7th ed. Toronto: Irwin Law, 2015. Stewart, Hamish. “Khelawon: The Principled Approach to
Hearsay Revisited” (2008), 12 Can. Crim. L.R. 95.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal (Neilson, Bennett and
Garson JJ.A.), 2015 BCCA 195, 323 C.C.C. (3d) 475, 372 B.C.A.C. 77, 640
W.A.C. 77, 20 C.R. (7th) 398, [2015] B.C.J. No. 884 (QL), 2015 CarswellBC
1168 (WL Can.), setting aside the accused’s convictions for first degree murder
and ordering a new trial. Appeal dismissed, Moldaver and Côté JJ.
dissenting.                     Margaret A. Mereigh and David Layton, for the appellant.                     Richard S. Fowler, Q.C., Eric Purtzki and Karin Blok, for the respondent.                     Michael Bernstein, for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario.                     Greg J. Allen, for the intervener the British Columbia Civil Liberties
Association.                     Louis P. Strezos and Samuel Walker, for the intervener the Criminal
Lawyers’ Association of Ontario.                     The
judgment of McLachlin C.J. and
Abella, Karakatsanis, Wagner and Brown JJ. was delivered by                      Karakatsanis J. — I.              
Introduction [1]                             
Hearsay is an out-of-court statement tendered
for the truth of its contents. It is presumptively inadmissible because — in
the absence of the opportunity to cross-examine the declarant at the time the
statement is made — it is often difficult for the trier of fact to assess its
truth. Thus hearsay can threaten the integrity of the trial’s truth-seeking
process and trial fairness. However, hearsay may exceptionally be admitted into
evidence under the principled exception when it meets the criteria of necessity
and threshold reliability. [2]                             
In this case, the Crown tendered hearsay from
Roy Thielen, an accomplice, implicating Robert Bradshaw, the accused, in two
murders. The trial judge ruled that this hearsay statement was admissible. The
Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and ordered a new trial. [3]                             
The following issue arises in this appeal: When
can a trial judge rely on corroborative evidence to conclude that the threshold
reliability of a hearsay statement is established? [4]                             
In my view, corroborative evidence may be used
to assess threshold reliability if it overcomes the specific hearsay dangers
presented by the statement. These dangers may be overcome on the basis of
corroborative evidence if it shows, when considered as a whole and in the
circumstances of the case, that the only likely explanation for the hearsay
statement is the declarant’s truthfulness about, or the accuracy of, the
material aspects of the statement. The material aspects are those relied on by
the moving party for the truth of their contents. [5]                             
Here, the hearsay statement was tendered
for the truth of Thielen’s claim that Bradshaw participated in the murders. The specific hearsay danger raised by Thielen’s statement was the
inability of the trier of fact to assess whether Thielen lied about Bradshaw’s
participation in the murders. In addition to the reliability dangers that are
inherent in all hearsay statements, there are specific reasons to be concerned
that Thielen lied. Thielen had a motive to lie to shift the blame to Bradshaw. Thielen
previously said that he had shot both victims, and had not implicated Bradshaw.
Furthermore, Thielen was a Vetrovec witness, a witness who cannot be
trusted to tell the truth due to his unsavoury character (Vetrovec v. The
Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 811). [6]                             
The trial judge relied significantly on the
existence of corroborative evidence to deem Thielen’s statement admissible.
However, the evidence he relied on did not, when considered in the
circumstances of the case, show that the only likely explanation was that
Thielen was truthful about Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders. It did not
substantially negate the possibility that Thielen lied about Bradshaw’s
participation in the murders. While this corroborative evidence may increase
the probative value of the re-enactment statement if admitted, it is of no
assistance in assessing the statement’s threshold reliability. The trial judge
therefore erred in relying on this corroborative evidence. [7]                             
Given that the trier of fact could not
adequately test the trustworthiness of Thielen’s statement, and there were no
circumstances or corroborative evidence showing that this statement was
inherently trustworthy, it should not have been admitted into evidence. [8]                             
For the reasons that follow, I would dismiss the
appeal. II.           
Background [9]                             
Laura Lamoureux and Marc Bontkes were killed in
March 2009, five days apart. The police suspected that Thielen was involved in
both murders. They ran a Mr. Big operation targeting Thielen. In a Mr. Big
operation, undercover officers recruit a suspect into a fictitious criminal
organization for the purpose of eliciting a confession from him (R. v. Hart,
2014 SCC 52, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 544, at para. 85). The officers befriend the
suspect and demonstrate that membership in the criminal organization provides
rewards and friendship. The suspect discovers that his membership is
conditional on a confession to the crime boss, Mr. Big (Hart, at paras.
1-2). [10]                         
As part of the Mr. Big operation, Thielen went
on a road trip with Cst. B., an undercover agent, in May 2010. During the road
trip, Thielen told Cst. B. that he had shot both Lamoureux and Bontkes. [11]                         
In July 2010, Thielen met an undercover agent
posing as the crime boss. During this meeting, Thielen said that he had shot
Lamoureux but that “Paulie” and Michelle Motola had shot Bontkes. “Paulie” was
Bradshaw’s nickname. [12]                         
Later that day, Thielen and Bradshaw met up at
the Best Western Hotel. Their conversation was recorded, but only the latter
part is audible. Bradshaw said that he had shot Bontkes and had participated in
both murders. [13]                         
Two days later, Thielen and Bradshaw met at
Bothwell Park. Bradshaw discussed an unsuccessful attempt to kill Bontkes,
which preceded Bontkes’s actual murder in March 2009. [14]                         
Thielen was arrested on July 30, 2010. He
initially denied his involvement in both murders. However, when the police told
Thielen that he had been the target of a Mr. Big operation, he then described
the murders and identified unnamed participants. The next day, he made another
statement to the police in which he described the murders and directly named
Bradshaw. A few days later, Thielen re-enacted the murders for the police
officers and implicated Bradshaw in both murders. This re-enactment was
recorded in a roughly six-hour video. [15]                         
Thielen and Bradshaw were initially charged
together with two counts of first degree murder. However, Thielen pled guilty
to second degree murder before the trial started. Thielen was called as a Crown
witness in Bradshaw’s trial, but refused to be sworn to give testimony. As a
result, he was held in contempt of court. The Crown sought to admit part of the
re-enactment video — a hearsay statement — into evidence. III.         
Decisions Below [16]                         
Following a voir dire, Greyell J. admitted the
re-enactment video into evidence (2012 BCSC 2025). He found that this hearsay
statement was necessary and sufficiently reliable to be admitted. In finding
that the statement was sufficiently reliable, he noted that the
re-enactment was voluntary, incriminating, and was made after Thielen
received legal advice. The statement was also corroborated by extrinsic
evidence. However, given Thielen’s unsavoury character, the trial judge
determined that a strong Vetrovec warning regarding the re-enactment
video was required. [17]                         
The British Columbia Court of Appeal held that
the trial judge erred in admitting the re-enactment video because it was not
sufficiently reliable. The court noted that the trial judge relied
significantly on evidence that did not implicate Bradshaw in the murders as
corroboration. Furthermore, in the recorded conversations at the Best Western
Hotel and Bothwell Park, Bradshaw did not implicate himself in the murders to
the degree that Thielen implicated Bradshaw in the re-enactment. The British Columbia Court of Appeal concluded that the trial judge
erred in finding that threshold reliability was established. It allowed the
appeal, set aside the guilty verdicts, and ordered a new trial (2015 BCCA 195,
323 C.C.C. (3d) 475). IV.        
Analysis A.           
Legal Principles [18]                         
Hearsay can exceptionally be admitted into
evidence if it is necessary and sufficiently reliable. This appeal raises the
following question: When can a trial judge rely on corroborative evidence to
conclude that the threshold reliability of a hearsay statement is established?
To answer, I turn to the rationale for the rule against hearsay and for the
principled exception to this rule. (1)          
The Principled Exception to the Hearsay Rule [19]                         
The truth-seeking process of a trial is
predicated on the presentation of evidence in court. Litigants make their case
by presenting real evidence and viva voce testimony to the trier of
fact. In court, witnesses give testimony under oath or solemn affirmation. The
trier of fact directly observes the real evidence and hears the testimony, so
there is no concern that the evidence was recorded inaccurately. This process
gives the trier of fact robust tools for testing the truthfulness of evidence
and assessing its value. To determine whether a witness is telling the truth,
the trier of fact can observe the witness’s demeanor and assess whether the
testimony withstands testing through cross-examination (R. v. Khelawon,
2006 SCC 57, [2006]
2 S.C.R. 787, at para. 35). [20]                         
Hearsay is an out-of-court statement tendered
for the truth of its contents. Because hearsay is declared outside of court, it
is often difficult for the trier of fact to assess whether it is trustworthy.
Generally, hearsay is not taken under oath, the trier of fact cannot observe
the declarant’s demeanor as she makes the statement, and hearsay is not tested
through cross-examination (R. v. B. (K.G.), [1993] 1 S.C.R. 740, at p. 764). Allowing a
trier of fact to consider hearsay can therefore compromise trial fairness and
the trial’s truth-seeking process. The hearsay statement may be inaccurately
recorded, and the trier of fact cannot easily investigate the declarant’s
perception, memory, narration, or sincerity (Khelawon, at para. 2). As
Fish J. explains in R. v. Baldree, 2013 SCC 35, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 520: First, the
declarant may have misperceived the facts to which the hearsay statement
relates; second, even if correctly perceived, the relevant facts may have been wrongly
remembered; third, the declarant may have narrated the relevant facts in an
unintentionally misleading manner; and finally, the declarant may have knowingly
made a false assertion. The opportunity to fully probe these potential
sources of error arises only if the declarant is present in court and subject
to cross-examination. [Emphasis in original; para. 32.] [21]                         
Given the dangers that hearsay evidence presents,
“[t]he fear is that untested hearsay evidence may be
afforded more weight than it deserves” (Khelawon, at para. 35).
Therefore, while all relevant evidence is generally admissible, hearsay is
presumptively inadmissible (Khelawon, at paras. 2-3). [22]                         
However, some hearsay evidence “presents minimal
dangers and its exclusion, rather than its admission, would impede
accurate fact finding” (Khelawon, at para. 2 (emphasis in
original)). Thus, categorical exceptions to the rule excluding hearsay
developed through the common law over time. These traditional exceptions are
based on admitting types of hearsay statements that were considered necessary
and reliable, such as dying declarations (Khelawon, at para. 42; R. v. Youvarajah, 2013 SCC 41, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 720, at para. 20; J. H. Wigmore, Evidence in Trials at Common Law (2nd ed.
1923), vol. III, at p. 152). [23]                         
Eventually, a more flexible approach to hearsay
developed through the jurisprudence. Under the principled exception, hearsay
can exceptionally be admitted into evidence when the party tendering it
demonstrates that the twin criteria of necessity and threshold reliability are
met on a balance of probabilities (Khelawon, at para. 47). [24]                         
By only admitting necessary and sufficiently
reliable hearsay, the trial judge acts as an evidentiary gatekeeper. She
protects trial fairness and the integrity of the truth-seeking process (Youvarajah,
at paras. 23 and 25). In criminal proceedings, the
threshold reliability analysis has a constitutional dimension because the
difficulties of testing hearsay evidence can threaten the accused’s right to a
fair trial (Khelawon, at paras. 3 and 47). Even
when the trial judge is satisfied that the hearsay is necessary and
sufficiently reliable, she has discretion to exclude this evidence if its
prejudicial effect outweighs its probative value (Khelawon, at para.
49). [25]                         
In this case, the necessity
of the re-enactment evidence is established because Thielen refused to testify.
Thus, its admissibility rests on whether threshold reliability is met. (2)          
Threshold Reliability [26]                         
To determine whether a hearsay statement is
admissible, the trial judge assesses the statement’s threshold reliability.
Threshold reliability is established when the hearsay “is sufficiently reliable
to overcome the dangers arising from the difficulty of testing it” (Khelawon,
at para. 49). These dangers arise notably due to the absence of contemporaneous
cross-examination of the hearsay declarant before the trier of fact (Khelawon,
at paras. 35 and 48). In assessing threshold reliability, the trial judge must
identify the specific hearsay dangers presented by the statement and consider any means of overcoming them (Khelawon, at
paras. 4 and 49; R. v. Hawkins, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 1043, at para. 75). The
dangers relate to the difficulties of assessing the declarant’s perception,
memory, narration, or sincerity, and should be defined with precision to permit
a realistic evaluation of whether they have been overcome. [27]                         
The hearsay dangers can be overcome and threshold
reliability can be established by showing that (1) there are adequate
substitutes for testing truth and accuracy (procedural reliability) or (2) there are sufficient circumstantial or evidentiary guarantees that the statement is inherently trustworthy (substantive reliability)
(Khelawon, at paras. 61-63; Youvarajah, at para. 30). [28]                         
Procedural reliability
is established when “there are adequate substitutes for testing the evidence”,
given that the declarant has not “state[d] the evidence in
court, under oath, and under the scrutiny of contemporaneous cross-examination”
(Khelawon, at para. 63). These substitutes must
provide a satisfactory basis for the trier of fact to rationally evaluate the
truth and accuracy of the hearsay statement (Khelawon, at para. 76; Hawkins,
at para. 75; Youvarajah, at para. 36). Substitutes for traditional
safeguards include a video recording of the statement, the presence of an oath,
and a warning about the consequences of lying (B. (K.G.), at pp. 795-96). However,
some form of cross-examination of the declarant, such as preliminary inquiry testimony (Hawkins) or cross-examination of a recanting witness at trial (B. (K.G.); R. v. U. (F.J.), [1995] 3 S.C.R. 764), is usually required (R. v. Couture, 2007 SCC 28, [2007] 2 S.C.R. 517, at paras. 92 and 95). In this respect, I
disagree with the Court of Appeal’s categorical assertion that safeguards
relevant to assessing procedural reliability are only “those
in place when the statement is taken” (para. 30). Some
safeguards imposed at trial, such as cross-examination of a recanting witness
before the trier of fact, may provide a satisfactory basis for testing the
evidence. [29]                         
However, jury warnings about the dangers of
hearsay evidence or Vetrovec testimony do not provide adequate
substitutes for traditional safeguards. Instructing a jury on how to
evaluate a statement that it lacks the means to evaluate does not
address the hearsay dangers that underlie the exclusionary rule. Furthermore, Vetrovec
warnings are designed to address concerns about a witness who is inherently
untrustworthy, despite the opportunity to cross-examine in court. They are not
tools for assessing the truth and accuracy of a hearsay statement in the
absence of contemporaneous cross-examination. [30]                         
A hearsay statement is also admissible if substantive
reliability is established, that is, if the statement is inherently trustworthy
(Youvarajah, at para. 30; R. v. Smith, [1992]
2 S.C.R. 915, at p. 929). To determine whether the statement is inherently trustworthy, the trial
judge can consider the circumstances in which it was made and evidence (if any)
that corroborates or conflicts with the statement (Khelawon, at
paras. 4, 62 and 94-100; R. v. Blackman, 2008 SCC 37, [2008] 2 S.C.R.
298, at para. 55). [31]                         
While the standard for substantive reliability is
high, guarantee “as the word is used in the phrase
‘circumstantial guarantee of trustworthiness’, does not require that
reliability be established with absolute certainty” (Smith, at p.
930). Rather, the trial judge must be satisfied that the statement is “so reliable that contemporaneous cross-examination of the declarant
would add little if anything to the process” (Khelawon, at para.
49).  The level of certainty required has been
articulated in different ways throughout this Court’s jurisprudence.
Substantive reliability is established when the statement
“is made under circumstances which substantially negate the possibility that
the declarant was untruthful or mistaken” (Smith, at p. 933); “under
such circumstances that even a sceptical caution would look upon it as
trustworthy” (Khelawon, at para. 62, citing Wigmore, at p. 154); when
the statement is so reliable that it is “unlikely to
change under cross-examination” (Khelawon, at para. 107; Smith,
at p. 937); when “there is no real concern about whether
the statement is true or not because of the circumstances in which it came
about” (Khelawon, at para. 62); when the only likely explanation is that
the statement is true (U. (F.J.), at para. 40). [32]                         
These two approaches to establishing threshold
reliability may work in tandem. Procedural reliability and substantive
reliability are not mutually exclusive (Khelawon, at para. 65) and
“factors relevant to one can complement the other” (Couture, at para.
80). That said, the threshold reliability standard always remains high — the
statement must be sufficiently reliable to overcome the specific hearsay
dangers it presents (Khelawon, at para. 49). For example, in U. (F.J.), where the Court drew on
elements of substantive and procedural reliability to justify the admission of
a hearsay statement, both cross-examination of the recanting witness and
corroborative evidence were required to meet threshold reliability, though
neither on its own would have sufficed (see also Blackman, at paras. 37-52). I know of no other example from this Court’s jurisprudence of substantive and
procedural reliability complementing each other to justify the admission of a
hearsay statement. Great care must be taken to ensure that this combined approach does not
lead to the admission of statements despite insufficient procedural safeguards
and guarantees of inherent trustworthiness to overcome the hearsay dangers. (3)          
Corroborative Evidence and Substantive
Reliability [33]                         
With these principles in mind, I turn to the
issue at the heart of this appeal: When and how can a trial judge rely on
corroborative evidence to conclude that substantive reliability is established? [34]                         
The Crown submits that threshold reliability
involves a consideration of all the corroborative evidence that supports the
truthfulness of a statement, including evidence that does not implicate the
accused, or directly confirm the disputed aspect of the statement. The Crown explains that this approach to corroboration is aligned
with other areas of the law, including corroboration when assessing the
ultimate reliability of hearsay statements, the ultimate reliability of
unsavoury witness statements, and the threshold reliability of Mr. Big
statements. [35]                         
In contrast, the respondent Bradshaw submits
that the trial judge can only consider evidence that corroborates the
purpose for which a hearsay statement is tendered, and notes that the
re-enactment statement was tendered to implicate him in the murders. [36]                         
In my view, the Crown’s position that “a uniform
definition of confirmatory evidence” should be employed “at both the threshold
and ultimate reliability stages” is untenable because it misconstrues the
relationship between threshold and ultimate reliability (A.F., at para.
96). It also misconstrues the relationship between threshold
reliability and probative value. [37]                         
In R. v. Starr, 2000 SCC 40, [2000] 2
S.C.R. 144, this Court held that corroborative evidence could not be considered
in assessing the threshold reliability of hearsay. This bright-line rule was
created to ensure that the trial judge did not invade the province of the trier
of fact by pre-determining a hearsay statement’s ultimate reliability (para.
217).[1] [38]                         
Khelawon
overturned Starr on this point. Charron J. explained that, in
appropriate cases, corroborative or conflicting evidence can be considered in
assessing threshold reliability (paras. 93-100). Khelawon established that “an item of evidence [that] goes to the
trustworthiness of the statement . . . should no longer be excluded simply
on the basis that it is corroborative in nature” (Blackman, at para.
55 (emphasis added)). But “[i]t is
important to emphasize that Khelawon did not broaden the scope of the
admissibility inquiry; it merely refocused it” (Blackman, at para. 54).
While Khelawon overturned the prohibition on considering corroborative
evidence in the admissibility inquiry, it reaffirmed the distinction between
threshold and ultimate reliability (para. 50; Blackman, at para. 56). [39]                         
The distinction between threshold and ultimate
reliability, while “a source of confusion”, is crucial (Khelawon, at
para. 50). Threshold reliability concerns admissibility, whereas ultimate
reliability concerns reliance (Khelawon, at para. 3).  When threshold reliability is based on the
inherent trustworthiness of the statement, the trial judge and the trier of fact may both assess the
trustworthiness of the hearsay statement. However, they do so for different
purposes (Khelawon, at paras. 3 and 50). In
assessing ultimate reliability, the trier of fact determines whether, and to
what degree, the statement should be believed, and thus relied on to decide
issues in the case (Khelawon, at para. 50; D. M.
Paciocco and L. Stuesser, The Law of Evidence (7th ed. 2015), at pp.
35-36). This determination is made “in
the context of the entirety of the evidence” including
evidence that corroborates the accused’s guilt or the declarant’s overall
credibility (Khelawon, at para. 3). [40]                         
In contrast, in assessing threshold reliability,
the trial judge’s preoccupation is whether in-court, contemporaneous
cross-examination of the hearsay declarant would add anything to the trial
process (Khelawon, at para. 49; see also H.
Stewart, “Khelawon: The Principled Approach to Hearsay Revisited”
(2008), 12 Can. Crim. L.R. 95, at p. 106). At the threshold stage, the trial judge must
decide on the availability of competing explanations (substantive
reliability) and whether the trier of fact will be in a position to choose
between them by means of adequate substitutes for contemporaneous
cross-examination (procedural reliability). For this reason, where procedural
reliability is concerned with whether there is a satisfactory basis to
rationally evaluate the statement, substantive reliability is concerned
with whether the circumstances, and any corroborative evidence, provide a
rational basis to reject alternative explanations for the statement,
other than the declarant’s truthfulness or accuracy. [41]                         
In short, in the hearsay context, the difference
between threshold and ultimate reliability is qualitative, and not a matter of
degree, because the trial judge’s inquiry serves a distinct purpose. In assessing substantive reliability, the trial judge does not usurp
the trier of fact’s role. Only the trier of fact assesses whether the hearsay
statement should ultimately be relied on and its probative value. [42]                         
To preserve the distinction between threshold and
ultimate reliability and to prevent the voir dire from overtaking the
trial, “[t]here must be a distinction between evidence that is admissible on
the voir dire to determine necessity and reliability, and the evidence
that is admissible in the main trial” (Stewart, at p. 111; see also L. Lacelle,
“The Role of Corroborating Evidence in Assessing the Reliability of Hearsay
Statements for Substantive Purposes” (1999), 19 C.R. (5th) 376; Blackman,
at paras. 54-57). As Charron J. explained in Khelawon,
“the trial judge must remain mindful of the limited role
that he or she plays in determining admissibility — it is crucial to the
integrity of the fact-finding process that the question of ultimate reliability
not be pre-determined on the admissibility voir dire” (para. 93).
Similarly, she noted in Blackman: “The admissibility voir dire must remain focused on the hearsay
evidence in question. It is not intended, and cannot be allowed by trial
judges, to become a full trial on the merits” (para. 57). Limiting the use of corroborative evidence as a basis for admitting
hearsay also mitigates the risk that inculpatory hearsay will be admitted simply because evidence of the
accused’s guilt is strong. The stronger the case against the accused, the
easier it would be to admit flawed and unreliable hearsay against him. The
limited inquiry into corroborative evidence flows from the fact that, at the
threshold reliability stage, corroborative evidence is used in a manner that is
qualitatively distinct from the manner in which the trier of fact uses it to
assess the statement’s ultimate reliability. As Lederman, Bryant and Fuerst
explain, at the threshold reliability stage, [t]he use
of corroborative evidence should be directed to the reliability of the hearsay.
Certain items of evidence can take on a corroborative character and be
supportive of the Crown’s theory when considered in the context of the evidence
as a whole. Such evidence relates to the merits of the case rather than to the
limited focus of the voir dire in assessing the trustworthiness of the
statement and is properly left to the ultimate trier of fact.  (S.
N. Lederman, A. W. Bryant and M. K. Fuerst, The Law of Evidence in Canada
(4th ed. 2014), at §6.140)  [43]                         
Thus, the Crown’s argument that the approach to
corroboration when assessing the ultimate reliability of Vetrovec
testimony is analogous to the approach for assessing the threshold reliability
of hearsay is also fundamentally flawed. Further, an unsavoury witness, unlike
a hearsay declarant, is a witness at trial and can be cross-examined. The
particular dangers posed by the absence of cross-examination make it necessary
to distinguish between the Vetrovec and hearsay approaches to
corroborative evidence.  As a result, I do not accept the Crown’s submissions
in this regard. [44]                         
In my view, the rationale for the rule against
hearsay and the jurisprudence of this Court make clear that not all evidence
that corroborates the declarant’s credibility, the accused’s guilt, or one
party’s theory of the case, is of assistance in assessing threshold
reliability. A trial judge can only rely on corroborative evidence to establish
threshold reliability if it shows, when considered as a whole and in the
circumstances of the case, that the only likely explanation for the hearsay
statement is the declarant’s truthfulness about, or the accuracy of, the
material aspects of the statement. If the hearsay danger relates to the
declarant’s sincerity, truthfulness will be the issue. If the hearsay danger is
memory, narration, or perception, accuracy will be the issue. [45]                         
First, corroborative evidence must go to the
truthfulness or accuracy of the material aspects of the hearsay
statement (see Couture, at paras. 83-84; Blackman, at
para. 57). Hearsay is tendered for the truth of its contents
and corroborative evidence must go to the truthfulness or accuracy of the
content of the hearsay statement that the moving party seeks to rely on.
Because threshold reliability is about admissibility of evidence, the focus
must be on the aspect of the statement that is tendered for its truth.[2] The function of corroborative evidence at the threshold reliability
stage is to mitigate the need for cross-examination, not generally, but on
the point that the hearsay is tendered to prove. [46]                         
A similar approach was taken in restricting the
type of corroborative evidence that can be relied on to establish the threshold
reliability of Mr. Big statements. In Hart, Moldaver J. (writing for the majority)
concluded that there was a “complete lack of confirmatory evidence” (para.
143), disregarding corroborative evidence that merely confirmed the accused’s
presence at the scene of the crime when it took place, because the Mr. Big
statement was tendered to show that the accused killed his daughters, not that
he was present at the scene of the crime. As Moldaver J. explained: The issue has always been whether the
respondent’s daughters drowned accidentally or were murdered. There was
never any question that the respondent was present when his daughters entered
the water. All of the objectively verifiable details of the respondent’s
confession (e.g., his knowledge of the location of the drowning) flow from his
acknowledged presence at the time the drowning occurred. [para. 143] Thus, in assessing the threshold
reliability of Mr. Big statements, the trial judge considers only corroborative
evidence that goes to the truthfulness or accuracy of the material aspects of
the statement. [47]                         
Second, at the threshold reliability stage,
corroborative evidence must work in conjunction with the
circumstances to overcome the specific hearsay dangers raised by the
tendered statement. When assessing the admissibility of
hearsay evidence, “the scope of the inquiry must be
tailored to the particular dangers presented by the evidence and limited to
determining the evidentiary question of admissibility”
(Khelawon, at para. 4). Thus, to overcome the
hearsay dangers and establish substantive reliability, corroborative evidence
must show that the material aspects of the statement are unlikely to change
under cross-examination (Khelawon, at para. 107;
Smith, at p. 937). Corroborative evidence does so if its combined
effect, when considered in the circumstances of the case, shows that the only
likely explanation for the hearsay statement is the declarant’s
truthfulness about, or the accuracy of, the material aspects of the statement
(see U. (F.J.), at para. 40). Otherwise, alternative explanations for the statement that could have been
elicited or probed through cross-examination, and the hearsay dangers, persist. [48]                         
In assessing substantive reliability, the trial
judge must therefore identify alternative, even speculative, explanations for
the hearsay statement (Smith, at pp. 936-37). Corroborative evidence is
of assistance in establishing substantive reliability if it shows that these
alternative explanations are unavailable, if it “eliminate[s] the hypotheses
that cause suspicion” (S. Akhtar, “Hearsay: The Denial of Confirmation” (2005),
26 C.R. (6th) 46, at p. 56 (emphasis deleted)). In contrast, corroborative
evidence that is “equally consistent” with the truthfulness and accuracy of the
statement as well as another hypothesis is of no assistance (R. v. R. (D.), [1996] 2 S.C.R. 291, at paras. 34-35). Adding evidence that is supportive of the truth of
the statement, but that is also consistent with alternative explanations, does
not add to the statement’s inherent trustworthiness. [49]                         
 While the declarant’s truthfulness or accuracy
must be more likely than any of the alternative explanations, this is not
sufficient. Rather, the fact that the threshold reliability analysis takes
place on a balance of probabilities means that, based on the circumstances and
any evidence led on voir dire, the trial judge must be able to rule out
any plausible alternative explanations on a balance of probabilities. [50]                         
To be relied on for the purpose of rejecting
alternative hypotheses for the statement, corroborative evidence must itself be
trustworthy. Untrustworthy corroborative evidence is therefore not relevant to
the substantive reliability inquiry (see Khelawon, at para. 108).
Trustworthiness concerns are particularly acute when the corroborative evidence
is a statement, rather than physical evidence (see Lacelle,
at p. 390). [51]                         
The jurisprudence of this Court provides two
examples of corroborative evidence that could be relied on to establish
threshold reliability. [52]                         
In R. v. Khan,
[1990] 2 S.C.R. 531, this Court held that a hearsay
statement from a child regarding a sexual assault was admissible, notably
because it was corroborated by a semen stain on the child’s clothes (p. 548).
The child alleged that she had been sexually assaulted at the doctor’s office.
She was only alone in the office for a brief period and “did not come into
contact with any other male person during [that] period” (p. 534). Given the
semen stain and the circumstances of the case, the only likely hypothesis was
that the child had not lied about or misperceived the assault. The semen stain directly responded to the hearsay dangers. [53]                         
Khan can be
contrasted with R.
(D.), where this
Court held that a child’s hearsay regarding a sexual assault by her father was
inadmissible, although there was evidence that supported her statement:
bloodstained underpants. This corroborative evidence was consistent with more
than one hypothesis, both the possibility that her brother had assaulted her
and the possibility that her father had assaulted her, and thus was of no
assistance in assessing threshold reliability (paras. 34-35). [54]                         
In U. (F.J.), a hearsay statement was
admissible in part because it was corroborated by a strikingly similar statement.
The strikingly similar statement was capable of supporting the threshold
reliability of the hearsay statement because the Court was able to rule out the
possibilities that the similarity was purely coincidental, that the second
declarant had heard the first statement and modeled her statement off of it,
and that either statement was the result of collusion or outside influence.
Importantly, Lamer C.J. was concerned with rejecting, not the hypothesis that
the second statement was in fact based on the first, but the possibility
that it could have been based on the first. He concluded that the only
likely explanation for the similarity between the two statements was the
truthfulness of the hearsay declarant (U. (F.J.), at paras. 40 and 53). [55]                         
In contrast, the corroborative evidence in Khelawon,
bruises and garbage bags filled with clothes, was not capable of bolstering the
threshold reliability of a hearsay statement regarding an assault. Charron J.
explained that the bruises on the complainant’s body could have been caused by
a fall rather than an assault. And while the complainant had alleged that the
accused had put his clothes in garbage bags, Charron J. reasoned that the
complainant “could have filled those bags himself” (para. 107). Given that the
corroborative evidence was consistent with many hypotheses, it did not show
that the only likely explanation was the declarant’s truthfulness about the
assault. [56]                         
Clarifying when corroborative evidence can be
relied on to establish substantive reliability is not a departure from the
functional approach to the admissibility of hearsay. There
is no bright-line rule restricting the type of corroborative evidence that a
trial judge can rely on to determine that substantive reliability is
established. In all cases, the trial judge must consider the specific hearsay
dangers raised by the statement, the corroborative evidence as a whole, and the
circumstances of the case, to determine whether the corroborative evidence (if
any) can be relied on to establish substantive reliability. [57]                         
In sum, to determine whether corroborative
evidence is of assistance in the substantive reliability inquiry, a trial judge
should 1.                 
identify the material aspects of the hearsay
statement that are tendered for their truth; 2.                 
identify the specific hearsay dangers raised by
those aspects of the statement in the particular circumstances of the case; 3.                 
based on the circumstances and these dangers,
consider alternative, even speculative, explanations for the statement; and 4.                 
determine whether, given the circumstances of
the case, the corroborative evidence led at the voir dire rules out
these alternative explanations such that the only remaining likely explanation
for the statement is the declarant’s truthfulness about, or the accuracy of,
the material aspects of the statement. [58]                         
With these principles in mind, I now turn to the
trial judge’s assessment of the threshold reliability of the re-enactment
statement. B.           
Application [59]                         
In concluding that the threshold reliability of
the re-enactment statement was established, the trial judge relied on the fact
that the statement was: (1) voluntary; (2) incriminating; (3) made after
Thielen received legal advice; (4) a detailed, free-flowing narrative; and (5)
corroborated by extrinsic evidence. As a result, he was satisfied that
threshold reliability was established. [60]                         
I conclude that the trial judge erred in relying
significantly on corroborative evidence that did not show, in the circumstances
of the case, that the only likely explanation was Thielen’s truthfulness about
the material aspect of the re-enactment statement. Given this error, the trial
judge’s admissibility ruling is not entitled to deference. This Court must
therefore determine whether the hearsay re-enactment statement meets the
reliability threshold. I conclude that it does not. (1)          
The Trial Judge’s Reliance on Corroborative
Evidence [61]                         
The trial judge relied significantly on the
existence of corroborative evidence to find that the re-enactment statement was
admissible. In particular, he relied on •                                           
forensic evidence that corroborated Thielen’s
detailed description of the murders (para. 45);  •                                           
Thielen’s accurate description of the weather on
the nights of the murders (para. 46);  •                                           
evidence of a conversation between Bontkes and
Motola on the night Bontkes died (para. 47) (Motola was a third accomplice in
Bontkes’s death and pled guilty to manslaughter in separate proceedings.);  •                                           
evidence that Bradshaw may have been present
when Motola and Thielen discussed their plan to kill Bontkes (para. 52);  •                                           
call records between one of the murder victims
and Bradshaw on the night of one of the murders, and between Thielen and
Bradshaw on the night of the other murder (para. 51); and  •                                           
Bradshaw’s admissions at the Best Western and
Bothwell Park (paras. 48-49). [62]                         
As I shall explain, this corroborative evidence
is of no assistance in the threshold reliability inquiry. [63]                         
The first step in assessing the substantive
reliability of a hearsay statement is identifying the material aspects of the
statement. The re-enactment statement was tendered for the truth of Thielen’s
claim that Bradshaw participated in the murders. Given the purpose for which
the statement was tendered, the material aspect of the statement was Thielen’s
assertion that Bradshaw participated in the murders. [64]                         
As to the specific hearsay dangers presented by
the statement, a number of common hearsay dangers were not in play in this
case. The accuracy of the statement is not at issue because it was
video-recorded. While the difficulties of investigating a hearsay declarant’s
perception and memory are often dangers associated with hearsay evidence, these
dangers are minimal in this case because the statement was not tendered to
provide details of how the murders unfolded, but rather to prove that Bradshaw
participated in the murders. It is hardly plausible that Thielen would have
been mistaken — or wrongly remembered — whether Bradshaw participated in the
murders. [65]                         
Therefore, the specific hearsay danger presented
by the re-enactment statement is the difficulty of testing Thielen’s sincerity
with regards to Bradshaw’s participation in the murders. This danger is
inherent in all hearsay statements due to the inability to test for and detect
the hearsay declarant’s insincerity through contemporaneous, in-court
cross-examination. Additionally, in this case, there
are serious reasons to be concerned that Thielen lied about Bradshaw’s
participation in the murders. [66]                         
First, Thielen gave inconsistent statements
about Bradshaw’s participation in the murders. In May 2010, Thielen told Cst.
B. that he shot Lamoureux and Bontkes, and he did not implicate Bradshaw. When
he met with the crime boss in July, Thielen implicated Bradshaw in the murders.
When he was arrested, Thielen initially denied his own involvement in both
murders. After the police told Thielen that he had been the target of a Mr. Big
operation, he admitted that he had been involved in the murders and he
implicated Bradshaw. [67]                         
Second, Thielen had a significant motive to lie
about Bradshaw’s participation in the murders. Like the hearsay declarant in Youvarajah,
Thielen “had a strong incentive to minimize his role in the crime and to shift
responsibility” to his accomplice (para. 33). Thielen had a motive to implicate
Bradshaw to reduce his own culpability, particularly given his admissions to
Cst. B. Although Thielen was charged with the first degree murder of Lamoureux
and Bontkes, he ultimately pled guilty to second degree murder. Thielen’s motive
to lie is relevant in assessing the reliability of his hearsay statement (Blackman, at para. 42). [68]                         
Third, Thielen was a Vetrovec witness. In
the trial judge’s words: . . . there is already considerable
evidence of Mr. Thielen’s unsavoury character before the jury. He has been
described by a number of witnesses as a drug dealer, a thug, an enforcer and a
murderer. He is clearly a person about whom a strong Vetrovec warning is
appropriate. [para. 60 (CanLII)] [69]                         
Given that a Vetrovec witness cannot be
trusted to tell the truth, even under oath (R. v. Khela, 2009 SCC
4, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 104, at para. 3), establishing that hearsay evidence from a Vetrovec
witness is inherently trustworthy will be extremely challenging. However,
there is no blanket prohibition on admitting hearsay from Vetrovec witnesses.
In all cases, the trial judge must assess whether the hearsay dangers have been
overcome. That said, the strong Vetrovec warning indicates that the
dangers presented by the hearsay statement here are particularly severe. [70]                         
The third step in assessing a hearsay
statement’s substantive reliability is considering alternative explanations for
the hearsay statement that arise from the particular circumstances of the case.
Given the hearsay dangers presented by the re-enactment statement, an
alternative explanation is that Thielen lied about Bradshaw’s participation in
the murders. [71]                         
With this in mind, corroborative evidence will
only assist in establishing the substantive reliability of the re-enactment
statement if it shows, when considered in the circumstances of the case, that
the only likely explanation is that Thielen was truthful about Bradshaw’s
involvement in the murders. When the hearsay danger is sincerity, substantive
reliability is only established when the circumstances and corroborative
evidence show that the possibility that the declarant lied is substantially
negated, that “even a sceptical caution would look upon [the statement] as
trustworthy” (Wigmore, at p. 154; Khelawon, at para. 62; Couture,
at para. 101). Corroborative evidence or circumstances showing that the
statement is inherently trustworthy are required to rebut the presumption of
inadmissibility. [72]                         
The forensic evidence, weather evidence, and
evidence of a conversation between Bontkes and Motola did not implicate
Bradshaw in the murders. This evidence is of no assistance in determining
whether Thielen was being truthful about Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders.
The fact that Thielen accurately described the way the murders unfolded and the
weather on the nights of the murders does not mitigate the danger that he lied
about Bradshaw’s participation. As an accomplice, Thielen was present at the
scenes of the crimes and was well positioned to fabricate a story implicating
Bradshaw (see R. v. Smith, 2009 SCC 5, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 146, at
para. 15; R. v. Salah, 2015
ONCA 23, 319 C.C.C. (3d) 373, at para. 116). [73]                         
The remaining corroborative evidence relied on by
the trial judge was probative of Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders. It will
be for the trier of fact to determine whether or not this evidence increases
the likelihood that Bradshaw is guilty. The call records
show that Bradshaw may have spoken to Lamoureux and Thielen on the evenings in
question, and the evidence of Bradshaw’s presence when the plan to kill Bontkes
was discussed shows that Bradshaw may have been aware of this plan. However,
this evidence, viewed in the circumstances, did not assist in effectively
ruling out the alternative explanation for the re-enactment statement — the
danger that Thielen lied about Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders. [74]                         
Finally, the recorded conversations at the Best
Western Hotel and Bothwell Park provide direct evidence of Bradshaw’s
involvement in the murders. However, as I shall explain, there are concerns
about the trustworthiness of these statements. As mentioned above,
corroborative evidence must itself be trustworthy to be relied on to establish
the threshold reliability of a hearsay statement (see Khelawon, at para.
108). [75]                         
When Thielen was the target of a Mr. Big
operation, undercover officers encouraged him to meet up with Bradshaw to
clarify their respective roles in the murders. On July 21, 2010, Thielen and
Bradshaw met in a room at the Best Western Hotel. Their conversation was
recorded. The first eight minutes of the recorded conversation are inaudible
because Bradshaw and Thielen were in the bathroom, while the tap was running.
Cst. B. called Thielen to get him to leave the bathroom so the conversation
could be captured. Once Bradshaw and Thielen moved into the main room, Bradshaw
said that he had shot Bontkes and participated in both murders. [76]                         
A few days later, Thielen and Bradshaw met at Bothwell
Park. Their conversation was recorded again. During their meeting, Bradshaw
discussed their unsuccessful attempt to kill Bontkes, before Bontkes was
actually murdered in March 2009. [77]                         
While this evidence provides some evidence of
guilt, it does not assist, for several reasons, in effectively ruling out the
possibility that Thielen lied about Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders. [78]                         
The Best Western and Bothwell Park evidence was
collected in a Mr. Big operation. Undercover officers were orchestrating the
circumstances to obtain an admission from Thielen and then from Bradshaw. As
the trial judge explained, the Best Western and Bothwell Park “meetings were
set up by Constable B. with Mr. Thielen’s cooperation, during the course
of the Mr. Big operation, in an endeavour to elicit evidence of Mr. Bradshaw’s
possible participation in the murders of Ms. Lamoureux and Mr. Bontkes”
(para. 43). Indeed, Cst. B. explained that he “wanted Mr. Thielen to get . . .
the truth from Mr. Bradshaw” (examination in chief, A.R., vol. V, at p. 134)
and that he gave Thielen instructions on what was required during his
conversation with Bradshaw at the Best Western Hotel. [79]                         
In Mr. Big operations, parties believe they are
dealing with a criminal organization. They are often induced and threatened. As
this Court noted in Hart: “Suspects confess to Mr. Big during pointed
interrogations in the face of powerful inducements and sometimes veiled threats
— and this raises the spectre of unreliable confessions” (para. 5). The Mr. Big
operation raises concerns about Thielen’s motivation and role in these
conversations, and the trustworthiness of Bradshaw’s statements at the Best
Western and Bothwell Park. [80]                         
As well, the initial part of the Best Western
conversation was inaudible because Thielen and Bradshaw were in the bathroom
and a tap was running. This raises questions about what followed. As I have
said, the trial judge is required to consider alternative, even speculative,
explanations that could account for the hearsay statement (Smith (1992),
at pp. 936-37). Indeed, while this evidence was not before the trial judge at
the time of his ruling, Bradshaw subsequently testified that, while the tap was
running, Thielen asked him to lie and say that he had been involved in
Lamoureux and Bontkes’s murders. [81]                         
Furthermore, in the Bothwell Park conversation,
Bradshaw primarily implicated himself in the attempted murder of Bontkes,
rather than in Bontkes’s actual murder. [83]                         
However, these admissions are not of such a
nature to justify the admission of Thielen’s highly suspect hearsay statements
implicating Bradshaw. They do not, when considered in the circumstances and
with the other evidence led at the voir dire, “substantially negate the
possibility that the [hearsay] declarant was untruthful” about Bradshaw’s
involvement in the murders (Smith (1992), at p. 933). Bradshaw’s Best Western admission
does not, in the circumstances, demonstrate that Thielen’s statement would be
unlikely to change under cross-examination (Khelawon, at para. 107; Smith
(1992), at p. 937). [84]                         
In U. (F.J.), this Court held that
“instances of statements so strikingly similar as to bolster their reliability
will be rare” (para. 45). Lamer C.J. explained that a similar statement cannot
bolster the reliability of a hearsay statement unless it is unlikely that “[t]he second declarant knew of the contents of the first statement,
and based his or her statement in whole or in part on this knowledge” and
unlikely that the similarity is
due to outside influence (para. 40). Thielen was present
for Bradshaw’s Best Western and Bothwell Park admissions, and could have based
his re-enactment statement on this knowledge. Furthermore, outside influence cannot be rejected as a possible explanation for
Bradshaw’s Best Western and Bothwell Park admissions. Indeed, according to Cst.
B.’s testimony, he played a role in orchestrating the admissions. The Best
Western and Bothwell Park statements were therefore of no assistance in
establishing the inherent trustworthiness of the re-enactment statement. [85]                         
The evidence led at the admissibility voir
dire as corroborative of Thielen’s statement is unlike the semen stain in Khan,
or the strikingly similar statement in U. (F.J.). When considered in the
circumstances of the case, this evidence does not show that the only likely
explanation for the statement was Thielen’s truthfulness about Bradshaw’s
involvement in the murders. Taken as a whole, this evidence therefore did not
assist in establishing threshold reliability. While much of the evidence relied
on by the trial judge was probative of Bradshaw’s guilt, and thus could be
considered by the trier of fact in the trial on the merits, none of it was of
assistance in establishing the threshold reliability of the re-enactment
statement. Furthermore, as noted above, the evidence and circumstances here
showed that there were serious reasons to be concerned that Thielen lied. (2)          
Threshold Reliability of the Re-enactment
Statement [86]                         
Given the trial judge’s flawed approach to
corroborative evidence, this Court must determine whether the threshold reliability of the hearsay re-enactment statement is
nonetheless established. Are the serious hearsay dangers presented by the
re-enactment statement overcome? [87]                         
To respect the role of the trier of fact in
assessing trustworthiness, I consider first the statement’s procedural
reliability (Khelawon, at para. 92). There were few means for the trier
of fact to determine whether Thielen lied about Bradshaw’s participation in the
murders. While the accuracy of the reporting of the statement is not at issue
in this case because it was video-taped, Thielen was not cross-examined at the
time the statement was taken or subsequently. Thielen’s statement was not taken
under oath and he was not warned of the consequences of lying before the
statement was taken. Most importantly, he was not available to be
cross-examined at trial. The trier of fact evidently did not possess a “sufficient substitute basis for testing the evidence” in the absence of
cross-examination (Khelawon, at para. 105). [88]                         
The trial judge considered “possible safeguards that [could] be put in place by the Crown and
the court to overcome [the hearsay] dangers” (para. 19). He explained that Thielen’s
inconsistencies could be put into evidence and that the Crown had agreed to
call the police officers to whom Thielen gave the different statements, in
order to allow the defence to cross-examine them on these inconsistencies
(para. 59). He also noted that a strong Vetrovec warning would be given
(para. 60). [89]                         
Putting Thielen’s inconsistencies into evidence did
not provide the jury with a sufficient substitute basis for evaluating the
truth of the re-enactment statement. And while cross-examining the recipient
of a hearsay statement may be helpful if there are concerns about the
recipient’s credibility or reliability (Blackman, at para. 50), there
were no such concerns in this case. As the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of
Ontario (an intervener) notes, “where there is no doubt about what was actually
said or under what circumstances — if the statement is video-taped, for
instance — then cross-examination of the recipient does nothing to help assess
whether the content of the hearsay is true” (I.F., at para. 32 (emphasis
in original)). Furthermore, as explained above, jury warnings about the dangers
of hearsay evidence and Vetrovec testimony do little to support the
statement’s procedural reliability. Jury warnings do not provide an adequate
substitute for the traditional safeguards. They are no substitute for other
conditions of admissibility. Rules of evidence, such as
the rule against hearsay, protect trial fairness and the integrity of the trial
process by deeming certain types of evidence presumptively inadmissible. [90]                         
Because there were few tools available for
testing the truth and accuracy of the re-enactment statement, it could only be
admitted if the circumstances in which it was made and corroborative evidence,
if any, “substantially negate[d] the possibility that the
declarant was untruthful” (Smith (1992), at p. 933). [91]                         
The trial judge found that the statement was
reliable because it was voluntary, made after Thielen had received legal
advice, and was a “free-flowing narrativ[e]”. He also relied on the fact that
it was incriminating. He reasoned that Thielen put
himself at risk, even in the prison system, by implicating himself and others
in the murders (para. 40). [92]                         
However, these circumstances “while relevant, in
essence simply point to an absence of factors that, if present, would detract
from an otherwise trustworthy statement” (Couture, at para.
101).  They do not provide a circumstantial guarantee of trustworthiness.
Furthermore, while Thielen incriminated himself in the
murders in the re-enactment video, he had already done so in his statements to
police following his arrest, and during the Mr. Big operation. And while he may
have put himself at risk in the prison system by implicating Bradshaw, he
nonetheless benefited from the opportunity of reduced criminal liability: he
pled guilty to the lesser charge of second degree murder. Thielen clearly had a
significant motive to lie about Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders. The
Court of Appeal rightfully noted that “[t]he [trial]
judge did not sufficiently address the issues that would detract from the
truthfulness of Mr. Thielen’s statements, including his considerable motive to
lie to extricate himself from his admissions to Cst. B. that he committed first
degree murder, not once, but twice” (para. 37). [93]                         
Finally, as discussed above, the corroborative
evidence relied on by the trial judge was of no assistance in establishing
threshold reliability. [94]                         
The hearsay danger raised by the re-enactment
evidence, namely the inability to investigate Thielen’s sincerity about
Bradshaw’s participation, is particularly difficult to overcome in this case.
Thielen had a motive to lie about Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders and he
initially did not implicate Bradshaw in the murders. Thielen is also a Vetrovec
witness, a witness who cannot be trusted due to his unsavoury character.
There are few tools available to the trier of fact to test Thielen’s sincerity.
The circumstances in which the statement came about, and the evidence led at
the voir dire, do not substantially negate the possibility that Thielen
lied about Bradshaw’s participation in the murders. [95]                         
This is not a case where the hearsay “presents minimal dangers and its exclusion, rather than its
admission, would impede accurate fact finding” (Khelawon, at
para. 2 (emphasis in original)). Rather, admitting the re-enactment statement
would undermine the truth-seeking process and trial fairness. Hearsay is
presumptively inadmissible and the trial judge erred in finding that
this presumption was rebutted. V.           
Conclusion [96]                         
I conclude that the trial judge erred in
admitting the re-enactment statement into evidence. The Crown failed to
establish the threshold reliability of this statement on a balance of
probabilities. [97]                         
I would dismiss the appeal. I agree with the
British Columbia Court of Appeal that the convictions be set aside and a new
trial ordered.                     The
reasons of Moldaver and Côté JJ. were delivered by                     Moldaver J. (dissenting)  — I.              
Overview [98]                         
At issue in this appeal is the admissibility of
a video re-enactment[3] of the events surrounding the murders of Laura Lamoureux and Marc
Bontkes in March 2009. In the re-enactment, which occurred in August 2010, some
17 months after the murders, Roy Thielen describes for the police how he and
the respondent, Robert Bradshaw, carried out the murders together. After Mr.
Thielen refused to testify at Mr. Bradshaw’s trial, the trial judge admitted
the re-enactment under the principled approach to hearsay evidence. [99]                         
My colleague, Karakatsanis J., concludes that
the trial judge erred in doing so. She reaches this conclusion on the basis of
a restrictive new test that departs from the functional approach to threshold
reliability which this Court has endorsed in its modern jurisprudence. [100]                     
With respect, I disagree with my colleague’s
approach and her conclusion. I acknowledge that Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment was
not problem-free and that hearsay dangers are generally more pronounced when a
declarant is not available to be cross-examined. However, this was an unusual
case, in that there was exceptionally powerful corroborative evidence,
including surreptitiously recorded conversations in which Mr. Bradshaw
admitted his involvement in the two murders. In addition, the trial judge
adopted a number of procedural safeguards which placed the jury in a position
to critically evaluate the impugned evidence. These included the limited
admission of prior inconsistent statements taken by police officers along with
the opportunity to cross-examine them, strict cautionary instructions to the
jury and wide latitude given to defence counsel to canvass the same points in
his closing submissions that he would have canvassed had he been able to
cross-examine Mr. Thielen. [101]                     
In conjunction, these factors — powerful
corroborative evidence and procedural safeguards — were capable of satisfying
the test for threshold reliability.  The principled approach to hearsay should
not stand in the way of the truth-seeking function of a trial where the
impugned evidence is shown to be trustworthy and the jury has the tools it
needs to critically evaluate its ultimate reliability. This was the conclusion
of the trial judge, who was uniquely positioned to make this determination. In
my view, his ruling admitting the video re-enactment was amply supported by the
record and error-free. I see no basis in fact or law to interfere with it. [102]                     
The trial judge’s decision to reject a defence
application to tender another hearsay statement by Mr. Thielen which did not
implicate Mr. Bradshaw is also entitled to deference. I would uphold it. [103]                     
Accordingly, I would allow the appeal, set aside
the judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal ordering a new trial and
restore Mr. Bradshaw’s convictions for the first degree murders of Ms.
Lamoureux and Mr. Bontkes. II.           
Analysis [104]                     
The modern approach governing the admissibility
of hearsay evidence is the principled approach. Under this approach, hearsay
evidence can be admitted where it is necessary and where it meets the test for
threshold reliability. It is uncontested that Mr. Thielen’s refusal to testify
at trial satisfies the necessity criterion. The focus of this appeal is
on whether Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment meets the test for threshold reliability. The Test for Threshold
Reliability [105]                     
Hearsay evidence is presumptively inadmissible
primarily because of the difficulty in testing its reliability. There is always
a risk that a witness may misperceive the facts, wrongly remember them, narrate
events in a misleading or incomplete manner, or make an intentionally false
assertion. When a statement is made in court, traditional safeguards — such as
the presence of the declarant in the courtroom and cross-examination — protect
against the danger of falsehoods or inaccuracies going undetected by the trier
of fact. Without the declarant being present in court and subjected to
contemporaneous cross-examination, the trier of fact may be unable to detect
mistakes, exaggerations or deliberate falsehoods: R. v. Baldree, 2013
SCC 35, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 520, at paras. 31-32; R. v. Khelawon, 2006 SCC
57, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 787, at para. 2. [106]                     
The extent to which the reliability of hearsay
evidence may be difficult to assess varies according to context. In certain
circumstances, the challenges in assessing the declarant’s perception, memory,
narration or sincerity and the dangers arising from this will be sufficiently
overcome to meet the test for threshold reliability: R. v. Devine, 2008
SCC 36, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 283, at para. 22; R. v. Blackman, 2008 SCC 37,
[2008] 2 S.C.R. 298, at para. 35; Khelawon, at para. 61. [107]                     
The principled approach to hearsay recognizes
that threshold reliability can be met in three ways: (1) where the statement
has sufficient features of substantive reliability; (2) where the statement has
adequate features of procedural reliability; or (3) where the statement does
not satisfy either of the first two ways, but incorporates features of both
which, in combination, justify its admission. As I will explain, this case
engages the third way and provides this Court with an opportunity to clarify
its operation for the first time. [108]                     
First, substantive reliability in this context
refers to a statement’s degree of trustworthiness. Features of substantive
reliability include the circumstances in which the statement was made and the
existence of extrinsic evidence capable of corroborating or contradicting it: R.
v. Youvarajah, 2013 SCC 41, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 720, at para. 30; Khelawon,
at para. 62; Blackman, at para. 35; R. v. Couture, 2007 SCC 28,
[2007] 2 S.C.R. 517, at para. 80. In the absence of procedural safeguards,
these features of substantive reliability will, on their own, satisfy the
threshold reliability requirement where they show that there is “no real
concern about a statement’s truth and accuracy”: Couture, at paras. 98
and 100; Devine, at para. 22; Khelawon, at para. 62.[4] For example, in R. v. Khan, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 531, features
of substantive reliability justified the admission of a
three-and-a-half-year-old child’s hearsay statement describing a sexual act, in
that the statement was made spontaneously and was powerfully corroborated by a
semen stain found on her clothing. [109]                     
Second, threshold reliability may be established
where there are adequate features of procedural reliability, namely, procedural
safeguards in place when the statement is made or at trial that permit the
trier of fact to assess the statement’s ultimate reliability: Youvarajah,
at para. 30; Khelawon, at para. 63; Blackman, at para. 35; Couture,
at para. 80. In the absence of features of substantive reliability indicating a
statement’s trustworthiness, threshold reliability will be satisfied if these
procedural safeguards, on their own, demonstrate that without contemporaneous
cross-examination of a witness in court, a hearsay statement’s “truth and
accuracy can nonetheless be sufficiently tested” by the trier of fact: Khelawon,
at para. 63; Devine, at para. 22; Couture, at para. 80. Where
features of procedural reliability alone are relied on, some form of
cross-examination of the declarant has generally been required to satisfy the
test for threshold reliability. For example, courts have held that adequate
substitutes for testing truth and accuracy are present in preliminary hearing
testimony (see R. v. Hawkins, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 1043) and prior
inconsistent statements that are video-taped and taken under oath where the
declarant has recanted but remains available to be cross-examined at trial (see
R. v. B. (K.G.), [1993] 1 S.C.R. 740). [110]                     
As Charron J. explained in Khelawon,
characterizing these procedural safeguards as factors which indicate a
statement’s threshold reliability is “somewhat of a misnomer” (para.
80). These tools for testing hearsay evidence do not enhance the reliability of
the statement, but rather ensure that the trier of fact is sufficiently
equipped to evaluate the ultimate reliability of the statement: see also D. M. Paciocco
and L. Stuesser, The Law of Evidence (7th ed. 2015), at p. 138. [111]                     
Finally, threshold reliability may be
established where the statement has adequate features of both
substantive and procedural reliability. These two categories that inform
threshold reliability are not mutually exclusive: Youvarajah, at para.
30; Khelawon, at para. 66; Devine, at para. 22; Blackman,
at para. 35; Couture, at paras. 80 and 99. Rather, features of
procedural reliability and substantive reliability may, in combination, satisfy
threshold reliability: Couture, at para. 99; R. v. Hamilton, 2011
ONCA 399, 271 C.C.C. (3d) 208, at para. 156. In R. v. U. (F.J.), [1995]
3 S.C.R. 764, the Court applied this approach, drawing on features of both
substantive and procedural reliability to justify the admission of a hearsay
statement (para. 53). [112]                     
Thus, a statement that is not admissible under
the first two principal ways of establishing threshold reliability may still be
admitted under this third way. Where a statement has a sufficient level of
trustworthiness, relative to the strength of the procedural safeguards for the
trier of fact to evaluate its ultimate reliability, the statement is safe to
admit. Put another way, “[s]o long as [the hearsay statement] can be assessed
and accepted by a reasonable trier of fact, then the evidence should be
admitted”: Paciocco and Stuesser, at p. 134. [113]                     
It is important to keep in mind that threshold
reliability is distinct from ultimate reliability. The trial judge does not
need to be satisfied that the hearsay statement is true for it to meet the
threshold reliability requirement under any of the three ways set out above. As
with the common law tests for Mr. Big statements and expert evidence, the
reliability of a hearsay statement need not be established to a point of
certainty before it can be admitted: R. v. Hart, 2014 SCC 52, [2014]
2 S.C.R. 544, at para. 98; R. v. Abbey, 2009 ONCA 624, 246 C.C.C. (3d) 301,
at para. 89. Otherwise, the trier of fact’s role of determining the ultimate
reliability of a hearsay statement will have been usurped. [114]                     
On several occasions, this Court has discussed
the danger of conflating threshold and ultimate reliability. In Khelawon,
Charron J. stated, at para. 50: It is important that the trier of
fact’s domain not be encroached upon at the admissibility stage. If the trial
is before a judge and jury, it is crucial that questions of ultimate
reliability be left for the jury — in a criminal
trial, it is constitutionally imperative. If the judge sits without a jury, it
is equally important that he or she not prejudge the ultimate reliability of
the evidence before having heard all of the evidence in the case. Hence, a
distinction must be made between “ultimate reliability” and “threshold
reliability”. Only the latter is inquired into on the admissibility voir
dire. [Emphasis added.] This cautionary note was
echoed in Blackman, at para. 56: “It is essential to the integrity of
the fact-finding process that the question of ultimate reliability not be
pre-determined on the admissibility voir dire: see Khelawon, at para. 93.” [115]                     
In this regard, I agree with the observations of
Watt J.A. in R. v. Carroll, 2014 ONCA 2, 304 C.C.C. (3d) 252, at para.
111, that the party tendering hearsay need not eliminate all possible sources of doubt about
the perception, memory or sincerity of the declarant. All that was required in
this case was that the circumstances in which the statements were made and any
relevant extrinsic evidence provided the trier of fact with the means to
critically evaluate the honesty and accuracy of the declarant . . . .
[Citations omitted.] [116]                     
In other words, as with expert evidence and Mr.
Big confessions, the trial judge is simply tasked with deciding “the threshold
question of ‘whether the evidence is worthy of being heard by the jury’”: Hart,
at para. 98, quoting Abbey, at para. 89. [117]                     
I am satisfied that the re-enactment in the
present case was admissible under the third way of establishing threshold
reliability. As I will explain, there was powerful corroborative evidence
indicating the statement’s trustworthiness and a number of procedural
safeguards that provided the jury with the tools it needed to evaluate its
truth and accuracy. With respect, I believe that in reaching a different
conclusion, my colleague has departed from the functional approach to threshold
reliability by: (1) unduly restricting the extrinsic evidence that a court can
consider when assessing a statement’s substantive reliability; and (2) adopting
a narrow view of the procedural safeguards available at trial that can equip
the jury with the tools it needs to assess the ultimate reliability of a
statement. (1)          
The Extrinsic Evidence That a Court Can Consider
When Assessing Substantive Reliability [118]                     
My colleague maintains that “at the threshold
reliability stage, corroborative evidence is used in a manner that is
qualitatively distinct from the manner in which the trier of fact uses it to
assess the statement’s ultimate reliability” (para. 42). In her view, “[a]
trial judge can only rely on corroborative evidence to establish threshold
reliability if it shows, when considered as a whole and in the circumstances of
the case, that the only likely explanation for the hearsay statement is the
declarant’s truthfulness about, or the accuracy of, the material aspects of the
statement” (para. 44). [119]                     
Respectfully, my colleague’s test gives rise to
two difficulties. First, her test would replace the functional approach that
this Court has repeatedly endorsed, with a restrictive test that unnecessarily
complicates the analysis and discards crucial information for evaluating
threshold reliability. The functional approach emphasizes that there is no
bright-line distinction between factors that inform threshold and ultimate
reliability. Rather, the inquiry is focused on whether the extrinsic evidence
addresses hearsay dangers by providing information about whether the statement
is trustworthy: In each case, the scope of the
inquiry must be tailored to the particular dangers presented by the evidence
and limited to determining the evidentiary question of admissibility.  . . .  . . . Relevant
factors should not be categorized in terms of threshold and ultimate
reliability. Rather, the court should adopt a more functional approach . . .
and focus on the particular dangers raised by the hearsay evidence sought to be
introduced and on those attributes or circumstances relied upon by the
proponent to overcome those dangers.  (Khelawon, at
paras. 4 and 93; see also para. 55.) [120]                     
My colleague’s approach instead creates a “threshold test within
the threshold test”, which is subject to the same criticisms which arise from
the [absolute] exclusion of corroborating or conflicting evidence. The
categorizing or labelling of evidence that is suitable for including in the decision-making
process of hearsay admissibility is neither necessary nor desirable.
[Emphasis in original.]  (S. Akhtar, “Hearsay:
The Denial of Confirmation” (2005), 26 C.R. (6th) 46, at p. 60) [121]                     
Second, in applying her approach, my colleague parses the
analysis by examining whether each individual piece of corroborative evidence
demonstrates that the “only likely explanation” is the declarant’s
truthfulness. This ignores the reality that even if an individual piece of
extrinsic evidence does not satisfy my colleague’s requirement on its own, it
may nonetheless work in conjunction with other extrinsic evidence or features
of substantive reliability to satisfy the test for threshold reliability (see R.
v. McNamara (No. 1) (1981), 56 C.C.C. (2d) 193 (Ont. C.A.), at pp. 278-79,
points 4 and 5, on the nature of corroborative evidence in general). Yet
according to her test, for a piece of corroborative evidence to make its way
onto the evidentiary scale for threshold reliability purposes, it must
effectively be independently capable of tipping the scale. This restrictive
test fails to look at the picture as a whole and discards corroborative
evidence that could play an important role in satisfying threshold reliability. [122]                     
That said, I acknowledge that it may be
necessary for the trial judge to limit the scope of extrinsic evidence that can
be considered in a hearsay voir dire. As Paciocco and Stuesser note (at
p. 134): “There is concern, however, that the voir dire on the admissibility
of the hearsay evidence could well overtake the trial. . . .  The difficulty is
where to draw the line and the reality [is] that there is no fixed line”
(emphasis added).  I agree that such concerns must be addressed on a
case-by-case basis, which is consistent with the functional approach to the
admissibility of hearsay endorsed in Khelawon: see R. v. R. (T.),
2007 ONCA 374, 85 O.R. (3d) 481, at para. 19; R. v. Lowe, 2009 BCCA 338,
274 B.C.A.C. 92, at para. 78. In my opinion, the line should be drawn where the
trial judge is of the view that the probative value of certain corroborative
evidence is tenuous and outweighed by its prejudicial effect in prolonging and
complicating the proceedings — in other words, where the bang is not worth the
buck. Trial judges should be trusted to make this determination and exercise
restraint when considering extrinsic evidence to ensure the trial proceedings
are not derailed by the voir dire: Blackman, at para. 57. (2)          
The Role of Safeguards Implemented at Trial in
Establishing Procedural Reliability [123]                     
As Charron J. held in Khelawon, “the
optimal way of testing evidence adopted by our adversarial system is to have
the declarant state the evidence in court, under oath, and under the scrutiny
of contemporaneous cross-examination” (para. 63). It follows that where no
meaningful cross-examination is possible, trial judges should be particularly
cautious when determining the admissibility of a hearsay statement. However,
where there are adequate substitutes for these traditional safeguards, “common
sense tells us that we should not lose the benefit of the evidence”: Khelawon,
at para. 63. A trial judge may have procedural safeguards at his or her
disposal that can provide the trier of fact with the tools needed to evaluate
the ultimate reliability of hearsay evidence. [124]                     
In this case, the Court of Appeal held that the
trial judge erred in considering procedural safeguards that were implemented at
trial in evaluating the threshold reliability of the re-enactment. According to
the Court of Appeal, only safeguards in existence at the time of the statement
could be considered: The guarantee of trustworthiness and
accuracy at the threshold test does not arise as a result of anything a
judge or the Crown at trial can do. Safeguards are those in place when the
statement is taken, for example, placing the person under oath, warning
them of the consequences of lying under oath and so on, but that is not the
situation here. The judge looked at safeguards that could be imposed at trial,
which do not assist in ascertaining threshold reliability. [Emphasis added;
para. 30.] [125]                     
I agree with the Crown that safeguards that
support procedural reliability include those which can be implemented at trial.
In my view, there is no principled distinction between safeguards in place at
the time the hearsay statement was made and safeguards available at trial. Both
enhance the ability of the trier of fact to critically evaluate the evidence. [126]                     
This is well established in the jurisprudence.
For example, where a recanting declarant is available to be cross-examined at
trial on a prior statement, this significantly enhances the trier of fact’s
ability to evaluate its reliability: Khelawon, at para. 66; Devine,
at para. 19; Couture, at para. 92; B. (K.G.), at pp. 795-96. In
addition, the cross-examination of a third party who witnessed the declarant’s
demeanour may provide an added procedural safeguard implemented at trial: U.
(F.J.), at para. 32; B. (K.G.), at p. 792. [127]                     
There are also other tools that can be
implemented at trial to assist the jury in evaluating a hearsay statement. As
this case illustrates, jury cautions, the limited admission of prior
inconsistent statements that contradict the hearsay statement, requiring the
Crown to call the police officers who took prior inconsistent statements as
witnesses so that they can be cross-examined by defence counsel, and permitting
enhanced leeway for defence counsel during closing submissions may also enable
the trier of fact to test a statement’s truthfulness and accuracy. The trial
judge is uniquely positioned to adapt and implement these measures based on the
specific circumstances of the case. [128]                     
My colleague does not
consider or address several safeguards referred to above upon which the trial
judge relied. In particular, she rejects the viability
of jury instructions as a procedural safeguard, asserting that “[i]nstructing a
jury on how to evaluate a statement that it [the jury] lacks the means
to evaluate does not address the hearsay dangers that underlie the exclusionary
rule” (para. 29 (emphasis in original)). In my respectful view, this statement
oversimplifies the issue. [129]                     
Jury instructions can be a means of
assisting the jury with the evaluation of a hearsay statement. Like
cross-examination, instructions can draw a jury’s attention to evidentiary
concerns, which ameliorates hearsay dangers by helping the jury assess the
reliability of a statement: see R. v. Goodstoney, 2007 ABCA 88, 218
C.C.C. (3d) 270, at paras. 58 and 92; R. v. Blackman (2006), 84 O.R.
(3d) 292 (C.A.), at paras. 81-87, aff’d 2008 SCC 37, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 298. For
example, an instruction cautioning a jury about a declarant’s motive to
fabricate and a suggestion of a motive to fabricate put to a witness in
cross-examination can both alert a jury to a concern regarding sincerity, which
helps it assess whether the statement is reliable. Further, jury instructions
include a caution to resolve any doubt in favour of the accused. [130]                     
It goes without saying that cross-examination is
a superior means of testing evidence because it allows the jury to observe how
a witness responds — be it a denial, an admission or an explanation. However,
in setting out the potential dangers of a hearsay statement, jury instructions
are capable of enhancing, to a limited extent, the procedural reliability of
the statement. In this case, to be clear, the instructions were only one
feature of a package of safeguards adopted by the trial judge to put the jury
in a position whereby it could critically evaluate the ultimate reliability of
the re-enactment. [131]                     
Ultimately, my colleague’s unwillingness to
consider the various procedural safeguards relied upon by the trial judge in
this case leads her to conclude that, because the hearsay statement does not
have sufficient features of substantive reliability, it cannot be admitted.
With respect, this skirts the third way of establishing threshold reliability —
the one applied by the trial judge in this case — in which features of
substantive and procedural reliability may, in conjunction, justify the
admission of a hearsay statement. [132]                     
I now turn to the issue of whether the trial
judge erred in admitting the re-enactment under this third way. III.         
Application to the August 2, 2010 Re-enactment A.           
The Hearsay Dangers Raised by the Re-enactment [133]                     
In this case, the primary hearsay danger raised
by the re-enactment was the possibility that Mr. Thielen was lying about Mr.
Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders. Mr. Thielen made prior inconsistent
statements and he was an accomplice in both murders. The concern that the jury
could not assess Mr. Thielen’s sincerity was therefore a particularly acute
hearsay danger. [134]                     
The challenges of testing Mr. Thielen’s memory
and perception also created hearsay dangers, given his drug abuse at the time
of the events and the nearly 17 months that had elapsed between the murders and
the re-enactment. My colleague suggests that Mr. Thielen’s sincerity was the
sole danger in issue, dismissing Mr. Thielen’s memory and perception
concerns as “minimal” (para. 64). In my view, this is not supported by the
record. During oral submissions on the voir dire, defence counsel
specifically referred to memory and perception concerns that he said detracted
from the re-enactment’s reliability. In doing so, he did not characterize these
as weak or minimal. Rather, he stated: Now,
I also want to highlight to you some of the other overriding factors
that you have to consider in assessing threshold reliability, and those are
that Mr. Thielen has a long-term substance abuse problem. His statement are
replete with references to being foggy, to having no recollection, all of which
he attributes to drug use and, I might say, the fact is that he’s giving this
video re-enactment 17 months after the fact. [Emphasis added.]  (A.R.,
vol. VII, at p. 147) In my view, Mr.
Bradshaw’s trial counsel was in a better position than this Court to assess
whether it was “plausible” that Mr. Thielen’s memory of Mr. Bradshaw’s role in
the killings was inaccurate. In light of defence counsel having raised these
concerns, the trial judge can hardly be faulted for responding to them. [135]                     
As I will explain, however, these hearsay
dangers — sincerity along with memory and perception — were sufficiently
overcome by features of both substantive and procedural reliability that
permitted the trier of fact to evaluate the reliability of the re-enactment. B.           
The Substantive Reliability of the Re-enactment [136]                     
The substantive reliability of the re-enactment
was significantly enhanced by both powerful extrinsic evidence that
corroborated its content and the circumstances in which it took place. I
acknowledge that these features of substantive reliability, on their own, were
insufficient to justify the admission of the re-enactment under the first way
of meeting threshold reliability. That said, they went a long way toward
establishing the trustworthiness of the re-enactment. In my view, this
attenuated the importance of cross-examination and the relative strength of the
procedural safeguards needed to meet the third way of establishing threshold
reliability. (1)          
The Powerful Corroborative Evidence [137]                     
Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment was corroborated by
three separate groups of evidence: (a) surreptitiously recorded conversations
with Mr. Bradshaw, in which Mr. Bradshaw admitted his involvement in the
murders; (b) circumstantial evidence implicating Mr. Bradshaw in the murders;
and (c) forensic evidence from the crime scenes confirming Mr. Thielen’s
account of the details of the murders. As stated, this corroborative evidence
must be examined as a whole, not assessed on a piecemeal basis. Considered
cumulatively, this evidence provides powerful support for the trustworthiness
of Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment. (a)          
The Recorded Conversations [138]                     
This case is unusual, in that the most
compelling corroborative evidence comes from Mr. Bradshaw’s own admissions. As
noted by my colleague, two surreptitiously recorded conversations with Mr.
Thielen “provide direct evidence of Bradshaw’s involvement in the murders”
(para. 74). (i)            
The July 21, 2010 Conversation [139]                     
The first recorded conversation took place
approximately 16 months after the two murders at a local hotel on July 21,
2010. It followed Mr. Thielen’s meeting earlier that day with “Mr. Big”, during
which Mr. Thielen implicated both himself and Mr. Bradshaw in the two murders.
In the meeting with Mr. Big, Mr. Thielen was told by undercover officers posing
as members of a criminal organization to discuss the murders with Mr. Bradshaw
in order to ensure there were no loose ends that needed to be brought to Mr.
Big’s attention. [140]                     
The first eight minutes or so of the
conversation between Mr. Thielen and Mr. Bradshaw at the hotel were not
captured because they were in a washroom together and their discussion was
muffled by the sound of running water. After an undercover officer called Mr.
Thielen on his phone, Mr. Bradshaw and Mr. Thielen left the washroom and the
conversation continued in the hotel room where it could be heard. Neither Mr.
Thielen nor Mr. Bradshaw knew they were being recorded. During this
conversation, Mr. Bradshaw admitted to being present during the murder of
Ms. Lamoureux (who went by the moniker “Double ‘D’”): Thielen:                 ‘Kay,
remember like my first one, Double ‘D’?  Bradshaw: Uh-hm.  Thielen:                             Right? When you parked, right.
Is there anybody that could have seen me?  Bradshaw: Houses.  Thielen:                 What?  Bradshaw: The houses around
us.  Thielen:                 Right.  Bradshaw: And they said they
saw a white Acura leaving.  Thielen:                 Exactly.  Bradshaw: Right, we were
in the black Cobalt.  Thielen:                 . .
. there’s nothing I touched, right?  Bradshaw: No, that’s a
tactic.  Thielen:                 That’s
a tactic?  Bradshaw:             Yeah. That’s what I think. My personal
opinion. ‘Cause if they had anything fuckin’, (knocking sound) [video shows
Bradshaw knocking on wooden table] like that —  Thielen:                 Yeah.  Bradshaw: -pff-  Thielen:                 There’s
nothing man. [Emphasis added.]  (A.R.,
vol. XII, at pp. 51-52) [141]                     
Later, Mr. Bradshaw seemingly agreed that he and
Mr. Thielen did not have a plan for murdering Ms. Lamoureux. He described how
Ms. Lamoureux called him to purchase drugs and he picked up Mr. Thielen before
the murder: Bradshaw:             . . . Before I picked you up. I think you were
just getting ready weren’t you?  Thielen:                 Yeah,
well we didn’t-  Bradshaw: . . .  Thielen:                 -really
hatch a plan.  Bradshaw: . . .  Thielen:                             We didn’t really have that one
planned did we? It was just kinda on a whim remember?  Bradshaw: Maybe-  Thielen:                 You
went-  Bradshaw: -and she called
me-  Thielen:                             -you went, you went and sold
her dope and then she wanted to trade it back.  Bradshaw: Yeah.  Thielen:                             And then, ‘cause I wasn’t with
you went and met her and you picked me up from somewhere out in the area.  Bradshaw: Okay. [Emphasis
added.]  (A.R.,
vol. XII, at pp. 60-61) This was consistent with
Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment. It was also corroborated by logs on Ms. Lamoureux’s
phone, which was recovered from the crime scene and showed several calls with
Mr. Bradshaw immediately prior to the murder. [142]                     
Mr. Bradshaw implicated himself in the murder of
Mr. Bontkes as well. He described how he and Mr. Thielen had worn gloves and
waited for Michelle Motola (Mr. Bradshaw’s then girlfriend) to drive up with
Mr. Bontkes, which corresponds with Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment. He also told
Mr. Thielen that Ms. Motola did not see who shot Mr. Bontkes. Ms. Motola
thought the shooter was Mr. Thielen, when it fact it was Mr. Bradshaw: Thielen:                 On
the second one, did we touch the van?  Bradshaw: No, we had
gloves on the whole time.  Thielen:                 ‘Kay.  Bradshaw:             As soon as got out of the car, gloves. And
then we pulled the piece out. Cleaned all the shells off. Put everything back
together and waited. And then there’s fuckin’ . . .  Thielen:                 But
Michelle didn’t do the last . . . did she?  Bradshaw:             She was there, but she didn’t see shit. She
didn’t see what happened, she thought it was you. She didn’t even know it was
me.  Thielen:                 Okay.  Bradshaw:             So, she’s fuckin’, even if she wanted to, she
couldn’t even tell it straight, because of that advantage because she was
(smacking sound) we were over here, right? She’s sitting her like this and this
. . . everything’s going on over here. She doesn’t know. She doesn’t know
anything for sure. [Emphasis added.]  (A.R.,
vol. XII, at pp. 52-53) [143]                     
Mr. Bradshaw also discussed their actions after
the murders: Thielen:                 Where
were we before that? Where were we after that?  Bradshaw: My house.  Thielen:                 And
before, at your house, right?  Bradshaw: All my house.  Thielen:                 Both
times?  Bradshaw:             Both. Before and after. We stashed the
thing in my house, took all the shit, you fuckin’ left with it. You walked
over to the fuckin’ . . .  Thielen:                 And
then I came back and got it later.  Bradshaw: Yeah.  Thielen:                 . .
. got rid of it, right?  Bradshaw:             . . . the pieces that were missing were my
shoes and I burned them personally. [Emphasis added.]  (A.R.,
vol. XII, at p. 53) [144]                     
Finally, the two discussed the investigations
and potential sources of evidence regarding the two murders: Thielen:                 Have
you talked to anybody about it?  Bradshaw: Nah.  Thielen:                 Nobody?  Bradshaw: Nothing.  Thielen:                 Just
absolutely nobody, so if-  Bradshaw: No.  Thielen:                 -it’s
anybody yapping their gums it’s Michelle?  Bradshaw:             That’s it. But people have been saying that I
killed Double ‘D’ since it happened.  Thielen:                 I
know, I know, I’ve been-  Bradshaw: . . .  Thielen:                 -hearing
so many things, I heard-  Bradshaw: . . .  Thielen:                 -stories
about it in jail.  Bradshaw:             -about me, blah, blah, blah. Fuckin’
everybody’s saying . . . whatever, that’s hearsay. That doesn’t make a fuckin’
difference . . . to nothing . . . anyone that even has a half fuckin’ I know,
is Michelle. The only one. Because she knows for a fact who was there,
that’s it. And it can only be one or the other.  Thielen:                 On the one, on the one, that’s it.  Bradshaw:             Yeah, only on that one. Right? She doesn’t
know shit about the first one.  Thielen:                 And so after both of them we went to your
house? Bradshaw:             Uh-hm. No, not after the first one.  Thielen:                 Where’d we go?  Bradshaw:             I think we went to your house after the
first one. Thielen:                 And you just dropped me off? And you kept
goin’ on right?  Bradshaw:             I think I was working.  Thielen:                 Yeah.  Bradshaw:             Yeah.  Thielen:                 Okay. So, we’re not gonna say nothing about
this? Not gonna talk to nobody about this?  Bradshaw:             I’m not sweating it to be honest. [Emphasis
added.]  (A.R.,
vol. XII, at pp. 55-56) (ii)          
The July 23, 2010 Conversation [145]                     
The second conversation took place two days
later at Bothwell Park on July 23, 2010. Undercover officers posing as members
of a criminal organization again instructed Mr. Thielen that he needed to speak
to Mr. Bradshaw about the murders, particularly with respect to a “dry run”
that had preceded the murder of Mr. Bontkes. This dry run involved Ms. Motola
picking up Mr. Bontkes and taking him for a drive, while Mr. Bradshaw pretended
to be unconscious in the back seat and Mr. Thielen hid under a jacket across
the back seat floor with a firearm. The plan to kill Mr. Bontkes on that
occasion failed because, in Mr. Bradshaw’s words, “[i]t was my fault ‘cause I
was supposed to string him up and then you were supposed to put the bitch on
him . . . . And I didn’t do that” (the “bitch” being
the gun they had at the time) (A.R., vol. XII, at p. 76). [146]                     
Because this conversation centres more on the
dry run of the murder of Mr. Bontkes, it is somewhat less compelling in
corroborating Mr. Bradshaw’s involvement in the actual murders than the hotel
conversation. Nevertheless, Mr. Bradshaw’s admitted participation in the
dry run strongly supports his motive for the killing of Mr. Bontkes. In
addition, Mr. Bradshaw did refer to the murders themselves, mentioning the ongoing
police investigation and suggesting that if the police had any evidence, they
would have already acted: Thielen:                             So, I just, I’m trying to go
through everything because how much dope I was on back then, I’m so fuzzy with
a lot of shit, man. I thought I was-  Bradshaw: Even better.  Thielen:                 No,
it’s not even better because I-  Bradshaw: Why?  Thielen:                             -I’m goin’ through stuff . . . 
trying to figure out what the hell needs to be fixed here. So we don’t get
popped, right. Bradshaw:             You could fly through a polygraph on that. If
you don’t know . . .  Thielen:                             Yeah, I would never, I would
never do a polygraph in my life, obviously I’m uh, I’m just trying to figure
what is missing and what can be put against us, right, so that we-  Bradshaw:             Honestly, like I said I think as long as .
. . I think the, the rest of it is fuckin’ snap shut tight. I think if there
was anything left it would have already been done immediately. They wouldn’t
have waited so long, they’re, they’re playing the drum, that’s all they’re doin’.
[Emphasis added.]  (A.R.,
vol. XII, at p. 80) [147]                     
Mr. Bradshaw later added that no one would have
seen Ms. Motola pick up Mr. Bontkes prior to the murder and the only witnesses
who could have seen them on the night of Mr. Bontkes’s murder was a construction
crew they drove past after the murder took place: Bradshaw:             And when she went to go see him, it was
just her and then you, so . . .  no other eyeballs on that one, the only other
thing, the only other people that saw us together was a construction crew.  Thielen:                 What
construction crew?  Bradshaw:             Construction crew . . . remember that? You
went south on 192, down to 32.  Thielen:                 And
there was a construction crew there?  Bradshaw:             There was a construction worker on 32. We came
across 32, hit 176, came up 176 and the car died. Remember?  Thielen:                 On that day?  Bradshaw:             . . . that was that night.  Thielen:                 No that was the night it all went down. We
left and . . . phone call . . . someone . . . sources . . . fuck off. Um . . .  Bradshaw:             Personally, I think, like I said, I think
it’s fuckin’ smooth. You know if I didn’t even know you guys at that time,
you know, we met at the bar talking maybe a month or so later, whatever. You
know, everybody’s fuzzy enough . . . no one can say for sure, right. That’s what
I’m talking about. (Chuckles) You know, especially with her. [Emphasis
added.]  (A.R.,
vol. XII, at p. 82) It is apparent that “her”
referred to Ms. Motola — who was also present for the killing of Mr. Bontkes —
as the two went on to discuss how the police had approached her. The police
investigation also confirmed that a construction crew was working in the area
at the relevant time. [148]                     
Reading these two conversations in their
entirety, there can be no doubt that Mr. Thielen and Mr. Bradshaw were
implicitly — and at times overtly — discussing their joint involvement in the
two murders. This provides powerful corroborative evidence that significantly
enhances the substantive reliability of the re-enactment by alleviating
concerns about Mr. Thielen’s sincerity. [149]                     
For my colleague, however, these conversations
provide “no assistance” in establishing substantive reliability (para. 84) — a
remarkable proposition that no one advanced in the proceedings below or before
this Court. In her view, Mr. Thielen’s truthfulness is not the only likely
explanation for the conversations — a conclusion which rests squarely on her
second-guessing the trial judge’s factual assessment of the conversations and
speculating about “outside influence” as a “possible explanation” for them
(para. 84). [150]                     
My colleague makes two points in this regard.
First, she maintains that the trial judge did not account for the reduced
reliability of Mr. Bradshaw’s statements because they were “collected in a Mr.
Big operation” (para. 78). With respect, calling these “Mr. Big” statements is
a misnomer. Mr. Bradshaw was not the subject of the Mr. Big operation. He
believed he was speaking to an accomplice, not to a member of a criminal
organization in circumstances involving the type of inducements or implied
threats that characterize Mr. Big operations: Hart, at paras. 5 and
58-60. The rationales for exercising special caution with Mr. Big confessions
therefore simply do not apply. On the contrary, I agree with the trial judge
that the fact that these conversations were surreptitiously recorded while both
Mr. Thielen and Mr. Bradshaw believed they were privately discussing the
details of the murders, as accomplices, significantly enhanced their
reliability (ruling on voir dire No. 1, 2012 BCSC 2025, at para. 44
(CanLII)). Any motive for Mr. Bradshaw to falsely implicate himself in such
circumstances is mere fancy. [151]                     
Second, my colleague expresses concern that “the
initial part [the first eight minutes] of the Best Western conversation was
inaudible because Thielen and Bradshaw were in the bathroom and a tap was
running” (para. 80). In her opinion, this raises questions about the
trustworthiness of the recording. [152]                     
I disagree. Neither individual knew that they
were being recorded. It stretches the bounds of credulity and common sense to
think that this initial part of the conversation could explain away the
incriminating admissions made by Mr. Bradshaw in the audible part of the
conversation. How one could reasonably infer that during these eight minutes,
Mr. Bradshaw may have been influenced and prepared to falsely recite his
participation in the two murders escapes me. It is clear from the transcript
that Mr. Bradshaw was, at times, leading the conversation and volunteering
details about the murders without any prompting on Mr. Thielen’s part. Unlike
my colleague, I do not believe it is appropriate to consider Mr. Bradshaw’s
trial testimony — that, during these eight minutes, Mr. Thielen asked him to
pretend that he had been involved in the murders — in assessing the substantive
reliability of the re-enactment. Mr. Bradshaw testified after the
re-enactment was admitted and therefore his testimony was not before the trial
judge at the time of his ruling. Furthermore, the jury clearly rejected Mr.
Bradshaw’s testimony that he was lying about his involvement in the murders at
Mr. Thielen’s request. [153]                     
If these conversations do not qualify as
corroborative evidence supporting a hearsay statement’s substantive
reliability, then I am at a loss to know what would. Even on the basis of my
colleague’s restrictive test, they clearly qualify. The only plausible — and
certainly the “only likely” — explanation for Mr. Bradshaw’s admissions was
that he participated in the two murders. It follows, in my view, that the trial
judge did not err in relying on Mr. Bradshaw’s admissions as powerful
corroboration of the truthfulness of Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment. (b)          
The Circumstantial Evidence Implicating Mr.
Bradshaw in the Murders [154]                     
The Crown also led circumstantial evidence
implicating Mr. Bradshaw in the murders. [155]                     
Indeed, there are telephone records that connect
Mr. Bradshaw to both murders on the nights in question. These records establish
a number of calls between Mr. Bradshaw and Ms. Lamoureux on the night she was
murdered. Several of these calls took place immediately prior to the murder.
This corroborates Mr. Thielen’s account of Mr. Bradshaw luring her into a
set-up under the ruse of a drug transaction before Mr. Thielen shot her. [156]                     
Similarly, on the night Mr. Bontkes was killed,
telephone records show a number of calls between Mr. Bradshaw and Mr. Thielen,
Mr. Thielen and Ms. Motola, and Ms. Motola and Mr. Bontkes — which was the last
call registered on Mr. Bontkes’s cell phone. This is consistent with Mr.
Thielen’s account that all three of them participated in the killing. (c)          
The Forensic Evidence From the Crime Scenes
Investigation [157]                     
In my view, forensic evidence from the crime
scenes investigation, which corroborates the details of Mr. Thielen’s
description of the murders, provides additional support for the trustworthiness
of the re-enactment. The trial judge noted that this forensic evidence
included: “. . . where and how the shootings occurred, the number of shots
fired, the fact the same gun was used, the positioning of the bodies of
Ms. Lamoureux and Mr. Bontkes, the presence and position of the van at
High Knoll Park . . .” (ruling on voir dire No. 1, at para 45). [158]                     
This evidence responds to the memory and
perception concerns raised by defence counsel. It alleviated the risk that Mr.
Thielen’s drug abuse and/or the passage of time made his account inaccurate. [159]                     
In my view, this evidence also addressed Mr.
Thielen’s overall sincerity. Assessing a declarant’s sincerity in a hearsay
statement, like assessing the credibility of a witness, is not a mathematical
exercise. Where extrinsic evidence corroborates or contradicts the contents of
a statement, this affects the statement’s overall reliability. If the details
of Mr. Thielen’s account were belied by the forensic evidence, this would cast
further doubt on his sincerity. On the other hand, the corroboration of the
details of his account by forensic evidence enhances the substantive
reliability of the re-enactment. [160]                     
I acknowledge that in view of Mr. Thielen’s
status as an accomplice, the forensic evidence is not as compelling in this
case as the corroborative evidence which directly implicated Mr. Bradshaw in
the murders: see Youvarajah, at para. 62; R. v. Smith, 2009 SCC
5, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 146, at para. 15. However, I agree with counsel for the
intervener British Columbia Civil Liberties Association that this forensic
evidence is relevant and should not be taken off the table. (2)          
The Circumstances of the Re-enactment [161]                     
Beyond the powerful corroborative evidence,
there are also other features of the re-enactment that enhance its substantive
reliability. The statement was voluntary and detailed, and it was provided
after Mr. Thielen received legal advice. It was also delivered in a
free-flowing narrative, without any leading questions from the police (ruling
on voir dire No. 1, at paras. 40-41). Although not under oath, it was
made to police officers while Mr. Thielen was under arrest in circumstances
which, viewed objectively, would have underscored the importance of telling the
truth: B. (K.G.), at p. 792; R. v. Adjei, 2013 ONCA 512, 309
O.A.C. 328, at para. 45. [162]                     
In addition, Mr. Thielen’s motives for
participating in the re-enactment with police were important to consider
because of the concerns regarding his sincerity. As recognized by this Court in
Blackman, at para. 42: There is no
doubt that the presence or absence of a motive to lie is a relevant
consideration in assessing whether the circumstances in which the statements
came about provide sufficient comfort in their truth and accuracy to warrant
admission. It is important to keep in mind,
however, that motive is but one factor to consider in the determining of
threshold reliability, albeit one which may be significant depending on the
circumstances. The focus of the admissibility inquiry in all cases must be, not
on the presence or absence of motive, but on the particular dangers arising
from the hearsay nature of the evidence. [Emphasis added.] [163]                     
In my view, the fact that Mr. Thielen’s
re-enactment went against his own interests is significant in this regard. It
directly implicated him in both murders and could be used to incriminate him.
It also implicated Ms. Motola, whom he considered to be a “sister”. Moreover,
he was aware that, in re-enacting the two murders for the police, he was
putting himself at risk in the prison system: “. . . what I’m asked to do here
is take the biggest step of my life and bring down a whole bunch of people and
you know what else, that’s gonna put me at risk for the rest of my life” (A.R.,
vol. XV, at p. 169). Given the unlikelihood that Mr. Thielen would willingly
make a false statement prejudicial to his own interests, this provides further
support that the re-enactment is trustworthy. [164]                     
My colleague takes a different view of Mr.
Thielen’s motivations for re-enacting the murders. She asserts that Mr.
Thielen’s statement was not actually made against his interests because he had
previously incriminated himself to police and in the Mr. Big operation. She
also takes the position that Mr. Thielen had a “significant motive to lie” to
gain “the opportunity of reduced criminal liability”, citing the fact that he
pled guilty to two counts of second degree murder (para. 92). [165]                     
I disagree with both of these assertions. First,
the fact that Mr. Thielen had previously implicated himself in both murders to
police does not change the fact that the re-enactment was made against his
interests. The police clearly wanted to collect as much information as possible
from Mr. Thielen and the re-enactment provided detailed and cogent evidence
that could be used against him. [166]                     
Second, the suggestion that Mr. Thielen was
seeking leniency is purely speculative. There is no evidence of any inducements
or assurances made by the police prior to Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment. Indeed,
the police rejected Mr. Thielen’s requests to see his girlfriend, receive a
name change, and be incarcerated in a faraway prison. The fact that Mr. Thielen
ultimately pled guilty to second degree murder does not detract from the
reliability of his previously made statement. We have no information to suggest
that the plea offer had anything to do with his participation in the
re-enactment. Indeed, we do not know if the same plea offer was made to Mr.
Bradshaw before his trial. [167]                     
Furthermore, the theory that Mr. Thielen
fabricated Mr. Bradshaw’s involvement to shift responsibility away from himself
is belied by the facts. Mr. Thielen did not minimize his own role in the
killings or shift the primary responsibility to Mr. Bradshaw for the
murder of Ms. Lamoureux. Instead, he admitted to pulling the trigger himself.
Additionally, in my view, Mr. Thielen’s prior statement to Mr. Big on July 21,
2010, in which he implicated Mr. Bradshaw in the murders, rebuts any purported
motive on Mr. Thielen’s part to fabricate Mr. Bradshaw’s involvement during the
re-enactment. Mr. Thielen had no motive to lie about Mr. Bradshaw’s involvement
to Mr. Big. Rather, it was against Mr. Thielen’s interest to implicate Mr. Bradshaw
when speaking to Mr. Big. At that time, Mr. Thielen believed his role in the
organization was in jeopardy because of the ongoing police investigation. This
jeopardy was only enhanced by implicating another person in the murders, which
could further complicate matters for Mr. Big. Mr. Big repeatedly emphasized
that Mr. Thielen had to be honest about the murders to maintain his role in the
organization, telling him: . . . lie to everybody else,
but we don’t lie to each other here. And uh, and guys that get found out for
lying or fuckin’ uh, screwing me around are gone. . . .  . . .  . . . if I find out at
anytime as we go along that anything you tell me right now is wrong or it’s
bullshit or it’s a lie, and again I’m not sayin’ that it is . . . but I want to
be up front . . . then I’m washing my hands of you.  (A.R.,
vol. XVIII, at pp. 66 and 88-89) [168]                     
The fact that Mr. Thielen told Mr. Big about Mr.
Bradshaw’s involvement well before he had any motive to fabricate indicates
that he was telling the truth when he re-enacted the two murders for police:
see R. v. Stirling, 2008 SCC 10, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 272, at para. 5;
Couture, at paras. 83 and 127-28; Goodstoney, at paras. 69-71. [169]                     
In sum, the substantive reliability of the
re-enactment was significantly enhanced by a combination of: (1)        Extrinsic
corroborative evidence, including: surreptitiously recorded conversations of
Mr. Bradshaw admitting to his involvement in the two murders; circumstantial
evidence implicating Mr. Bradshaw in the murders; and forensic evidence from
the crime scenes confirming the details of the murders as described by Mr.
Thielen. (2)        Circumstantial
indicia of trustworthiness, including: the fact that the re-enactment was
voluntary and free flowing; that it was contrary to Mr. Thielen’s interest, in
that he did not attempt to shift blame to Mr. Bradshaw but instead implicated
himself in two counts of first degree murder; and that Mr. Thielen’s alleged
motivation to fabricate was rebutted by his prior consistent statement to Mr.
Big. C.           
The Procedural Reliability of the Re-enactment [170]                     
In this case, the jury had the benefit of
several substitutes for the traditional safeguards relied on for testing
evidence. As my colleague acknowledges, the fact the re-enactment was
video-taped ensures an accurate record of the statement and enhances the
ability of the jury to observe and evaluate it. In addition, the trial judge
took a number of steps to ensure the jury was in a position where it could
assess and weigh the reliability of the hearsay statement. These safeguards
included the following: requiring the Crown to call officers who were present
for the re-enactment and prior inconsistent statements so that defence counsel
could cross-examine them on any inconsistencies and any reduced plea offers or
inducements made to Mr. Thielen; the limited admission of prior inconsistent
statements made by Mr. Thielen to help assess his credibility; and wide
latitude for defence counsel to discuss Mr. Thielen’s possible motives and
challenge the ultimate reliability of the re-enactment in closing submissions. [171]                     
Further, the trial judge provided detailed
cautions to help the jury identify and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of
the re-enactment. Before the video re-enactment was played for the jury, the
trial judge provided a mid-trial instruction that told the jury the following: That
evidence is hearsay evidence, and is not usually permitted as evidence in a
court of law. The reason it is not permitted is because the individual who is
offering the evidence is not appearing in the witness box, and testifying and
subjecting himself to cross-examination, cross-examination which might reveal
lies, inconsistencies, motive for making up a story and so forth. So you will
need to consider the weight ultimately that you are going to attach to the
evidence that you are about to hear this morning.  Now,
that is particularly important because in this case, the person who is offering
that evidence is subject to a special warning, and you will hear more about
this from me in my final instructions to you on the law. Mr. Thielen, you have
heard other witnesses testify, is not only an unsavoury character, having
regard to his background in drugs and the drug culture in Langley and Surrey.
He has been described as an enforcer. He is certainly of unsavoury character in
that regard. You have also and will hear -- I think you have heard that he pled
guilty to the second degree murder of Ms. Lamoureux and Mr. Bontkes.  You
will recall when I gave you some opening instructions, I set out some things
you should consider when you decide whether or not to believe a witness. Well,
you should consider those things when you assess what Mr. Thielen is about to
say. But in addition, I must warn you that you should be extremely cautious
in accepting Mr. Thielen’s testimony. I must caution you it is dangerous to
rely on that testimony alone. The reasons are Mr. Thielen has admitted to
participation in the commission of the offence. As I’ve said, he has an
unsavoury reputation. He’s admitted and pled guilty to a criminal conviction.
Mr. Thielen may well have some motive other than the pursuit of truth. All of
these things you will need to consider.  [Emphasis added.]  (A.R.,
vol. VIII, at pp. 2-3) [172]                     
In the jury charge at the close of trial, the
trial judge thoroughly and repeatedly cautioned the jurors about Mr. Thielen’s
re-enactment and instructed them on how to evaluate it. This included the
following key excerpts: As I explained during in the
trial, this evidence [Thielen’s re-enactment] was placed before you without the
usual testing of evidence by cross-examination, and that you must therefore
be very cautious in determining the reliability of the evidence.  . . .  In
this case Mr. McMurray was not able to cross-examine Mr. Thielen on the
things he said or did in the enactment. He was unable to test Mr. Thielen’s
memory, credibility, motive of or for the things said and done during the
re-enactment. You did not have the opportunity to observe the demeanour of Mr.
Thielen in the witness box as he gave his evidence.  Furthermore,
the statements Mr. Thielen gave to [Cst. D.] were not given under oath. As a
result of all that you should not place the statement of Mr. Thielen on the
same footing as the statement of a witness who testifies under oath in the courtroom.
You should treat Mr. Thielen’s out-of-court statement with special care and,
after considering it with all the evidence in this case, give it the weight you
think it deserves.  . . .  . .
. In addition, however, I must warn you that you should be extremely
cautious in accepting some or any of his testimony. It is dangerous for you to
rely on his evidence alone. There are a number of grounds upon which you
may question whether his evidence is reliable: Thielen admitted he participated
in the commission of the two offences with which Mr. Bradshaw is charged.
He plead guilty to second degree murder of Ms. Lamoureux and Mr. Bontkes.  Thielen
admitted to an extensive history of criminal conduct, including the attempted
murder of Sigurdson. He has an unsavoury reputation. He has given prior
inconsistent statements, that is, in his statement particularly to [Cpl. G.] on
March the 18th, when he said he had not seen Lamoureux for two months; and to
[Cst. B.] on the drive from Edmonton to Calgary. Mr. Thielen might have some
motive other than the pursuit of truth in giving his testimony.  The
last and most important ground is that of course Mr. Thielen’s evidence was not
tested by cross-examination. A person who participated in the commission of an
offence would be in a particularly good position to concoct a story that
falsely implicates the accused. All that person would need to do is tell a
truthful story that could be confirmed easily, and falsely add to it an
allegation the accused was also a participant.  . . .  . .
. In this case Thielen made statements to the police that tend to show Mr.
Bradshaw was involved in committing the offences you are trying. You should
consider those statements with particular care because Thielen may have been
more concerned about protecting himself than about telling the truth.
[Emphasis added.]  (A.R.,
vol. I, at pp. 73, 82-83, 85-86 and 96) [173]                     
In my view, the opportunity to observe Mr.
Thielen in the re-enactment video and the numerous procedural safeguards
adopted by the trial judge, including these instructions, placed the jury in a
position to identify and critically evaluate each of the frailties of the
re-enactment that my colleague identifies. To assume that the jury was
incapable of following these instructions and appreciating the frailties of
this evidence betrays the time-honoured trust and confidence our justice system
places in juries. In R. v. Corbett, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 670, this Court
emphasized the need to “trust the good sense of the jury” in determining what
evidence it may hear (p. 691). This point was put succinctly by Donald J.A. in R.
v. Carroll, 1999 BCCA 65, 118 B.C.A.C. 219, at para. 41: Juries are
often required to find facts from a melange of evidence. It is not uncommon for
cross-examination to use prior statements of several kinds: police statements,
testimony given in a previous trial, an inquest or a preliminary inquiry. We
have to trust
juries to use their common sense in sifting the evidence and
to follow the guidance offered by the trial judge. [Emphasis added.] [174]                     
I share the sentiment expressed by
L’Heureux-Dubé J. in dissent in R. v. Noël, 2002 SCC 67, [2002] 3 S.C.R.
433, at para. 145, that courts should trust juries to make proper use of
admissible evidence or risk “demean[ing] the jury by suggesting that they are
incapable of properly dealing with [the] evidence. Our faith in the jury system
is a hollow one if such an attitude is allowed to prevail.” D.           
Final Balancing [175]                     
In this case, I am satisfied and agree with the
trial judge that the re-enactment met the test for threshold reliability on the
basis of strong features of substantive reliability, supplemented by sufficient
features of procedural reliability. The trial judge was uniquely positioned to
make this determination. And, contrary to my colleague’s assertions, his
analysis discloses no legal error. As a result, his ruling is entitled to
deference. [176]                     
In Youvarajah, Karakatsanis J. explained
the rationale for this deference (at para. 31): The
admissibility of hearsay evidence, such as the prior inconsistent statement in
this case, is a question of law. Of course, the factual findings that go
into that determination are entitled to deference and are not challenged in
this case. As well, a trial judge is well placed to assess the hearsay
dangers in a particular case and the effectiveness of any safeguards to assist
in overcoming them. Thus, absent an error in principle, the trial judge’s
determination of threshold reliability is entitled to deference: [Couture],
at para. 81. [Emphasis added.] [177]                     
In Blackman, Charron J. made a similar
observation (at para. 36): The trial
judge is well placed to determine the extent to which the hearsay dangers of a
particular case are of concern and whether they can be sufficiently alleviated.
Accordingly, the trial judge’s ruling on admissibility, if informed by correct
principles of law, is entitled to deference. [178]                     
Ultimately, the trial judge made a difficult
call in a close case. It must be emphasized that he was in the best position to
make that call based on his assessment of the trustworthiness of the evidence
and the jury’s ability to evaluate it. Contrary to my colleague’s assertions,
the trial judge’s reasons for admitting the re-enactment were free from error
and, as I have endeavoured to demonstrate, were well supported by the record.
Indeed, he followed the functional approach that has been repeatedly endorsed
by this Court. [179]                     
I agree with the comments of the Court of Appeal
for Ontario in R. v. S. (S.), 2008 ONCA 140, 232 C.C.C. (3d) 158,
at paras. 29-30: Trial judges cannot consult
rules akin to mathematical formulas to tell them how much weight to give to
each of the factors. The assessment is case-specific. Different judges will
reasonably assign more or less weight to each of the particular factors in any
given case.  As
long as the trial judge addressed the factors germane to the reliability of the
hearsay statement, did not fall into any material misapprehension of the
evidence relevant to those factors, and made a reasonable assessment of the
weight to be assigned to those factors, this court should not redo the weighing
process, but should defer to the trial judge’s weighing of those factors. [Emphasis added.] [180]                     
Respectfully, in my view, it is not the role of
this Court to second guess the trial judge’s reasonably exercised judgment from
a position far removed from the trial setting. Doing so betrays both the
deference owed to trial judges and the trust and confidence placed in juries to
follow instructions and use their common sense and reason to evaluate evidence.
As a result, I would uphold the trial judge’s ruling that the re-enactment was
admissible. IV.        
Application to the May 15, 2010 Statement [181]                     
Since I have concluded that the re-enactment was
admissible, I must address Mr. Bradshaw’s alternative argument that the trial
judge erred in refusing to admit a prior statement by Mr. Thielen given on May
15, 2010, for the truth of its contents. [182]                     
That statement occurred during a road trip from
Edmonton to Calgary that Mr. Thielen took with an undercover office as part of
the Mr. Big operation. Their conversation in the car was audio-recorded. During
the trip, Mr. Thielen told the undercover officer that he killed Ms. Lamoureux
by himself and killed Mr. Bontkes with the assistance of Ms. Motola. He made no
mention of any involvement by Mr. Bradshaw. [183]                     
The May 15, 2010 statement shares the same
hearsay dangers as the re-enactment. However, as I will explain, this statement
has a number of distinguishing features that add to its frailties and support
the trial judge’s decision to refuse to admit it for the truth of its contents. [184]                     
First, it is significant that the statement was
not video-recorded. This prevents the jury from observing Mr. Thielen’s demeanour
and reduces its ability to assess his credibility. [185]                     
Second, Mr. Thielen’s motives were entirely
different in this context. He had a strong incentive to exaggerate his
individual involvement and responsibility for the murders in order to impress
his perceived peer in the criminal underworld: Hart, at paras. 68-69.
Moreover, the statement cannot be characterized as being against his interests
because Mr. Thielen admitted his involvement to an associate, not to the
police. Unlike the re-enactment, these circumstances of the May 15, 2010
statement cast doubt over Mr. Thielen’s sincerity. [186]                     
Third, this May 15, 2010 statement was strongly
contradicted by extrinsic evidence which suggests that it was untruthful. For
example, Mr. Thielen stated that after he shot Mr. Bontkes in the head and
body, Ms. Motola shot him again in the groin area. This version of events was
directly contradicted by forensic evidence which showed Mr. Bontkes was not
shot in his groin area. Mr. Thielen’s omission of any mention of Mr. Bradshaw
is also directly contradicted by Mr. Bradshaw’s own admissions of involvement
in his recorded conversations with Mr. Thielen described above. [187]                     
The trial judge considered the relevant factors
and applied the correct test in finding this statement to be inadmissible for
its truth. As indicated, his ruling is entitled to deference. Accordingly, I
would not interfere. I say this mindful of the fact that the trial judge may
relax the rules of evidence for hearsay tendered by the accused in order to
prevent a miscarriage of justice: R. v. Post, 2007 BCCA 123, 217 C.C.C.
(3d) 225, at paras. 89-90; R. v. Tash, 2013 ONCA 380, 306 O.A.C. 173, at
para. 89; R. v. Kimberley (2001), 56 O.R. (3d) 18 (C.A.), at para. 80.
Accepting this principle, I note that this statement was put before the jury as
a prior inconsistent statement for the purpose of evaluating Mr. Thielen’s
credibility in the re-enactment. Indeed, defence counsel made reference to it
in his closing address and submitted to the jury that it was true. As a result,
even if the trial judge did err in refusing to admit it for the truth of its
contents, I do not think it caused significant prejudice or resulted in a
miscarriage of justice that would warrant appellate intervention. V.           
Conclusion [188]                     
For these reasons, I conclude the trial judge
did not err in admitting Mr. Thielen’s re-enactment and refusing to admit
his May 15, 2010 statement for the truth of its contents. In my respectful
view, there is no reason to send this case back for a second trial. Mr. Bradshaw
had a fair trial before a properly instructed jury that was well positioned to
critically evaluate the reliability of the re-enactment. Accordingly, I would
allow the appeal and restore Mr. Bradshaw’s two convictions for first degree
murder.                     Appeal
dismissed, Moldaver and Côté JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitor
for the appellant: Attorney General of British Columbia, Vancouver.                     Solicitors
for the respondent: Fowler and Smith Law, Vancouver.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario: Attorney General of
Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association: Hunter
Litigation Chambers, Vancouver.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario: Louis P. Strezos
& Associate, Toronto; Henein Hutchison, Toronto. [1]   This rule was criticized for being antithetical to the flexible
nature of the principled exception to hearsay (H. Stewart,
“Khelawon: The Principled Approach to Hearsay Revisited” (2008), 12 Can.
Crim. L.R. 95, at p. 105) and for
leading to the exclusion of manifestly reliable hearsay evidence (S. Akhtar,
“Hearsay: The Denial of Confirmation” (2005), 26 C.R. (6th) 46). [2]   Ensuring that corroborative evidence goes to the truthfulness or
accuracy of the material aspects of the hearsay statement is particularly
important when the hearsay statement is lengthy. In this
case, for example, a 200-page transcript from the re-enactment video was given
to the jury. If the trial judge were entitled to consider any evidence
that corroborated any part of this statement in assessing its
admissibility, the voir dire could become a trial within a trial (Blackman,
at para. 57). [3]   In these reasons, Mr. Thielen’s hearsay re-enactment refers to
both the visual demonstrations and verbal statements he made in the video to
describe how the murders and related events took place. [4]   While this is clearly a high standard, it does not require the
trial judge to be convinced to a point of certainty that the statement is true,
otherwise the difference between threshold and ultimate reliability, which this
Court has consistently maintained, would be lost (see paras. 113-16 below).  