  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Pappas, 2013 SCC 56, [2013] 3
  S.C.R. 452 Date: 20131025 Docket: 34951  Between: Bill
James Pappas Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent    Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver
and Wagner JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 43)  Reasons
  Concurring in Result: (paras. 44 to 79) McLachlin C.J. (Abella, Rothstein,
  Cromwell, Moldaver and Wagner JJ. concurring)  Fish J.   R. v. Pappas, 2013 SCC 56, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 452 Bill James Pappas                                                                                           Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent Indexed as:  R. v. Pappas 2013 SCC 56 File No.:  34951. 2013:  April 26; 2013:  October 25. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver and Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for alberta                     In
2006, K’s lifeless body was discovered.  He had been shot twice.  Days later, P
was arrested.  He confessed to killing K.  According to P, K had been extorting
money from him for 18 months by threatening to reveal details about his
offshore investments to the Canada Revenue Agency, and by threatening to harm
his mother if he chose to stop paying or went to the police.  P decided that he
had had enough.  He went to K’s home to end the extortion and threats.  He
brought along a loaded handgun in order to intimidate K but did not immediately
take out his gun.  Rather, he attempted to get K to agree to put an end to the
extortion.  K responded that he would continue the extortion and that he had
“great fucking insurance”, a comment that P took as an implied threat against
his mother.  At this point, P said he “snapped”.  He retrieved his gun and shot
K in the back and then in the head.                     P
was charged with second degree murder.  At the trial by jury, P admitted to
killing K but argued that the defence of provocation applied.  Finding that
there was some evidence on the objective and subjective elements of the defence
of provocation, the trial judge left the defence with the jury.  The jury
rejected the defence, and found P guilty of second degree murder.  He appealed
his conviction, arguing inter alia that the trial judge erred in her
instructions to the jury on provocation.  The majority of the Court of Appeal
dismissed the appeal, holding that the defence of provocation was properly left
with the jury and that there were no errors in the instructions to the jury.                     Held: 
The appeal should be dismissed.                     Per
McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Wagner JJ.: 
On the evidence in this case, there was no air of reality to the defence
of provocation and the defence should not have been left to the jury.  The
conviction for second degree murder, however, is affirmed.                     Where
the evidence requires the drawing of inferences in order to establish the
objective or subjective elements of the defence of provocation, the trial judge
may engage in a limited weighing to determine whether the elements of the
defence can reasonably be inferred from the evidence.  For the purposes of the
application of the air of reality test, we must assume that the version of
events described in an accused’s confession is true.  That said, an air of
reality cannot spring from bare, unsupported assertions by the accused. 
Defences supported only by bald assertions that cannot reasonably be borne out
by the evidence, viewed in its totality, should be kept from the jury.                     K’s
threat against the safety of P’s mother and the history of the relations
between K and P, provide a minimal evidential foundation for the objective
element of the defence.  However there was no air of reality to the subjective
element of the defence of provocation.  That element includes a requirement of
“suddenness” which applies to both the act of provocation and the accused’s
reaction to it.  The trial judge committed an error of law by only considering
whether there was evidence to support the contention that P had killed K before
there was time for his passion to cool.  She did not examine whether the record
could support a finding that K’s provoking comments were sudden, in the sense
that P was subjectively caught unprepared and surprised by them.                     The
record cannot reasonably support an inference that P was caught unprepared by K’s
statements as K had made similar statements repeatedly in the past.  Viewed in
its totality, the evidence suggests that before setting out to visit K, P
contemplated the possibility that K would persist with his extortion and
threats, and that in that case, he would need to kill K to end them.  A
contention that P was caught unprepared is outside the range of reasonable
inferences that can be drawn from this evidence.  It is supported by little
more than P’s bald assertions that he “snapped” and “everything was just
automatic”.                     Per
Fish J.:  The trial judge did not err in leaving to the jury the defence
of provocation, nor did she commit a reviewable error in instructing the jury
as she did. Cases Cited By McLachlin C.J.                     Referred
to: R. v. Cairney, 2013 SCC 55, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 420; R.
v. Mayuran, 2012 SCC 31, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 162; R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC
29, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 3; R. v. Fontaine, 2004 SCC 27, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 702;
R. v. Arcuri, 2001 SCC 54, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 828; R. v. Park,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 836; R. v. Gauthier, 2013 SCC 32, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 403; R.
v. Tran, 2010 SCC 58, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 350; R. v. Parent, 2001 SCC
30, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 761; R.
v. Tripodi, [1955] S.C.R. 438. By Fish J.                     Referred
to:  Henderson v. The King, [1948] S.C.R.
226; R. v. Buzizi, 2013 SCC 27, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 248; R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 3; R. v. Fontaine,
2004 SCC 27, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 702; R. v. Gauthier, 2013 SCC 32, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 403;
R. v. Osolin, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 595; R. v. Faid, [1983] 1 S.C.R.
265; R. v. Mayuran, 2012 SCC 31, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 162; R. v. Thibert,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 37; Parnerkar v. The Queen, [1974] S.C.R. 449; R. v.
Tran, 2010 SCC 58, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 350; R. v. Cairney, 2013 SCC 55, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 420. Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 11 (d), (f).                     APPEAL from a judgment of the Alberta Court of Appeal (Berger, O’Brien
and Rowbotham JJ.A.), 2012 ABCA 221, 533 A.R. 294, 65 Alta. L.R. (5th)
359, 288 C.C.C. (3d) 323, 264 C.R.R. (2d) 211, 557 W.A.C. 294, [2012] A.J. No. 716
(QL), 2012 CarswellAlta 1191, affirming the accused’s conviction for second
degree murder.  Appeal dismissed.                     Michael Bates, Jennifer
Ruttan and Geoff Ellwand, for the appellant.                     Jolaine Antonio, for
the respondent.                     The judgment of McLachlin
C.J. and Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Wagner JJ. was delivered by                     The Chief Justice — I.    Background [1]                             
On November 10, 2006, Brian Kullman’s body was
discovered in the Elbow Falls area southwest of Calgary, Alberta.  He had been
shot twice — once in the back, and once in the head. [2]                             
Five days later, the appellant, Bill Pappas, was
arrested as he was about to board a plane for London, England.  The police
interrogated him and he confessed to killing Kullman. [3]                             
Pappas explained to the police his version of
the events leading to Kullman’s death.  Pappas contended that Kullman had been
extorting money from him for approximately 18 months by threatening to reveal
details about his offshore investments to the Canada Revenue Agency, and by
threatening to harm his mother if he chose to stop paying or went to the
police. According to Pappas, two of Kullman’s associates had visited his mother
as a threatening gesture, and had thereafter told him, “You say no to Brian —
you say no to Brian and next time it won’t be a social visit”: A.R., vol. II,
at p. 239. [4]                             
Pappas, as he put it, decided that he had had
enough.  He loaded his 9 millimetre handgun with four hollow point bullets and
went to Kullman’s condominium.  The ostensible purpose of the visit was to
store a bicycle in Kullman’s basement.  The real purpose was to end the
extortion and threats.  Pappas told the police that he brought the gun along
only to intimidate Kullman.  But he also explained that he chose this kind of
bullet because it was particularly lethal. [5]                             
During his visit to the condominium, Pappas
raised the subject of extortion several times with Kullman, attempting to get
him to agree to put an end to it.  He did not immediately take out his gun, but
instead kept it concealed on his hip. On the way to the basement where the bike
would be stored, Pappas tried one more appeal, saying, “Brian, just please —
let’s just end this”.  In response, Kullman said, “Buddy, why the fuck should
I? You’re the best cash out I have and I got great fucking insurance”:  A.R.,
vol. II, at p. 241. [6]                             
Pappas took the reference to “insurance” as an
implied threat against his mother.  At this point, he said, he just “snapped”,
his “mind shut down and everything was just automatic”:  A.R., vol. III, at p.
64, and vol. II, at p. 304.  He retrieved the gun, cocked the hammer, and shot
Kullman in the back at close range.  Kullman screamed and began to fall, and
Pappas fired again.  Finally, as the victim lay on the floor in distress,
Pappas moved the handgun to within 7 or 8 inches of Kullman’s head and shot him
in the left side of his head. [7]                             
Pappas pulled Kullman’s body up the stairs and
loaded it in Kullman’s car.  After returning to the basement and setting a fire
to cover his tracks, he drove to Elbow Falls where he rolled the body down an
embankment.  Several days later, he also disposed of Kullman’s credit card and
of bloodstained clothes in the garbage cans behind a convenience store and a
gas station. [8]                             
In his confession, Pappas admitted that he had
forged a cheque from Kullman to himself for $2,500 and deposited it into his
bank account, and that he had used Kullman’s credit card. [9]                             
Throughout, Pappas insisted that he had murdered
Kullman to save his mother from harm. [10]                         
Pappas was charged with second degree murder for
the killing of Kullman. II.  The Trial and Appeal [11]                         
At the trial by jury, Pappas’ confession was
entered by the Crown as evidence.  Pappas did not testify, but relied on his
confession as evidence on the issue of provocation.  Maintaining that he
“snapped” and killed Kullman following the implied threat to harm his mother,
he argued that the defence of provocation applied to reduce the verdict from
murder to manslaughter. [12]                         
The trial judge initially took the view that the
provocation defence lacked an air of reality.  However, after hearing defence
submissions on the matter, she concluded: I am satisfied that if the
jury were to believe the evidence of Mr. Pappas on this issue of provocation
properly, there is some evidence upon which a reasonable jury properly
instructed could find there has been provocation. I acknowledge that the
evidence on the objective and subjective test is not strong. But it is there. 
[A.R., vol. I, at p. 5]  [13]                         
The jury rejected the defence of provocation,
and found Pappas guilty of second degree murder. [14]                         
Pappas appealed his conviction, arguing inter
alia that the trial judge’s instructions to the jury on provocation
contained several errors.  The Crown argued that the instructions were
error-free.  In addition, the Crown contended that there was no air of reality
to the defence and that it never should have been left with the jury. [15]                         
The majority of the Court of Appeal, per
O’Brien and Rowbotham JJ.A., dismissed the appeal.  It held that the defence of
provocation was properly left with the jury and that there were no errors in
the instructions to the jury: 2012 ABCA 221, 533 A.R. 294. [16]                         
Berger J.A., dissenting, agreed with the
majority that the defence was properly left with the jury but found several
errors in the instructions to the jury. [17]                         
Mr. Pappas now appeals to this Court.  Before
us, four issues arise: (1) Was the defence
of provocation properly left to the jury? (The Crown contends it was not,
making it unnecessary for this Court to consider whether the charge on the
defence was in error.) (2) Did the trial
judge fail to adequately instruct the jury that the post-offence conduct had no
bearing on the issue of provocation? (3) Did the trial
judge misstate the accused’s motive? (4) Did the trial judge err by stating the suddenness instruction
disjunctively, requiring rejection of the defence if either the extortion or
the threat was not sudden? [18]                         
For the reasons that follow, I would accept the
Crown’s argument that there was no air of reality to the defence of
provocation.  This makes it unnecessary for me to consider the other issues
raised by the appellant. III.  Discussion [19]                         
For ease of reference, I set out s. 232  of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 : 232. (1) Culpable homicide that otherwise would be murder may be reduced
to manslaughter if the person who committed it did so in the heat of passion
caused by sudden provocation.  (2)
A wrongful act or an insult that is of such a nature as to be sufficient to
deprive an ordinary person of the power of self-control is provocation for the
purposes of this section if the accused acted on it on the sudden and before
there was time for his passion to cool.  (3)
For the purposes of this section, the questions  (a)
whether a particular wrongful act or insult amounted to provocation, and  (b)
whether the accused was deprived of the power of self-control by the
provocation that he alleges he received,  are
questions of fact, but no one shall be deemed to have given provocation to
another by doing anything that he had a legal right to do, or by doing anything
that the accused incited him to do in order to provide the accused with an
excuse for causing death or bodily harm to any human being.  (4)
Culpable homicide that otherwise would be murder is not necessarily
manslaughter by reason only that it was committed by a person who was being
arrested illegally, but the fact that the illegality of the arrest was known to
the accused may be evidence of provocation for the purpose of this section. Was the Defence of Provocation
Properly Left to the Jury? [20]                         
The Crown contends that on the evidence in this
case, there was no air of reality to the defence of provocation.  I agree.  I
will first discuss the air of reality test, and then the objective and
subjective elements of the defence of provocation. (1) The Air of Reality Test [21]                         
As discussed in the companion case R. v.
Cairney, 2013 SCC 55, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 420, before leaving the defence to the jury, the trial judge must find
that there is an air of reality on both the objective and subjective elements
of the defence.  The question is whether a properly instructed jury acting
reasonably could be left in a state of reasonable doubt as to whether the
accused is guilty of murder, on the basis of the defence of provocation.  There
must be an evidential foundation for both the objective and subjective elements
of the defence, which s. 232(3)  of the Criminal Code  states are
questions of fact. [22]                         
The air of reality test requires courts to tread
a fine line: it requires more than “some” or “any” evidence of the elements of
a defence, yet it does not go so far as to allow a weighing of the substantive
merits of a defence: R. v. Mayuran, 2012 SCC 31, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 162, at
para. 21.  A trial judge applying the air of reality test cannot consider
issues of credibility and reliability, weigh evidence substantively, make
findings of fact, or draw determinate factual inferences:  R. v. Cinous,
2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 3, at para. 87; R. v. Fontaine, 2004 SCC
27, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 702, at para. 12.  However, where appropriate, the trial
judge can engage in a “limited weighing” of the evidence, similar to that
conducted by a preliminary inquiry judge when deciding whether to commit an
accused to trial: see R. v. Arcuri, 2001 SCC 54, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 828,
cited by McLachlin C.J. and Bastarache J. in Cinous, at para. 91. [23]                         
The ability of the trial judge to engage in
“limited weighing” depends on the type of evidence on the record.  “If there is
direct evidence as to every element of the defence, whether or not it is
adduced by the accused, the trial judge must put the defence to the jury”: Cinous,
at para. 88.  The trial judge may not engage in any weighing of direct
evidence, since this would require a consideration of the inherent reliability
of the evidence. [24]                         
“Direct evidence is evidence which, if believed,
resolves a matter in issue”: Cinous, at para. 88, citing D. Watt, Watt’s
Manual of Criminal Evidence (2001), at § 8.0.  However, “the mere
assertion by the accused of the elements of a defence does not constitute
direct evidence, and will not be sufficient to put the defence before a jury”: Cinous,
at para. 88.  An air of reality “cannot spring from what amounts to little more
than a bare, unsupported assertion by the accused”, which is otherwise
inconsistent with the totality of the accused’s own evidence: R. v. Park,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 836, at para. 35, per L’Heureux-Dubé J. For example, in R.
v. Gauthier, 2013 SCC 32, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 403, this Court, per Wagner J., suggested that a single
statement made by an accused that is otherwise inconsistent with the accused’s
“principal narrative” is insufficient to give an air of reality to a defence:
paras. 60-61. [25]                         
Where the evidence instead requires the drawing
of inferences in order to establish the elements of a defence, the trial judge
may engage in a limited weighing to determine whether the elements of the
defence can reasonably be inferred from the evidence.  “The judge does not draw
determinate factual inferences, but rather comes to a conclusion about the
field of factual inferences that could reasonably be drawn from the evidence”: Cinous,
at para. 91.  In conducting this limited weighing, the trial judge must examine
the totality of the evidence: Cinous, at para. 53; Park, at para.
13, per L’Heureux-Dubé J. [26]                         
As discussed in Cairney, in cases where
there is a real doubt as to whether the air of reality test is met, the defence
of provocation should be left to the jury.  However, this principle does not
exempt the trial judge from engaging in a limited weighing of the evidence,
where appropriate.  The fact remains that the trial judge exercises a
gatekeeper role in keeping from the jury defences that have no evidential
foundation.  Defences supported only by bald assertions that cannot reasonably
be borne out by the evidence, viewed in its totality, should be kept from the
jury. [27]                         
In the present appeal, Pappas relies upon his
confession as providing the grounds for the defence of provocation.  For the
purposes of the application of the air of reality test, we must assume that the
version of events described in that confession is true: Cinous, at
paras. 53 and 119.  The question is whether a properly instructed jury acting
reasonably could be left in a state of reasonable doubt as to the presence of
each of the elements of the defence of provocation.  There must be an
evidential foundation for both the objective and subjective elements of the
defence.  I will now examine each of these in turn. (2) The Objective Element [28]                         
The objective element asks whether there was a
wrongful act or insult by the deceased, sufficient to deprive an ordinary
person of the power of self-control.  Pappas argues that his confession
provides evidence of a wrongful act or insult, in the form of Kullman’s
statement that he had “great fucking insurance”.  Pappas’ confession describes
a sequence of events in which he had been consistently extorted for an 18-month
period and in which his mother had been the target of threats.  He contends
that Kullman’s reference to insurance caused him to finally snap. [29]                         
Unlike the companion case Cairney, this
appeal does not raise the issue of self-induced provocation.  Pappas did not
initiate an aggressive confrontation.  He did not confront Kullman at gunpoint;
his weapon remained concealed on him until the moment when he was allegedly
provoked.  Nor did he approach Kullman in an otherwise aggressive manner that
could predictably have induced threatening behaviour.  Rather, Pappas contends
that he tried to reason with Kullman, by asking him if the extortion could
cease. [30]                         
The relevant question is thus whether an
ordinary person, placed in Pappas’ circumstances, would have been deprived of
self-control upon being told, “You’re the best cash out I have and I got great
fucking insurance”. [31]                         
On the one hand, the ordinary person standard
must be contextualized to take into account the history of the relations
between Pappas and Kullman.  Pappas had been the target of ongoing extortion
and the safety of his mother had repeatedly been threatened. [32]                         
On the other hand, the ordinary person standard
seeks to ensure that only “behaviour which comports with contemporary society’s
norms and values will attract the law’s compassion”:  R. v. Tran, 2010
SCC 58, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 350, at para. 30.  The particular circumstances in
which the accused finds himself are relevant in determining the appropriate
standard of human behaviour against which to measure the accused’s conduct: Tran,
at para. 34.  Pappas had engaged in tax evasion that Kullman was threatening to
reveal to the Canada Revenue Agency.  He did not go to the police with respect
to Kullman’s extortion or threats.  Rather, he armed himself and attempted to dissuade
Kullman in person.  Arguably, this behaviour runs contrary to the ordinary
person standard. [33]                         
Nevertheless, as discussed in the companion case
Cairney, what would suffice to cause an ordinary person to lose
self-control is a question of degree that the jury is well placed to decide,
and one which, in cases of doubt, should be left to the jury.  The nature of
Kullman’s comments — a perceived threat against the safety of Pappas’ mother —
and the history of the relations between Kullman and Pappas, provide a minimal
evidential foundation for the objective element of the defence. (3) The Subjective Element [34]                         
In my view, there was no air of reality to the
subjective element of the defence of provocation.  The subjective element is
two-fold: “. . . (1) the accused must have acted in response to the
provocation; and (2) on the sudden before there was time for his or her passion
to cool”:  Tran, at para. 36. [35]                         
Of particular relevance to this appeal is the
requirement of “suddenness”.  The defence of provocation does not apply to
killings that are purely the result of vengeance or of anger, without any
attendant loss of self-control:  Tran, at para. 38; R. v. Parent,
2001 SCC 30, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 761, at para. 10.  To determine whether there was
an actual loss of self-control, the common law has long asked whether the
accused acted “on the sudden”.  The requirement of suddenness has two
dimensions: (i) the wrongful act or insult must be sudden, in that the accused
is subjectively unprepared for it and is caught by surprise, and (ii) the
accused must kill “on the sudden”, before there is time for his passion to cool:
Tran, at para. 38; R. v. Tripodi, [1955] S.C.R. 438, at p. 443. [36]                         
In my view, the trial judge committed an error of law by only
considering one of the two dimensions of “suddenness”.  She considered whether
there was evidence to support the contention that Pappas had killed Kullman
suddenly, before there was time for his passion to cool.  Indeed, the trial
judge reasoned that there was an air of reality to the subjective element on
the following basis: Mr. Pappas did say that it was the
word “insurance” that set him off, and he reacted immediately to that.  It is not up to me to weigh the sufficiency of that evidence.  I
am satisfied that there is an air of reality to the defence.  [Emphasis added;
A.R., vol. I, at p. 5.] However, she did not examine
whether the record could support a finding that Kullman’s provoking comments
were sudden, in the sense that Pappas was subjectively caught unprepared and
surprised by them.  This is an error of law, as “suddenness applies to
both the act of provocation and the accused’s reaction to it”: Tran, at
para. 38. [37]                         
The record cannot reasonably support an inference that Pappas was
caught unprepared by Kullman’s statement that he would continue the extortion
and that he had “great fucking insurance”.  Kullman had made similar statements
repeatedly in the past.  Viewed in its totality, the evidence suggests that
before setting out to visit Kullman, Pappas contemplated the possibility that
Kullman would persist with his extortion and threats, and that, in that case,
he would need to kill Kullman to end them. [38]                         
The principal narrative of Pappas’ confession is that he had
resolved to put an end to the extortion and to the threats against his mother,
through whatever means necessary.  He brought a gun loaded with hollow point
bullets to his encounter with Kullman.  When asked why he chose these bullets,
he explained: If you want to stop someone you use a
hollow point. You don’t use a regular ball round ‘cause that goes through them.
It doesn’t do any kind of damage. . . . It wasn’t supposed to be like that but
it kept building up. So, I bought them.  [A.R., vol. II, at p. 262] [39]                         
 At several points in his confession, Pappas referenced his
decision to do whatever was necessary to end the extortion and the threats to
his mother.  He described that he felt that the threats left him with little
choice other than to confront Kullman: You can’t imagine what it feels like
being put in [a] corner and then having to choose.  I didn’t wanna hurt him. I
didn’t care about me but it was my mom.  What was I supposed to? [sic]
He gave me no choice when he sent his friends — when he sent his friends
there.  He gave me no choice after that.  I started — I made — I made my
decision.  [A.R., vol. II, at p. 255] He described how the ongoing extortion and threats
led him to make the “choice”, and how “[a]fter 18 months [of extortion] it
became very simple” — “[i]t was either [Kullman] or my mom”: A.R., vol. II, at
p. 259-61.  He went on to explain how, when he was standing outside the door to
Kullman’s condominium, he flashed back to the moment when Kullman’s associates
visited his mother.  He said, “So, as soon as that image crossed my mind that’s
it, ‘Gun’s staying with me’. . . . [Kullman] made his choice, I made mine right
there”: A.R., vol. II, at p. 294.  He described in detail how Kullman’s
repeated refusals to put an end to the extortion gradually made it clear he
would have to resort to using the gun he had brought: We just started talking about things and I was
trying to tell him — I was trying to literally put my foot down right there,
trying to draw the line right there. . . . And, ah, he’s going, “Well, like I
say, you know, I mean I’ve got really good insurance”, you know? “And I’ve got
a good pay day coming up”, you know? . . . or so and he had good insurance. And
it just, you know, I’m trying to talk him out of it or so. It’s like I’m trying
to, you know, “Don’t go there, Brian.  Come on, man. Don’t go there”, because I
had something here on my hip . . . and I’m trying to do everything I can to
keep — to steer Brian away from that . . . .  . . .  I mean literally every time he would open his
goddamned mouth he would take one step closer to making me do what I had to do
and I didn’t want to go there.  [Emphasis added; A.R., vol. II, at pp. 299
and 302.] [40]                         
The only passages in Pappas’ confession that
support a loss of self-control are the ones in which he describes his reaction
upon hearing Kullman once again make reference to the fact that he had
“insurance”: It — it was just the way he said it. It
was just the way he said the word “insurance”. I knew what that meant. . . .
[A]fter that it was just my mind shut down and everything was just automatic. I
drew my gun, I chambered a round, I fired.  [A.R., vol. II, at p. 303] At this point, Pappas said that he
“snapped”. [41]                         
 The contention that Pappas was caught
unprepared by Kullman’s comments is outside the range of reasonable inferences
that can be drawn from this evidence.  It is supported by little more than
Pappas’ bald assertions that he “snapped” and “everything was just automatic”.  Viewed in its totality, the evidence suggests that Pappas’ mind
was prepared for the possibility that Kullman might reject his pleas to end the
extortion, “making [him] do what [he] had to do”.  His narrative, viewed as a
whole, describes a progressive building up of the resolve to kill Kullman. 
Accepting Pappas’ evidence that he “snapped” as true, this was not the result
of a sudden insult striking an unprepared mind.  It was simply the final stage
of doing what he had come to do — killing Kullman if that was necessary to stop
the extortion and threats. [42]                         
For these reasons, I conclude that there was no
air of reality to the subjective element of the defence of provocation on the
evidence.  The defence should not have been left to the jury.  Any errors in
the trial judge’s instructions to the jury regarding provocation were thus
irrelevant, and I need not examine the appellant’s other grounds of appeal. IV.  Conclusion [43]                         
I would dismiss the appeal and affirm the
conviction for second degree murder.                     The following are the reasons
delivered by                     Fish J. — I [44]                         
Like the Chief Justice, but for different
reasons, I would dismiss this appeal and affirm the appellant’s conviction at
trial. [45]                         
Unlike the Chief Justice, however, and with the
greatest of respect, I agree with the Court of Appeal’s unanimous conclusion
that the trial judge did not err in leaving to the jury the appellant’s defence
of provocation (2012 ABCA 221, 533 A.R. 294). [46]                         
The Court of Appeal divided only as to the
adequacy of the trial judge’s charge to the jury.  In this regard, I agree with
the majority that the trial judge committed no reviewable error in instructing
the jury as she did. [47]                         
In the result, the appeal fails. II [48]                         
There is no dispute that trial judges must leave
for the jury’s consideration every defence available on the record, subject
only to exceptional circumstances which have no application here.  To do
otherwise is to usurp the function of the jury and to deprive the accused of an
enshrined right under our system of justice. [49]                         
This is not new law.  In Henderson v. The
King, [1948] S.C.R. 226, for example, Kellock J. recognized that “[i]t is a
paramount principle of law that when a defence, however weak it may be, is
raised by a person charged, it should be fairly put before the jury” (p. 241;
see also Taschereau J., at p. 237). [50]                         
For some offences, the accused may choose trial
by jury; for others, as in this case, trial by jury is mandatory.  In either
instance, absent a directed verdict of acquittal, the determination of guilt or
innocence falls exclusively within the province of the jury.  That bedrock
principle is violated whenever a trial judge withholds from the jury a defence
that it is entitled — indeed, required by law — to consider. [51]                         
This case hardly invites concern over the
submission of weak defences to juries.  On the contrary, it illustrates why our
system of justice supposes that juries, properly instructed by judges, can be
trusted to reject defences that do not raise in their minds a reasonable doubt
as to the guilt of the accused.  That is what happened here.  The trial judge
felt bound to put to the jury the appellant’s defence of provocation — though
she found, understandably, that the evidence in support of the defence was “not
strong”.  And the jury, properly instructed and acting reasonably, rejected the
defence. [52]                         
In determining whether a defence must be
submitted to the jury, trial judges must take care not to infuse what has come
to be known as the “air of reality” test with any significance beyond the
governing standard that has prevailed for centuries.  That standard, though not
always formulated in identical terms, has never varied in substance:  A defence
must be put to the jury if there is any evidence upon which a properly
instructed jury, acting reasonably, could be left with a reasonable doubt as to
the guilt of the accused. [53]                         
The phrase “air of reality” connotes neither
plausibility nor likelihood.  The “air of reality test [is not] intended to
assess whether the defence is likely, unlikely, somewhat likely, or very likely
to succeed at the end of the day”:  R. v. Buzizi, 2013 SCC 27, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 248, at para. 16, citing R.
v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 3, at para. 54.  Moreover, in
determining whether to leave a defence to the jury, the trial judge assumes
that the evidence relied upon by the accused is true:  R. v. Fontaine,
2004 SCC 27, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 702, at para. 72; Cinous, at para. 53. [54]                         
The trial judge is not permitted to make
determinations about the credibility of witnesses, weigh the evidence, make
findings of fact, or draw determinate factual inferences:  R. v. Gauthier,
2013 SCC 32, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 403, at para. 25; Fontaine, at para. 72; Cinous, at para.
54.  Indeed, the “air of reality” test has been found by this Court to be
“reasonable” and “valid” precisely because the trial judge does not
weigh the evidence and thus “cannot be accused of usurping the role of the
jury or violating the accused’s rights”:  R. v. Osolin, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 595, at p. 691. [55]                         
In the present
context, I find particularly apt this passage from the concurring reasons of
Sopinka J. in Osolin, at pp. 653-54: With respect
to the defence of mistaken belief, I agree with Cory J. that s. 265(4) “simply
sets out the basic requirements which are applicable to all defences” (p. 676)
and that it requires no more of the accused than the discharge of an
evidentiary burden to adduce or point to some evidence on the basis of which a
reasonable jury properly instructed could acquit.  I believe we are all in
agreement in this respect.  Indeed, this is the basis for our determination
that it is constitutional.  The term “evidentiary burden” and the definition I
have set out are well known to trial judges and well accepted.  I cannot
understand how the addition of the term “air of reality” helps in understanding
the duty of a trial judge with respect to this defence.  I am concerned that
when an attempt is made to add to the definition of a basic concept in the
criminal law, it only creates confusion. [56]                         
While the Court has recognized that a “limited
weighing” of the evidence will be permitted, exceptionally, where the evidence
relied on by the accused is circumstantial, no weighing is permitted with
respect to direct evidence.  As the Chief Justice explains, “[t]he trial judge
may not engage in any weighing of direct evidence, since this would require a
consideration of the inherent reliability of the evidence” (para. 23). [57]                         
Accordingly, where there is direct evidence as
to all elements of a defence, the trial judge must put the defence to the jury
since, “[b]y definition, the only conclusion that needs to be reached in such a
case is whether the evidence is true” (Cinous, at para. 88).  And
whether the evidence is true, or at least raises a reasonable doubt as to the
guilt of the accused, is a matter ultimately reserved to the jury. [58]                         
In this case, the appellant’s evidence at trial
constitutes direct evidence and relates the facts upon which his defence of
provocation rests.  Where an accused gives evidence as to all the elements of
the defence, as the appellant did in this case, the trial judge is bound to
leave the assessment of that evidence to the jury:  R. v. Faid, [1983] 1
S.C.R. 265, at p. 276. [59]                         
According to the Chief Justice, “[t]he air of reality test . . . requires more
than ‘some’ or ‘any’ evidence of the elements of a defence” (para. 22 (emphasis
added)).  In my respectful view, one should not impute to this passage a
meaning that it cannot have been intended to bear. [60]                         
As the Court made plain
in Cinous: The full question is whether there is
evidence (some evidence, any evidence) upon which a properly instructed jury
acting judicially could acquit.  If there is any or some such
evidence, then the air of reality hurdle is cleared.  If there is no
such evidence, then the air of reality hurdle is not cleared. [Emphasis in
original; para. 62.] And, leaving no room for
doubt in this regard, the Court later reiterated “the full question, which is
whether there is evidence (some evidence, any evidence) on the basis of
which a properly instructed jury acting reasonably could base an acquittal if
it believed the evidence to be true” (para. 83 (emphasis added)). [61]                         
I recognize that the Court, in R. v. Mayuran,
2012 SCC 31, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 162, at para. 21, stated that “[i]t is not enough
for there to be ‘some evidence’ supporting the defence (Cinous, at para.
83).”  This passage must be read in line with established authority, including
the paragraph in Cinous to which it refers.  As appears from that very
paragraph, the Court has consistently held that the decisive question is
whether there is evidence upon which a properly instructed jury could
reasonably acquit:  Fontaine, at para. 71; Cinous, at para.
83; R. v. Thibert, [1996] 1 S.C.R. 37, at para. 7; Faid,
at p. 276; Parnerkar v. The Queen, [1974] S.C.R. 449, at p. 454. [62]                         
These principles are well settled.  They align
with the trust our criminal justice system places in the collective good sense
of juries.  And, they breathe life into the accused’s Charter  rights to
be presumed innocent (s. 11 (d)) and to have the benefit of a jury trial
where the maximum punishment for the alleged offence is at least five years
imprisonment (s. 11 (f)). III [63]                         
I turn now to the application of these
principles to the facts of this case. [64]                         
I agree with the Chief Justice that the
appellant discharged his evidentiary burden on the objective component
of his defence of provocation.  In my respectful view, he met his evidentiary
obligation on the subjective component as well. [65]                         
The subjective component (or “element”) of the
defence of provocation requires that the accused acted (1) in response
to the provocative act or conduct; and (2) on the sudden before there was time
for his or her passion to cool:  Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, s. 232 ; see also R. v. Tran, 2010 SCC
58, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 350, at
para. 36.  The Chief Justice emphasizes that the second, “suddenness” portion
of the inquiry applies to both the provocation itself and the accused’s
reaction to it (para. 36).  In her opinion, there is no evidentiary basis upon
which a jury could reasonably conclude that the wrongful provocation was
sudden, in the sense that it surprised Mr. Pappas by catching his mind
unprepared. [66]                         
The appellant’s evidence was that the deceased
had been extorting him for 18 months leading up to the killing (A.R., vol. II,
at p. 238).  When Mr. Pappas resisted, the deceased implied that he was
prepared to have Mr. Pappas’s mother killed (p. 239).  On the night in
question, the appellant did carry a concealed weapon.  He testified, however,
that he did not intend to use it (pp. 242, 245 and 292-93).  The deceased
responded to Mr. Pappas’s overtures by again implicitly threatening to kill his
mother (p. 303).  At this point, according to Mr. Pappas, his “mind shut down
and everything was just automatic. I drew my gun, I chambered a round, I fired”
(p. 304). [67]                         
The sudden and unexpected nature of the
deceased’s provocative act emerges from the timeline of events on the night of
the killing.  Describing the deceased’s offer to give him money for a plane
ticket, and the deceased’s subsequent veiled threat to kill his mother, Mr.
Pappas testified: He does me a favour from his point of
view one minute . . . and then the next minute he just told me what’s going to
happen . . . if I don’t get back and [indiscernible]
his fucking expensive toys. [A.R., vol. II, at p. 244] [68]                         
Accepting this evidence as true, Mr. Pappas
plainly acted “on the sudden” — he “didn’t think about it” (A.R., vol. II, at
p. 241), but reacted immediately to the deceased’s provocation before there was
time for his passion to cool.  Indeed, the Chief Justice accepts that this
satisfies one dimension of the subjective “suddenness” inquiry. [69]                         
According to the Chief Justice, however, the
record cannot support a finding that the provocation itself was sudden
because the deceased “had made similar statements repeatedly in the past”
(para. 37). [70]                         
In R. v. Cairney, 2013 SCC 55, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 420, Justice Abella
addresses the manifest difficulties presented by a “predictability of
consequences” approach with regard to the objective element of provocation. 
The same holds true for the subjective element — the mere fact that the
deceased had made similar threats to the accused in the past does not mean that
the accused would have anticipated, or been prepared for, subsequent threats of
the same sort.  Plainly, a reiterated threat or insult can cause a previously
unprovoked person to “snap”. [71]                         
The Court explicitly addressed this very
possibility in Thibert.  In considering whether a provocation is
“sudden” in the sense that it strikes upon a mind unprepared for it, the Court
held that the background and history of
the relationship between the accused and the deceased should be taken into
consideration.  This is particularly appropriate if it reveals a long history
of insults, leveled at the accused by the deceased. . . . “[T]he last affront
may be comparatively trivial, merely the last straw that makes the worm turn,
so to speak”.  [para. 20]  (Citing
G. Williams, Textbook of Criminal Law (2nd ed. 1983).) [72]                         
In this regard, the Chief Justice focuses on
whether Mr. Pappas’s “mind was prepared for the possibility that Kullman might
reject his pleas to end the extortion” (para. 41).  With respect, however, the
alleged provocative act was not the deceased’s failure to end the
extortion; rather, it was his sudden utterance — “I got great fucking
insurance” — which Mr. Pappas understood as a threat to his mother’s life
(A.R., vol. II, at p. 241).  This is amply supported by Mr. Pappas’s evidence
that he shot the deceased in order to protect his mother (A.R., vol. II, at pp.
240-42, 247 and 254-55). [73]                         
Nor am I able to share the Chief Justice’s
characterization as “little more than . . . bald assertions” the appellant’s
evidence that he was unprepared for the deceased’s comments (para. 41). [74]                         
In Osolin, this Court affirmed that, in
order for a defence to be put to the jury, there must be “evidence beyond [a]
mere assertion” of the elements of the defence (pp. 686-87).  Using the defence
of provocation as an example, the Court held that while a “bare assertion” by
the accused — “I was provoked” — would not suffice, the “requisite evidence may
come from the detailed testimony of the accused alone” (p. 687 (emphasis
added)). [75]                         
Read in this light, Mr. Pappas’s detailed
evidence of the circumstances surrounding the alleged provocation, including
his perceptions and explanations for his actions, can hardly be equated with a
“bare assertion” that he was provoked. [76]                         
Neither can Mr. Pappas’s description of the
provoking act be considered a single statement that is inconsistent with his
“principal narrative”:  Gauthier, at para. 61, cited by the Chief
Justice, at para. 24. [77]                         
I agree with the Chief Justice that the “only
passages in [Mr.] Pappas’ confession that support a loss of self-control are
the ones in which he describes his reaction upon hearing Kullman once again
make reference to the fact that [Kullman] had ‘insurance’” (para. 40).  These
descriptions constitute direct evidence of the suddenness of the provocation
and must be taken as true.  As such, they demonstrate that the appellant
discharged his evidentiary burden on the “sudden provocation” element of the
defence. [78]                         
Whether these passages are “inconsistent” with
other evidence, however, necessarily requires a weighing of the evidence and an
assessment of its reliability.  That determination must properly be left to the
jury.  And the trial judge’s decision whether to leave the defence to the jury
must, in any event, be based on “the construction of the evidence most favourable
to the accused’s position” (Cinous, at para. 98).  The trial judge in
this case therefore committed no error in finding that Mr. Pappas’s evidence —
if accepted as true in whole or in part — was capable of supporting the
inference that the deceased’s comments constituted a sudden and unexpected act
of provocation. IV [79]                         
For the foregoing reasons, I am unable to agree
with the Chief Justice that the trial judge committed a reviewable error in
leaving the appellant’s defence of provocation to the jury.  As mentioned at
the outset as well, I would nevertheless dismiss the appeal for the reasons of
the majority in the Court of Appeal.                     Appeal
dismissed.                     Solicitors
for the appellant:  Ruttan Bates, Calgary.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Attorney General of Alberta, Calgary.   