  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation:
  R. v. Named Person B, 2013 SCC 9, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 405 Date:
  20130222 Docket:
  34053  Between: Named
Person B Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent -
and - Jacqueline
Benoît, Raymond Bouchard, Denis Corriveau, Marcel Demers, Raymond
Desfossés, Gilles Dubois, Frédéric Faucher, Jean-Claude Gagné, Denis
Gaudreault and Gérard Hubert Others and Director
of Public Prosecutions, Attorney General of Ontario and Criminal
Lawyers’ Association (Ontario) Interveners   Notice:  On January 24
and December 20, 2011, the Court issued orders sealing the record in the matter
of Named Person B v. Her Majesty the Queen (34053) and banning the
publication of any information within the sealed record.  The reasons for
judgment are not subject to these orders.   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Deschamps,* Fish, Abella,
Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 49)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 50 to 153)  Abella J. (McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish,
  Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)  Cromwell J. (Rothstein J. concurring)  R. v. Named Person B, 2013 SCC 9,
[2013] 1 S.C.R. 405  Named Person
B                                                                                              Appellant v. Her Majesty
The Queen                                                                               Respondent and Jacqueline Benoît, Raymond Bouchard, Denis Corriveau, Marcel Demers, Raymond Desfossés, Gilles Dubois, Denis
Gaudreault and Gérard Hubert                                                               Others and Director of Public Prosecutions, Attorney General of Ontario and Criminal
Lawyers’ Association (Ontario)                                                   Interveners Indexed as:  R. v. Named Person B 2013 SCC 9 File No.:  34053. 2012:  April 11; 2013:  February 22. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Deschamps,*
Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the superior court of québec                     Criminal
law — Evidence — Informer privilege — Individual with informer privilege with
one police force providing information relating to himself and others to second
police force — Whether individual has status of police informer with second
police force — Whether implicit promise of confidentiality by second police
force exists as result of nexus between two police forces.                     B
approached a first police force to give information about violent crimes and
was promised confidentiality by that police force.  Two days later, the first
police force transferred B and the information he had provided to the Sûreté du
Québec (“SQ”).  Over the next five years, B continued to cooperate with the SQ
and to give information about serious crimes.  At the end of that period, the
Crown ordered the SQ to redact B’s name and any information that could identify
him from all documents and to put those documents under seal.  It also brought
an application to determine if B benefitted from police informer privilege with
the SQ.  The application judge found that B did not have informer status.                     Held
(Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. dissenting):  The appeal is allowed and
the matter remitted for reconsideration.                     Per
McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.:
 While the application judge recognized that a promise of confidentiality could
be either explicit or implicit, he undertook no analysis into whether an
implicit promise could have been inferred.  In particular, the application
judge failed to make any findings about whether B’s transfer from the first
police force to the SQ, the relationship between the two police forces, and the
similarities in B’s relationships with both, could have led someone in B’s
position to believe, on reasonable grounds, that the status he had with the
first police force would continue with the second.                     The possibility of an implied promise of confidentiality emerges from
this record based on the nexus between the first police force and the SQ and
the SQ’s failure to clarify to B what his status was.  B’s interactions with
the SQ originated in his relationship as a confidential informant with the
first police force and the two police forces cooperated in handling B over the
following years.  In addition, the evidence is undisputed that no one ever told
B that he ceased to be a confidential informant when he was transferred to the
SQ, even though it is also undisputed that he repeatedly asked the SQ to
clarify his status.                     B
approached the first police force to provide information about violent crimes. 
He was promised informer privilege with respect to the information that he
provided to that force.  In its investigations, the SQ used confidential
information B had given to the first police force prior to the SQ’s
involvement.                     Based
on B’s information, the two police forces worked together and dealt with B interchangeably. 
An SQ officer acknowledged that the first police force and the SQ were
effectively operating together in respect of an investigation that developed
around B’s information.  This interconnection is also reflected in a letter
sent by an officer of the first police force, which acknowledges B’s
confidentiality with the first force and implies that that force believed that
B had a similar status with the SQ.                     In
addition to the temporal and operational nexus between the two forces, B insistently asked what his status was and never received a clear
answer.  This may well have led someone in B’s position
to reasonably believe that his identity would be protected.  While the SQ
officers were adamant that they did not think of B as an informer, they
do not appear to have shared this view with B.  B was promised confidentiality
by the first police force because his cooperation put his life at risk.  The
risk did not change when he was transferred to the SQ two days later and there is no doubt that the SQ knew of B’s protected status with the
first police force.  At the very least, the SQ sent mixed signals to B
concerning the confidentiality of his statements.  The net effect of these
mixed signals from the SQ on B’s reasonable expectation of confidentiality must
be decided at a new hearing.                     The
fact that one police force has granted informer status to an individual is not,
on its own, a sufficient basis for a claim of informer privilege with another
police force.  However, given the nexus between the
forces in handling B, and given the essential continuity of B’s relationship
with both, B may well have had reasonable grounds to believe that the
protection promised by the first police force would continue with the ongoing
flow of information that he was providing to the SQ.                     Per
Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. (dissenting):  To decide this case, the
concrete realities of it and the limits of appellate review must first be
assessed.  The realities are that the application judge expressly rejected B’s
evidence that his status as a confidential police informer was ever promised or
even discussed.  He further found that the police had done nothing that would
permit B to understand that he was to become a confidential police informer.  While
it may in some rare cases be theoretically possible for a person to be both a
Crown witness and a confidential police informer, it was not possible in B’s
situation.  The application judge recognized this as does B’s own counsel
before this Court.  The fact that the police have an obligation to protect a
person has nothing to do with whether that person is a confidential police informer. 
Thus, there is nothing inconsistent with the police position that, on the one
hand, they felt obliged to protect B and on the other, that B was not a
confidential police informer.                     Any
implication that B inquired about his status as a police informer and was not
given a straight answer is not supported by either the application judge’s
findings or by this record.  In fact, the officers who testified on this issue
repeatedly asserted that a conversation about B’s status as a source or
confidential informer simply never occurred.  Indeed, none of the officers
involved failed to give B a straight answer about whether he was a confidential
source because there were no such discussions.                     It
is not open to an appellate court to reweigh the evidence in the record or to
draw inferences from the evidence, which the application judge refused to draw,
absent some clear and determinative error on the part of the judge.  Thus, it
is not open to this Court on appeal to draw any inference from this record that
B inquired whether or not he was a source and did not receive a straight answer. 
Such an inference is not only contrary to the evidence that the application
judge accepted but it is also contrary to the judge’s express finding of fact
that the SQ did nothing that could have led B to believe that he would become a
confidential police source.                     On
the issue of alleged police promises of confidentiality, the application judge
was alive to and expressly noted that there was inconsistency in the evidence. 
A review of the record shows that there was indeed inconsistency or confusion in
the evidence about what was or was not confidential.  Sorting this out is the
job of the application judge, not of an appellate court.  The judge did so and
there is no basis to interfere with his findings.                     The
application judge did not fail to consider whether a promise of confidential informer
status could be implicit in this case.  Rather, the judge’s factual findings
and the record amply support the conclusion that he was careful to consider
whether any promise was made implicitly as well as explicitly, even though B’s
evidence was solely to the effect that the SQ had made repeated explicit
promises.  This was the only basis for his professed belief that he had informer
status.                     The
judge was alive to B’s dealings with other police agencies.  Having heard that
evidence, however, he found as a fact that the evidence in the case required
that B’s dealings with the SQ be considered differently.  The judge referred to
several differences in support of this conclusion, which is amply supported by
the evidence.                     In
light of the application judge’s extensive findings, there is no evidence to
support the view that there may have been some implicit promise in this case.  In
fact, this possibility is inconsistent with B’s own clear
and unequivocal evidence that the claim of informer privilege arose solely from
alleged express promises, which the application judge concluded had never been
made.  Moreover, the judge accepted police evidence that there was never even
any thought of making B a confidential informer and that they did nothing that
could let B understand that he had that status.  The judge also found that it
was some years after B’s initial dealings with the SQ that B started to claim
the status of a confidential police informer.  These findings leave no room for
the imputed or implied promise theory.                     Finally,
the judge’s conclusions that B actually knew that he did not have informer
privilege and that B’s claim of that status was an after-the-fact exercise of
opportunism make irrelevant any possibility that some hypothetical person in
B’s circumstances might have thought that the promise was implicit.  B knew he
had no such promise and provided the information anyway.  B was a disappointed
suitor for a potentially lucrative co-operating witness contract and an
opportunist, not a police informer.                     In
light of the record, there is no reason to interfere with the application
judge’s findings of fact.  Nothing in this case, however, should be taken as
undermining the importance of the police being clear with potential sources about
their status; quite the contrary.  Given the important role that
informer status plays in the detection and prosecution of crime, courts must
not undermine its effectiveness by condoning police actions that leave
potential informers uncertain or confused as to their status.  The application
judge in this case was clearly alive to these concerns, as he ought to have
been, and reached the conclusions he did after a careful and thorough review of
all of the evidence.  His decision should not be disturbed. Cases Cited By Abella J. By Cromwell J. (dissenting)                     R.
v. Stinchcombe, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 326; Bisaillon v. Keable, [1983] 2
S.C.R. 60; R. v. Leipert, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 281; Named Person v.
Vancouver Sun, 2007 SCC 43, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 253; R. v. Babes (2000),
146 C.C.C. (3d) 465; R. v. Barros, 2011 SCC 51, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 368; R.
v. Basi, 2009 SCC 52, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 389.                     Guy Bertrand, for
the appellant.                     Jacques Casgrain and Maxime
Laganière, for the respondent.                     Louis
Belleau, for the Others.                     François Lacasse and Nancy L. Irving,
for the intervener the Director of Public Prosecutions.                     Susan Magotiaux, for
the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario.                     Anil K. Kapoor
and Lindsay L. Daviau, for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’
Association (Ontario).                     The
judgment of McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Moldaver and Karakatsanis
JJ. was delivered by [1]                             
Abella J.  — This appeal involves an individual, “B”,[1] who was guaranteed
confidentiality by one police force and then transferred to another. The second
police force failed to answer B’s repeated questions about his status, nor did
it at any time clarify what that status was.  The disposition of this case
rests on the consequences of the information vacuum created by the second
police force and, in particular, on whether an inference could reasonably have
been drawn that an implicit promise of confidentiality was made based on the
nexus between the two police forces. [2]                             
The application judge held that B’s status as a
confidential informant with one police force did not automatically make him a
confidential informant for the other. The application judge also found that B
lied about being expressly promised confidential informer status by the second
police force. But the inquiry should not have ended there.  What remained
unanswered was whether, due to the interaction between the police forces and
other police conduct, there was a nexus between the two police forces and, if
so, whether B was implicitly promised that the confidentiality he enjoyed with
one police force would continue to the other. The application judge accepted
the testimony of officers in the second police force concerning their
interactions with B. Significantly, that testimony included acknowledgments
that B repeatedly asked what his status was, and was never clearly told that he
was not a police informer. [3]                             
The application judge concluded that B’s status
with each police force was to be treated differently. He never explained why. B placed himself at risk by providing the Sûreté du Québec (“SQ”) with information leading to the investigation and
prosecution of violent crime.  I see an error in the
application judge’s failure to make any findings about whether the
transfer, the relationship between the two police forces, and the similarities
in B’s relationships with both, could have led someone in B’s position to
believe, on reasonable grounds, that the status he had with the first police
force would continue with the police force to which he was transferred. [4]                             
The record reveals that these are live issues.
None of the application judge’s findings address them, even accepting all of
the findings delineated by Justice Cromwell. This, with respect, leaves a key
question unanswered, namely, whether an implicit promise of confidentiality was
made in these circumstances. Background [5]                             
Motivated by fear for his safety and a desire
for vengeance, B met with two officers of the first police force in order to
give them information.  B’s information implicated a number of people who were
involved in violent criminal activity and in which he admitted to having been
involved as well.  B was promised confidentiality and given an informant code
in that police force’s system.  The police force then released B, but because
the criminal activity was outside its authority, the force transmitted the
information it got from B to the SQ. [6]                             
 Two days later, B was transferred to the SQ and
two SQ officers arrested him for his crimes. B continued to want to cooperate
and to give information both about his crimes and his prior criminal
activities.  In the next several days, B made a number of statements to the SQ
relating to them. [7]                             
B was given an informant code in the SQ’s system
and, for five years, continued to cooperate with the SQ.  Most of B’s
declarations to the SQ were preceded by a statement promising him that the
information he provided would not be used against him in a proceeding, except
for perjury, but that charges could be brought against him if they were
supported by independent evidence. [8]                             
During the course of those five years, B pleaded
guilty to one of his violent crimes and was sentenced for it. [9]                             
At the end of the five years, the Crown ordered
the SQ to redact B’s name and any information that could identify him from all
documents and to put those documents under seal.   A few months later, two SQ
officers went to the penitentiary to have B sign a document entitled [translation] “Waiver of Informer
Privilege” — a waiver of his right to invoke police informer privilege.  He did
not sign.   Thereafter, B’s name does not appear in any new documents, and was
replaced with the word “source”. [10]                         
 The Crown brought an application to clarify B’s
status and determine if he benefitted from a police informer privilege that
assured the confidentiality of his identity.  The hearing took place in closed
session, with documents under seal. [11]                         
At the hearing, B testified that he was told by
the SQ on several occasions that he was an informer.  He relied on the fact
that he was attributed an informant code by the SQ, that he was asked to sign a
“Waiver of Informer Privilege”, and that he was identified as a “source” in any
documents created after the Crown requested the general redaction.  For its
part, the Crown argued that the SQ expected B to become a cooperating witness;
that B was told on many occasions that his statements could be used against
him; that B’s identity was not concealed by the SQ in documents and statements
prior to the sealing of the documents; and that the police had made limited
disclosure of one of B’s statements on one occasion. The Crown suggested that
this was inconsistent with B’s testimony that he had been promised that
his identity would remain protected. [12]                         
The application judge found that the first
police force’s officers had promised to keep B’s identity confidential in
exchange for the information he provided.  All of B’s statements to that police
force, therefore, were protected by informer privilege.  This is not contested
by any of the parties. [13]                         
The application judge concluded, however, that [translation] “[t]he evidence requires
that [B’s] situation be viewed differently depending on whether information was
being disclosed to the [first police force]  or to investigators from the
Sûreté du Québec”.  As to B’s status with the SQ, the application judge saw the
evidence as presenting “two diametrically opposed versions” of events.  The
application judge rejected B’s evidence that the SQ had expressly told him that
he was a confidential informer, and accepted the SQ’s denial that any such
promise was made. [14]                         
While he noted that it was [translation] “odd”
that the police would ask a person to renounce his right to invoke police
informer privilege if it had never been offered in the first place, the
application judge nonetheless ultimately accepted the testimony of the Crown’s
witnesses and found that B’s testimony was not credible.  He therefore
concluded that B had never been promised police informer status by the SQ in
exchange for his statements. [15]                         
But the application judge undertook no analysis
into whether the promise was implicit in the circumstances because of the nexus
between the first police force, who had expressly granted B informer status,
and the SQ, to whom the first force immediately transferred B because they
lacked jurisdiction over the crimes he was describing. That oversight was based
on the application judge’s conclusion that B’s relationships with the first
police force and the SQ had to be treated differently.  The application judge
therefore ignored B’s relationship with the first force entirely when assessing
his status vis-à-vis the SQ. [16]                         
The application judge never explained why the
two forces had to be treated differently, nor did he make any findings related
to the issue. Instead, his analysis unfolded based on this unexplored
assumption. Yet B only became involved with the SQ due to his collaboration
with the first police force as a confidential informer.  The failure to
consider this nexus, in my respectful view, meant that the application judge
did not consider whether the police conduct gave rise to an implicit promise of
protected status.  In other words, would the police conduct have led someone in
B’s position to believe, on reasonable grounds, that his protected status would
continue when he and his information were transferred to the SQ? [17]                         
I would set aside the application judge’s order
and direct that a new hearing take place to determine B’s status in light of
the nexus between the police forces. Analysis [18]                         
In R. v. Barros, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 368,
this Court held that “not everybody who provides
information to the police thereby becomes a confidential informant” (para.
31).  The Court was clear, however, that “the promise [of protection and
confidentiality] need not be express [and] may be implicit in the circumstances”
(para. 31, citing Bisaillon v. Keable, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 60). The legal question is whether, objectively,
an implicit promise of confidentiality can be inferred from the circumstances. 
In other words, would the police conduct have led a person in the shoes of the
potential informer to believe, on reasonable grounds, that his or her identity
would be protected? Related to this, is there evidence from which it can
reasonably be inferred that the potential informer believed that informer
status was being or had been bestowed on him or her? An implicit promise of
informer privilege may arise even if the police did not intend to confer that
status or consider the person an informer, so long as the police conduct in all
the circumstances could have created reasonable expectations of
confidentiality. [19]                         
The application judge recognized that the
promise of confidentiality could be either explicit or implicit, but he
undertook no analysis into whether an implicit promise could have been inferred
from the circumstances of the relationship between the two police forces. In
fairness, a theory based on an implicit promise of confidentiality was not
specifically argued before the application judge. The arguments before him
centred on B’s claims that SQ officers had expressly and repeatedly told
him that his identity would remain confidential, which the officers denied.
Once the application judge found against B on that point, he effectively
overlooked the possibility that the police conduct, even in the absence of any
express statements, could have amounted to an implicit promise of
confidentiality. [20]                         
Justice Cromwell states that there is no live
issue as to whether B received an implicit promise of confidentiality,
because the application judge effectively found that B knew that he did
not have informant status with the SQ. With respect, those were not the
application judge’s findings. I agree that if there had been a finding that B
actually knew that he did not have informant status, the inquiry would end
there. But there was no such finding. What the application judge did was to
reject B’s claims that the SQ expressly promised him confidential
informer status. He invoked B’s [translation]
“doubtful credibility . . . and . . . obvious opportunism”. In other words, the
application judge found that B lied in saying that the SQ officers expressly
promised him confidentiality in order to bolster his claim. That does not,
however, amount to a finding that B knew all along that he did not benefit from
confidentiality with the SQ. [21]                         
Similarly, B’s failure to testify about an
implicit promise does not necessarily mean that no such promise was made or
that he knew that informer status had been withheld. While B may have been found
not to be credible about receiving explicit promises of confidentiality,
the evidence in the record of a nexus between the police forces leaves open the
possibility of an implicit promise. B’s “obvious opportunism” and lack of
credibility do not, in the circumstances of this case, close the door to
finding an implicit promise of confidentiality, nor do they dispense
with the need for the application judge to examine the nexus between the
investigations and determine whether it gave rise to such a promise.  It is
hard to speculate what the application judge’s findings might have been
had he specifically turned his mind to the issue. [22]                         
For me, the possibility of an implied promise of
confidentiality emerges from this record based on the nexus between the first
police force and the SQ, and the SQ’s failure to clarify to B what his status
was. First, B’s interactions with the SQ originated in his relationship as a
confidential informant with the first police force and the two police forces
cooperated in handling B over the following years. In addition, the evidence is
undisputed that no one ever told B that he ceased to be a confidential
informant when he was transferred to the SQ, even though it is also undisputed
that he repeatedly asked the SQ to clarify his status. [23]                         
The key issue is the nexus between the police
forces. B advanced the argument that all police forces
are “indivisible” with respect to police informer privilege such that, where
one police force extends a promise of confidentiality to an informer, that
status will continue to attach to the person when he or she is transferred to
another force.  I see no need for such a blunt “indivisibility” rule.  The fact
that one police force has granted informer status to an individual is not, on
its own, a sufficient basis for a claim of informer privilege with another
police force. [24]                         
This is not to say that B’s transfer from one
police force to another is irrelevant to whether B had reason to believe that
he had been given informer privilege by the SQ. Given the interactions between
the two police forces in handling B, and given the essential continuity of B’s
relationship with both forces, in my view B may have had reasonable grounds to
believe that the protection promised by the first police force would continue with
the ongoing flow of information that he was providing to the SQ. [25]                         
B approached the first police force in order to
provide information about violent crimes.  He was
promised informer privilege with respect to the
information that he provided to that force from their initial meeting onwards.  One of the two officers who had been at that meeting explained
that he perceived a strong need for confidentiality as of that first meeting,
given the risk to B’s safety and the sensitive information he was providing
concerning serious criminal activity: [translation] We can’t afford to put [his] safety at risk. 
One thing that’s absolutely certain is that we wouldn’t have time to, as we
say, . . . “code” [him] at that time; there’s a coding procedure and
all that.  But in our minds, everything Named Person B told us . . . went into
a classified file to protect [his] . . . shall we say, secrets.  . . .   . . . everything that was said .
. . [h]ad to remain highly confidential, and there was evidence there that
related to past investigations, [violent crimes].   We couldn’t afford to
. . . we couldn’t give it a low classification.  It had to be given a
high classification . . . . [26]                         
In its investigations, the SQ used confidential
information B had given to the first police force during their initial
meetings, prior to the SQ’s involvement. Significantly, that information was
unrelated to the charges against B, and included a list of
individuals involved in violent criminal activity. In other words, while it is
true that the SQ arrested B for a violent crime that he committed, the SQ
treated B as much more than merely a suspect in a serious crime. B was
expected, and in fact continued to provide the SQ with information about
violent criminal activity, just as he had done with the first police force. [27]                         
There is no doubt that the SQ knew of B’s
protected status with the first police force.  One of the SQ officers who
arrested B acknowledged that when the SQ picked B up, they knew that B had
provided [translation] “a lot of
information” to the first police force, that B wanted to cooperate by providing
information, that he was “protected” by that other
force, and that the SQ would have to continue to protect him: [translation] Well, we knew from the beginning that Named Person B wanted to give
information, there was no secret about it, and when we took charge of Named
Person B, it was because the [first police force] told us [he] was implicated in
[violent criminal activity, for which] the Sûreté du Québec [was] responsible.
. . .  So we met [him] as a [violent crime] suspect, but we knew that this
person . . . wanted to co-operate with the Sûreté.  We knew that
[he]’d given information to the [first police force].  We knew that this was a
person who was protected by the [first police force].  We knew that we were the
ones who would continue to protect [him].  So, we were in a sense [his]
controllers. [Emphasis added.] [28]                         
 Another SQ officer who had dealt with B from
the beginning acknowledged that he knew that B was coded as a “source” by the
other police force when he first talked to him upon his transfer from that
force.  The exchange at the hearing was as follows: [translation]  Q     Was [he] already classified as a “source” by the Quebec
police?  . . .  A     I would say, to the best of my knowledge, I would say no.  . . .  Q     Did you know that [he] had been one for the [first police
force]  or that [he] still was one for the [first police force]?  A     A “source” for the [first police force]?  Q     Yeah.  A     It’d been coded that way . . . . [Emphasis
added.]  [29]                         
Notes taken two years after B’s arrest by an
officer of the first police force following a conversation with an SQ officer
(introduced as fresh evidence), confirm that the first police force put the SQ
on notice that B benefitted from confidentiality: [translation]  [The SQ officer and I]
discussed [B] and the information that source had given [the two officers of
the first police force who first met with B].  Informer privilege was
discussed.  On this subject, I said that [B] had the privilege because [he] had
given the information as a source and [he] had an expectation of
confidentiality.  I told [the SQ officer] that in
my opinion, though I’m not a lawyer, if the information is confidential and if
it is included in [any document], it should be redacted.  To be confirmed with
a lawyer. [30]                         
For five years, B continued to provide the SQ
with wide-ranging information dealing with violent crimes. SQ officers kept
going back to him as a source, and his information led to the investigation and
prosecution of many other crimes. [31]                         
During the years when he was being questioned, B
knew that he was being dealt with interchangeably by both police forces.  At
various points, he stayed under the first police force’s guard or at that
force’s premises and was picked up there by SQ officers. 
On at least three occasions, an officer of the first
force met with B along with SQ officers. [32]                         
At the hearing, an SQ officer acknowledged that
the first police force and the SQ were effectively operating together in
respect of an investigation that developed around B’s information. In order to
show his good faith, B had surrendered various items to the SQ, including
thousands of dollars.  The SQ turned the money over to the first police force.
When asked why the SQ turned the money over to that force, the SQ officer noted
that [translation] “[the first force] was on the
case, was . . . participating in the case”.  He referred to the joint
handling of B as “a sort of interorganizational project”. [33]                         
This interconnection is also reflected in a
letter sent by an officer of the first police force to the SQ with respect to
the money, which acknowledges B’s confidentiality with the first force and
implies that that force believed that B had a similar status with the SQ. The
officer asked the SQ to return the money to B because
the only evidence that the money was the proceeds of crime was given by B to
the SQ under a promise that it would not be used against him. He indicated that [translation]
given the status of [B] with the Sûreté du Québec and the [first police force],
and given our obligation to keep this status confidential, we have been
unable to gather any other evidence that could be used.  [Emphasis added.] [34]                         
In other words, the relationship between B and
the SQ was not only connected to the first police force in an ongoing way, it
was not significantly different from that between B and the first force. Both
police forces warned him that he would receive no immunity in respect of his
own criminal acts, and both forces expected him to become a cooperating witness
in other cases. Based on B’s information, the two police forces worked together
and dealt with B interchangeably. [35]                         
This evidence of a close connection between the
first police force and the SQ establishes a foundation upon which
someone in B’s position may reasonably have seen himself as being part of a
joint, ongoing operation between the two police forces: the first force had
given him an express promise of informer privilege, and the SQ, to whom he was
transferred consensually for jurisdictional reasons, took advantage of the
relationship and information that flowed from this protection. [36]                         
In addition to the temporal and operational
nexus between the two forces, the evidence is
undisputed that B insistently asked what his status was and never received a
clear answer. An SQ officer who had dealt with B since his arrest testified
that around the time of his transfer to the SQ, B [translation] “was
worried about what was going to happen to [him]”, and that he was “deeply
concerned” about this.  It was a source of stress for B, who was “extremely
afraid” that he would be killed.   Another SQ officer testified that B was
asking about his status two years after his transfer. The application judge
found that B was still asking about his status two years after that. [37]                         
The SQ’s conduct in failing to clarify B’s
status to him despite being repeatedly asked to do so, may well have led
someone in B’s position to reasonably believe that his identity would be
protected. It bears emphasizing that no one ever told B that he was not
a confidential informant with the SQ.   One of the SQ
officers who arrested B, for instance, testified that he did not discuss B’s
status with him when he first took B into SQ custody, because B had already
“started the process” with the first police force: [translation]  Q     Was [his] testimony as a cooperating witness, [his] status
discussed . . . .  A     It was not discussed.  Q     . . . at that time?  A     No, because [he]’d already started with the [first police
force]. Named Person B, [he] was in a process with [that force], we knew
that [he]’d given a lot of information to the [first force].  We knew that
because we’d met the guys from that force.  So I don’t know what Named Person B
might’ve been thinking at that time.  [He] . . . was in a process
in [his] mind, that’s for sure, for sure . . . because
. . . [he] was cooperating with [the first force].  [Emphasis
added.] Although this officer was
referring to the process of becoming a cooperating witness, the “process” B had
started with the first police force included a promise of confidentiality made
only two days earlier. [38]                         
While the SQ officers were adamant that
they did not think of B as an informer, they do not appear to have shared this
view with B. B was promised confidentiality by the first police force because
his cooperation put his life at risk. The risk did not change when he was transferred
to the SQ two days later. From that point onward, B
repeatedly voiced concerns about his confidentiality, his safety, and the
uncertainty and confusion he felt while waiting for the possibility of a
cooperating witness contract to materialize. [39]                         
There is no doubt that much of the focus of B’s
questions related to whether the cooperating witness contract was forthcoming
and to the type of protection that he would be given under it. But there is
also no doubt that he voiced inquiries that raised confidentiality concerns.
Where B’s status was in flux and unclear as a result of his transfer from one
police force to another, the SQ’s failure to clarify his status may have given
rise to a reasonable belief in informer status, whether or not he actually asked
a specific question like, “Will I be treated as a police informer in the event
of failure to conclude a cooperating witness contract?” [40]                         
In these circumstances, the fact that nobody
clarified for him whether the confidentiality promised by the first police
force continued to apply to his dealings with the SQ could well have led him to
believe that the protection he had with the first force continued pending the
cooperating witness contract. [41]                         
The fresh evidence also illustrates the
ambiguity generated by the SQ’s approach to B’s status. Two documents introduced as fresh evidence
were written by one of the SQ officers who had been involved with B since his
transfer. These documents followed a discussion the SQ
officer had two years after B’s arrest with an officer of the first police
force about B’s status. In these documents, B was referred
to as a “source”, as was the practice with informers, rather than by name. Many
other documents prepared by SQ officers refer to B by his name. In other words,
SQ officers inconsistently referred to B, sometimes designating him by his real
name, and sometimes calling him an informer. Their confusion may well have led
B to reasonably assume that his confidential status remained unchanged upon his
transfer from the first police force to the SQ. [42]                         
Justice Cromwell concludes that B could not
reasonably have believed that the SQ considered him an informer, given the
expectation that he would become a cooperating witness. But informer privilege
is not necessarily inconsistent with being a cooperating witness. B’s position at the hearing was that he believed he would remain a
police informer until he secured a cooperating witness contract with the Crown.
In other words, his identity would remain confidential until the Crown confirmed
that it intended to call him as a witness and provide certain advantages in
exchange for his testimony. [43]                         
As this Court recognized
in Barros, the same person can be an informer entitled to privilege in
one matter, and a witness whose identity is disclosable in another: Once a police informer goes into the
“field” and acts as a police agent, the informer privilege is no longer
applicable to prevent disclosure of his or her identity in respect of the
events in which he or she acted as an agent. . . . This does not mean, of
course, that the informer loses protection in other cases where he or she has
not stepped out of the protected role. [Emphasis added; para. 33.] Witnesses can even
testify without having to disclose that they supplied confidential information
to the police in that same matter, as this Court noted in R. v. Leipert,
[1997] 1 S.C.R. 281, at para. 17: “[Informer privilege] applies to a witness on
the stand. Such a person cannot be compelled to state whether he or she is a
police informer . . .”. This possibility has been recognized since Attorney-General
v. Briant (1846), 15 M. & W. 169, 153 E.R. 808, in which Pollock C.B.
held that a Crown witness could not be asked, “Did you give the information?”
that led to the institution of penal proceedings. Finally,
while informers typically waive privilege when they agree to testify, nothing
prevents them from keeping their privilege until there is a firm decision to
testify by both the informer and the prosecution. [44]                         
SQ officers gave B several reassurances that may
have reinforced his view that he was an informer until he became a
cooperating witness. One of the two SQ officers who arrested B explained to him
that he would never have to testify in relation to any of the information he
provided unless a cooperating witness contract was signed: [translation]  A     . . . And I also explained to [him] that if [he] didn’t sign a
contract, [he] would never have to testify about any of the things [he]’d given
us under a promise. . . .  Q     Under a promise of . . . that it couldn’t be used against
[him]?  A     That’s it. . . .  [He] wouldn’t have to
testify, because the contract is so that the person will testify . . .
and that’s the point of the contract . . . .  Q     If there was no contract, well, [he] wouldn’t have to
testify. . . .  A     That’s it. [45]                         
Moreover, another SQ officer testified that he
always made it clear to B that his statements were confidential: [translation]  Q     But Named Person B asked you several times: “Hey, my
statements, what’re you doing with them?  Will they stay confidential?  Don’t
show that to anyone.”  A     They were always confidential.  Q     They were always confidential?  A     Yes.  Q     But you were always clear with Named Person B that they were
confidential?  A     They were always confidential. The only thing . . . 
When I say confidential, it’s that those statements weren’t shown to other
accused, or potential accused, or even “accusables” . . . .
[Emphasis in original.]  He also said that he repeatedly
reassured B that none of his statements had ever been disclosed: [TRANSLATION]  Q     But [he] was told they were confidential?  A     As far as I know, [his] statements were never disclosed in any
case.  Except for [one time] . . .  we didn’t disclose any
statements.  In fact, it bothered me at times, and I would tell [him]: “Look, don’t
worry, nothing in the file, nothing’s been disclosed”. [46]                         
 This officer said that there was only one
exception to the confidentiality which generally applied to B’s statements: on
one occasion, a statement was disclosed in another investigation. The SQ did so
without B’s knowledge or consent. The exceptional use of B’s statements a few
years after the start of his relationship with the SQ is hardly revelatory of
whether B could reasonably have believed that his identity was being protected
throughout that time. [47]                         
It is true that B gave statements to the SQ
after being cautioned that they could be used as evidence in court against
third parties. But these cautions must be juxtaposed against the repeated
reassurances from SQ officers that B’s statements would remain confidential,
and that B would never have to testify on those subjects unless and until
he became a cooperating witness. At the very least, the SQ sent mixed signals
to B concerning the confidentiality of his statements, and never clearly denied
that he benefitted from confidentiality. In my view, the net effect of these
mixed signals from the SQ on B’s reasonable expectation of confidentiality must
be decided at a new hearing. [48]                         
Significantly too, five years after B’s transfer
to the SQ, the Crown ordered the SQ to redact all documents that could identify
B, and asked that a signed waiver of privilege be obtained from B. SQ officers
repeatedly visited B for that purpose. Had there been certainty that B’s status
was not protected, these steps would not have been necessary. The
application judge acknowledged that the Crown’s request for a waiver of
privilege was [translation]
“contradictory” and “odd” given the SQ officers’
position that they had never promised B confidentiality, concluding: “Had the
intention been to confuse, it could not have been done better.” [49]                         
All of this, including the uncontradicted
evidence that B was not told by the SQ what his status was, makes it possible
that someone in B’s circumstances could reasonably believe that the confidentiality
he was promised by the first police force continued when they transferred him
to the SQ.  I would therefore allow the appeal and remit the matter for
reconsideration in light of these reasons.                     The
reasons of Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. were delivered by                     Cromwell J.  (dissenting) — I.  Overview [51]                         
My colleague Abella J. would hold that the
application judge’s ruling must be set aside and the matter reheard,
essentially for two reasons.   First, the application judge “undertook no
analysis” into whether the promise of confidential informer status was implicit
in the circumstances (paras. 15 and 19).   Second, this issue which the
application judge failed to consider is a live issue on this record because
there is evidence, including new evidence, to support the conclusion that “the
police conduct [would] have led someone in B’s position to
believe, on reasonable grounds, that [his status was] protected” (para. 16).
The failure to consider this live issue therefore requires a new hearing.  I
cannot subscribe to my colleague’s conclusion or the reasons for it.  My
disagreement is based on the following interrelated points. [52]                         
First, the analysis of the appeal in my view
must take place in the context of the concrete realities of this case and
within the proper limits of appellate review. Respectfully, my colleague’s
analysis is directed towards hypothetical possibilities that are either
contrary to clear findings by the application judge or have no air of reality
on the record before the Court. [53]                         
Second, the application judge, as I see it, did
not fail to consider whether a promise of confidential informer status could be
implicit in this case.  In my view, the judge’s factual findings and the
record amply support the conclusion that he considered that possibility. [54]                         
Third, as I read the record in light of the
application judge’s extensive findings, there is no evidence to support the
view that there may have been some implicit promise in this case.  In fact,
this possibility is inconsistent with B’s own evidence and with the
circumstances under which B was treated by the SQ. Moreover, the application
judge specifically considered whether an implicit promise had been made and
made explicit findings of fact that the SQ never did anything that could
allow B to understand that he would become a confidential police informer. 
As I see it there is no live issue on this point. [55]                         
Fourth, the application judge found as a fact
that B actually knew from his first dealings, and during his subsequent
dealings, with the SQ that he had no promise that he would be a confidential
source for the SQ and that the claim of informer status was an after-the-fact
exercise in opportunism on B’s part.  This conclusion, amply supported by the
record, makes irrelevant what some hypothetical person in B’s position might
have thought.  B thought no such thing and, knowing he did not have any promise
of confidentiality, supplied information to the SQ for a number of years.  As
the application judge found, B’s assertion of informer privilege came only when
the Crown, in the context of discharging disclosure obligations in another
prosecution, thought it advisable to have B’s status clarified by a judicial
determination.  The judge dismissed B’s after-the-fact claims as showing [translation] “obvious opportunism” on
his part. [56]                         
I would dismiss the appeal. II.     Issues, Facts and Proceedings A.     Introduction [57]                         
The appellant, B, provided information about
criminal activity — his own and that of others — over a number of years to the
SQ in the hopes of being retained as a [translation]
“co-operating witness” and of receiving the type of remuneration and other
benefits normally commensurate with this type of co-operation.    Ultimately,
individuals (some of whom are parties to this appeal and are referred to as the
“Other Individuals”) were charged with several violent crimes and it is in the
context of their trial that the question of B’s possible status as a
confidential police informer arises. [58]                         
If information provided by B met the Stinchcombe
standard, it would normally have to be disclosed: R. v. Stinchcombe,
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 326.  However, B claimed to have confidential police informer
status: therefore, B’s identity as the supplier of the information to the SQ
was privileged and must not be disclosed.  The Crown’s position, however, is
that B has no such status. [59]                         
B’s status of course could significantly affect
the scope of the Crown’s disclosure obligation to the Other Individuals at
their trial.  If B is a confidential source with respect to certain information,
then B’s identity as the supplier of that information must be kept
confidential, along with any other information that could reveal B’s identity
as the source in that regard.  None of this confidential information could be
disclosed, subject only to an accused establishing that it falls within the
“innocence at stake” exception or unless both B and the police waive the
privilege.  Otherwise, the confidentiality is absolute and disclosure cannot be
made.  The impact on disclosure is thus potentially considerable. [60]                         
The Crown applied to the application judge for a
determination of this issue and the application judge held that B was not a
confidential informer with respect to information he supplied to the SQ. B.          
Issues [61]                         
The principal issues, as the appeal has evolved,
are these: 1.           
What are the concrete realities of this case and
the proper limits of appellate review which form the basis for consideration of
the appeal? In my view, the judge’s express findings of fact, read in light of
the record leave no room for appellate intervention with respect to his
conclusion that B was not a confidential source for the SQ. 2.           
Did the application judge fail to consider
whether a promise of confidential informer status could be implicit in this
case?  In my view he did not. 3.           
Is there a live issue on this record as to
whether there may have been an implicit promise of informer privilege by the
SQ? In my view there is not. 4.           
Is the application judge’s finding of fact that
B actually knew that he did not have confidential informer status fatal to B’s
claim?  In my view it is. C.     Background Facts          (1)      The Appellant Seeks Out the Police [62]                         
The appellant, motivated by a desire to avenge
himself against others and to make amends for his past criminal activity,
contacted the police.  He sought to provide information about past crimes and
to assist in their prosecution. [63]                         
Soon thereafter, the appellant was put under
arrest by the SQ, cautioned and detained for his criminal activity.  Of course,
that warning would have included advice that anything B said could be used as
evidence.  During the application hearing, Crown counsel read out the warning
given to B by the SQ before taking B’s statements regarding his criminal
activity. [translation]  Q     And when [he] told you then: My name is . . . . I’m going to
read you a warning.  You can sit down.  I want to inform you that you’re under
arrest. . . .  . . .  Q     . . . you have the right to remain silent.  We must inform you
that we are police officers.  You are not required to say anything, and you
must understand clearly that if you wish to speak, everything you say will
be taken down . . . and can be used as evidence against you. [Emphasis
added.]  [64]                         
The appellant gave a statement to the SQ
regarding his involvement in criminal activity, going so far as to bring SQ
officers to the crime scene.  B was told by the police at the outset that B
would be held to account for his crime.  It was therefore clear to B that those
matters were not subject to any sort of confidentiality obligation.  B’s
arrest, detention and cautioning by the SQ are in every respect consistent with
that advice. [65]                         
I also underline the application judge’s finding
that B stated that from the beginning of his co-operation with the police, B
both wanted and expected to testify at future trials.  In the circumstances
here, as the application judge found, B could not possibly become a Crown witness
and a confidential police informer with the SQ. [66]                         
The next day, the appellant was arrested and
cautioned for another crime.  Again, B freely made a statement discussing
several subjects, including the extent of B’s involvement in that crime. [67]                         
I underline the cautions given to B by the SQ to
the effect any statements could be used in evidence. [68]                         
The appellant’s co-operation subsequently
continued to intensify, as he provided the SQ with further statements
implicating other individuals in serious crimes.  Several of these statements
were made under a promise by the SQ that they would not be used as
incriminating evidence against the appellant. [69]                         
The SQ officers involved, realizing that the
appellant could possibly be of great use to them in solving other cases,
started to evaluate whether he could make a suitable co-operating witness. [70]                         
As a result of their frequent meetings, they
registered the appellant as an informer in the SQ database, apparently to
enable them to incur secret expenses for him.  Indeed, though this type of code
was normally used to identify confidential informers in its database, the SQ
was clear that it had been attributed to the appellant for purely
administrative imperatives.  As an SQ officer testified, this registration was
warranted because secret expenses could only be reimbursed if incurred for the
benefit of an individual who had such a code assigned to him in the SQ
database. [71]                         
Soon after his first meeting with the SQ, the
latter also submitted the appellant to a polygraph test, one of the important
preliminary steps to obtaining co-operating witness status.          (2)      The Appellant Shows Signs of Impatience [72]                         
While the administration of the polygraph test
could have been interpreted by the appellant as an encouraging sign that a co-operating
witness contract was forthcoming, B was not appeased.  He soon thereafter
became nervous about the Crown’s lateness in formalizing his status as a
co-operating witness and voiced this to the SQ.  He insisted on being promptly
informed of the state of his co-operating witness application and on receiving
clarification about his status in the meantime.  He threatened, at one point,
to starve himself and stop co-operating with the SQ until he was formally
recognized as a co-operating witness. [73]                         
The appellant testified that his insistence led
the SQ to tell him that he would be considered a confidential police informer
until it received instructions as to whether his co-operating witness candidacy
was approved.  The SQ police officers who testified, on the other hand, denied
ever making such a promise.  Their view of the situation was that he was in the
process of becoming a co-operating witness (and some explicitly told him this)
and that the idea of making him a confidential informer had not crossed their
mind at that time.  The application judge accepted the police evidence and
rejected that of B.  The appellant continued to cooperate with the SQ for a
time after this episode.          (3)      The Appellant Continues Co-operation With the
SQ [74]                         
Almost a year after being arrested, the
appellant was informed by officers that the Crown had decided against enrolling
the appellant as a co-operating witness.  The Crown had decided against calling
B as a witness in future trials and therefore that status was in the Crown’s
view unnecessary. [75]                         
The SQ later informed B that there was a
possibility that B would be offered a co-operating witness contract
nonetheless.  The appellant accepted the police’s offer and a co-operative
relationship between the SQ and the appellant was re-established. [76]                         
After B resumed active co-operation with the SQ,
he later gave several statements to the SQ.  It is worth noting here that
though it was made clear to the appellant that these statements could not be
used against him in a court of law, it was also made clear that they
could be used as evidence in the trials of third parties. As I shall
discuss and the application judge rightly found, in these circumstances, the
roles of potential witness and police informer were completely inconsistent, as
B would well have understood. [77]                         
Subsequently, the appellant had occasional
dealings with the SQ, either in person or by phone, providing additional
information.  On these occasions, the SQ provided assurances that a
co-operating witness contract was probably forthcoming.          (4)      Non-completion of the Co-operating Witness
Contract [78]                         
The following year, SQ officers met with the
appellant to transmit, on behalf of the Crown, a new offer in a case before the
court.  The SQ officers also informed him that he would, for the time being, be
considered a special witness (a witness who benefits from police protection
because of the sensitive nature of the information that he may be called upon
to testify on, but who does not obtain the financial advantages normally
commensurate with being a co-operating witness).  They assured him however that
his co-operating witness application was still pending. [79]                         
A few weeks later, the appellant contacted the
SQ, seeking assurances about the progress of his co-operating witness
application.  The appellant testified that he was told by an SQ officer, with
another officer present, that his contract was forthcoming and that, in any
event, he was considered a confidential police informer in the meantime. 
Again, this is denied by the SQ. The officer, on the other hand, claims only to
have told him that he wanted him to testify in court, and assured him that he
was taking care of him and his safety.  According to the officer, the option of
granting the appellant confidential informer status was never contemplated
because he was always sure that the appellant would be given a co-operating
witness contract.  As noted earlier, the application judge accepted the police
evidence. [80]                         
What is uncontested, however, is that the
evaluation process was progressing.  Officers took the appellant to other
SQ-controlled premises later that same year, where he made full disclosure of
his criminal past — a prerequisite to the signature of a co-operating witness
contract.  He also met with Crown prosecutors a few days later. [81]                         
A few months later, the appellant was questioned
again with the assurance that his statements would not be used against him in a
court of law.  He was questioned regarding several inconsistencies between
different statements he had made to the police and to Crown prosecutors.  It is
clear that his credibility was being tested, as is often done when evaluating
the suitability of a co-operating witness candidate and his potential for
providing convincing testimony in court. [82]                         
However, the Crown ultimately decided against
entering into the arrangement because it did not intend to have him testify for
the moment.  He would therefore not be retained as a co-operating witness.          (5)      The Crown Attempts to Clarify Appellant’s
Status [83]                         
The Crown, having decided not to retain the
appellant as a co-operating witness, sought to clarify the appellant’s status
in order to properly discharge its disclosure obligations.  While this was
being sorted out, the Crown, as a measure of precaution, ordered that the
appellant’s name and any information capable of leading to the discovery of his
identity be redacted from various documents. [84]                         
Chief among its concerns was its desire to
clarify whether or not the appellant benefited from informer privilege, for if
he did, much of his statements even if otherwise subject to disclosure would
not be so subject.  In an effort to clear up this issue, the Crown sent a
police officer to meet with the appellant and ask him whether he would agree to
sign a document whereby he would undertake not to seek to invoke informer
privilege regarding the information he had provided the SQ.  The appellant
refused.  The Crown therefore brought a motion before the court seeking to
determine whether or not the appellant benefited from informer privilege. 
After witness testimony and argument by counsel, the judge held that B did not
benefit from informer privilege in regard to that information. D.  Judgment Below [85]                         
After having reviewed this Court’s decisions in Bisaillon
v. Keable, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 60; R. v. Leipert, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 281; Named
Person v. Vancouver Sun, 2007 SCC 43, [2007] 3 S.C.R. 253, and the Ontario
Court of Appeal’s decision in R. v. Babes (2000), 146 C.C.C. (3d) 465,
the application judge held that in order for informer privilege to apply, the
police had to explicitly or implicitly promise a claimant that his identity as
the provider of information would be kept confidential.  He added that the
burden rested on the individual claiming informer privilege to demonstrate, on
a balance of probabilities, that he was entitled to benefit from it. [86]                         
The appellant testified about this issue during
the hearing, admitting that the purpose for initially coming forward to the
police was to get revenge.  B further testified that he hoped to become a
co-operating witness and that B’s statements would not be used against B in a
court of law.  Nevertheless, the appellant testified that he believed he
benefited from informer privilege because he had been assured of this many
times by several SQ officers.  According to B, he had been told that he would
be considered a confidential informer as long as the hoped-for co-operating
witness agreement with the Crown had not been finalized.  B’s position
throughout was that the SQ had made an explicit promise of informer status. 
B’s position in his evidence was never that he had inferred from police conduct
that they were promising B informer status or that anything done by the police
force fed any such inference. [87]                         
The Crown also called several SQ officers to
testify in that regard.  They all indicated that the appellant had never been considered
a confidential informer and had never been told so.  In fact, they indicated
that they always had in mind that B was in the process of becoming a
co-operating witness and would testify in future court proceedings.  The
prospect of granting B informer privilege had, according to them, simply never
been on their radar. [88]                         
After having considered the testimonial and
documentary evidence before him, the application judge proceeded to identify
the elements which supported the parties’ respective positions. [89]                         
In support of the appellant’s position, the
application judge noted the fact that the SQ in some respects treated B as it
would a confidential informer and had invited him to sign a document whereby he
would undertake not to seek to invoke informer privilege regarding the
information he had provided the SQ. [90]                         
In support of the opposite conclusion, the
application judge noted, amongst other things, that (1) the appellant wished to
become a police agent and expected to have to testify in future trials, (2) B
was arrested for violent criminal activity and the information that he gave the
SQ in that regard was used against B, (3) B gave a statement soon after his
first meeting with the SQ knowing that this could lead to charges of violent
criminal activity, (4) the SQ never produced any source reports regarding the
information gathered from him, (5) B was offered immunity and an undertaking
not to testify in a prosecution, (6) one of the appellant’s statements was
disclosed in the course of another investigation (this is incompatible with the
confidentiality owed to an individual benefiting from informer privilege), and
that (7) the appellant gave several statements in regards of which he was
warned they could be used as evidence in the trial of others. [91]                         
Having completed this exercise, the application
judge acknowledged that it was certainly surprising to [translation] “ask someone considered to be a possible
witness to waive [his] police informer privilege [some] years after having
assigned [him] an identifier reserved for sources”.  He also found quite
strange that the Crown asked the appellant to undertake not to seek to invoke a
privilege that only the SQ police officers could have granted and that they
maintained never having granted. [92]                         
Nevertheless, the application judge remained of
the view that no express or implied understanding existed between the SQ and
the appellant that he would be conferred confidential informer status. Contrary
to Justice Abella’s suggestion that the key question of whether there was an
implicit promise of confidentiality was left unanswered, this question was in
fact specifically answered in the negative by the application judge. 
Recognizing that the evidence was contradictory, he largely rejected the
appellant’s testimony as lacking credibility, and instead accepted the evidence
of the SQ officers. [93]                         
The application judge further found that the
appellant had always, since his first meeting with the SQ, understood
that he would testify in other trials.  B’s insistence on obtaining confidential
informer status was sparked, the application judge found, by disappointment
with not being signed on as a co-operating witness and the fruitlessness of the
negotiations with the witness protection programme. The application judge was
of the view that the appellant seized the opportunity of trying to invoke
informer privilege when the Crown tried to obtain an undertaking not to seek to
invoke informer privilege; on account of this, the appellant’s behaviour, the
application judge opined, was that of an obvious opportunist.  Considering this
express finding that B only sought to assert privilege after the fact, it is my
view that we can conclude that, contrary to my colleague’s statement at para.
20, this does “amount to a finding that B knew all along that he did not
benefit from confidentiality with the SQ”. [94]                         
With all that having been said, the application
judge concluded that an analysis of the testimonies and the exhibits leads to
the overriding conclusion that the appellant did not benefit from informer
privilege in regard to the information provided to the SQ, but was rather a
compellable witness in the trial of other individuals. The judge further found
that the SQ had never done anything that would allow B to understand that he
would become a confidential police informer. III.    Analysis A.     What Are the Concrete Realities of This Case? [95]                         
At the outset, I think it is important to note
the concrete realities of the case and the limits of appellate review against
which the appellant’s submissions must be assessed.  As I see it, there are
several matters that must be kept in mind. [96]                         
First, the application judge expressly rejected
B’s evidence including the evidence that his status as a confidential police
informer was ever promised, or even discussed. He further found that the police
had done nothing that would permit B to understand that he was to become a
confidential police informer. It is worth setting out in full some key parts of
the application judge’s findings in this regard:            [translation] Officers . . . who were
in regular contact with [B] from [the time of his first meeting with the SQ],
all state that they always dealt with [him] as a witness to crimes and that
they at no time suggested to [him] that they would one day consider [him] a
police informer should [he] not be granted a co-operating witness contract. 
[B] states categorically that the opposite is true and that the officers in
question formally undertook to do so on several occasions.  . . .             The Court
accordingly accepts the version of the police witnesses, who have always, since
[B’s first meeting with the SQ], made it clear that they intended to have [B]
testify publicly about [his] disclosures, and who have always told [him] so
without ever suggesting to [him] that [he] might become a police informer
should there be no contract with the Crown.  . . .             . . . the Court
must on the basis of the evidence as a whole find that there was no agreement, either
express or tacit, between [B] and the officers . . . under which
[he] had the status of a police informer . . . . [Emphasis added.]  [97]                         
Second, while it may in some rare cases be theoretically possible
for a person to be both a Crown witness and a confidential police informer, it
was not possible in B’s situation. The application judge recognized this as
indeed does B’s own counsel before this Court. Moreover, the application judge
specifically rejected as a matter of fact B’s evidence that he was promised
confidential informer status pending the resolution of the co-operating
witness process and accepted the police evidence that they did nothing
that could have led B to understand that he had confidential police informer
status at any point in their dealings. [98]                         
Third, the fact that the police have an obligation to protect a
person has nothing to do with whether that person is a confidential police
informer. There is nothing inconsistent with the police position that, on the
one hand, they felt obliged to protect B, and on the other that B was not a
confidential police informer. [99]                         
Fourth, it is not open to an appellate court to
reweigh the evidence in the record or to draw inferences from the evidence
which the application judge refused to draw absent some clear and determinative
error on the part of the application judge. In my respectful view, my colleague
Abella J.’s reasons run afoul of this important principle in more than one
respect. [100]                     
Consider, for example, my colleague’s repeated
references to B’s inquiries concerning his “status”.  In effect, my colleague
suggests that B asked repeatedly about whether he was a police informer and was
not given a straight answer.  Respectfully, that is not an inference that may
be fairly drawn from this record or the application judge’s findings of fact. [101]                     
B’s testimony that he was assured that he had
the status of a confidential police informer pending the outcome of the
co-operating witness contract process was specifically rejected by the
application judge. On the contrary, the judge found expressly that the police,
since B’s first meeting with the SQ, had always manifested the intention to
call B to testify publicly about his revelations to them and that their
discussions with him never allowed him to understand that he could become a
confidential source. [102]                     
According to the police witnesses, whose
evidence the judge accepted, B’s preoccupation was with getting a co-operating
witness contract — a contract that he could reasonably expect would provide
financial and other benefits.  It was about the progress of the process of
being given such a contract, not whether B was a confidential informer, that B
repeatedly inquired and in response to which the police advised that the
process was ongoing and that the Crown had the final decision.  Any implication
that B inquired about his status as a police informer and was not given a
straight answer is, respectfully, not supported by either the application
judge’s findings or by this record. In fact, the officers who testified on this
issue repeatedly asserted that a conversation about B’s status as a “source” or
“confidential informer” simply never occurred. For example, an officer
testified in the following manner: [translation]  Q     But when [he] had these questions, do you remember that Named
Person B asked you: “Yeah, but then, if [he] doesn’t sign, what will you do
with me?  A     No.  Q     What am I?  A     No.  Q     . . . What are you doing with the statements?”  Another officer’s
testimony on this issue is also instructive: [translation]  Q     And Named Person B, when [he] spoke with you, am I right to
say that [he] told you a number of times: “I want to be a ‘source’, I don’t
want you to give my statements to anyone” . . . .  A     No, Named Person B . . . .  Q     . . .  A     No, Named Person B, [his] statements were targeted, and we
used them . . .  Named Person B, every time [he] was with us,
[he] knew we were using [his] statements. Yet another officer
provides a similar answer to this question: [translation]    . . .  Q     But did you not also answer [him] that, at any rate, in the
meantime, you are a “source”?  A     No.  No.  [He] was always regarded as . . . .  In my
mind, [he] was going to testify.  It was a surprise when we learned that [he]
would not be testifying.  It was a surprise. In other words, none of
the officers involved failed to give B a straight answer about whether he was a
confidential source because there were no such discussions and the very idea of
B being or becoming a source never even crossed their minds. [103]                     
In my view, it is not open to this Court on
appeal to draw any inference from this record that B inquired whether or not he
was a “source” and did not receive a straight answer. Such an inference
is not only contrary to the evidence which the application judge accepted but
it is also contrary to the judge’s express finding of fact that the SQ did
nothing that could have led B to believe that he would become a confidential
police source. [104]                     
My colleague also, in my respectful view,
oversteps the bounds of appellate review with respect to the issue of alleged
police promises of confidentiality. On this, the application judge was alive to
and expressly noted that there was a lack of clarity and consistency in the
evidence. A review of the record shows that there were indeed some
inconsistencies in the police evidence on this issue and that the term
“confidential” was used in several different senses. The judge even interjected
during the testimony of an officer in order to clarify the sense in which the
officer was using the term confidential. [105]                     
The apparent confusion about what was or was not
confidential is evident in the police testimony. For example, an officer — in
the passage cited by my colleague Abella J. at para. 44 — states that if B does
not sign a contract, he will not have to testify and his statements will not be
used against him, implying a certain level of confidentiality. Later, however,
he testified to having on one occasion acted in a way that was inconsistent
with B being a confidential source and insisted that B is not a “source”
because with a “source” you cannot divulge his identity.  Similarly, another
officer is inconsistent in his testimony about confidentiality. While in the
passage cited by my colleague at para. 45, the officer states that B’s
statements were “always confidential”, he also testifies to the fact that B was
never a police informer nor a confidential “source”.  On the other hand, the
evidence of another officer consistently contrasts B’s situation with that of a
police informer — whose identity and statements must be kept secret — and
states that there was no confidentiality. [106]                     
Sorting this out was the job of the application
judge, not of an appellate court.  The judge adverted to this issue (among
others) and made findings that the evidence showed that B in this case could
not be at the same time a police informer and prosecution witness, that the police
had consistently manifested the intention to call B as a witness and that the
police had never let B understand that he would become a confidential police
informer. There is in my view no basis to interfere with these clear findings. [107]                     
With those matters in mind, I turn to the remaining issues. B.     Did the Application Judge Fail
to Consider Whether a Promise of Confidential Informer Status Could Be Implicit
in This Case? [108]                     
My colleague Abella J. finds that the
application judge’s ruling ought to be quashed because he did not consider
whether a promise of confidential informer status could be implicit. 
Respectfully, I do not agree that the judge failed to consider the question. 
Several considerations lead me to this view. [109]                     
The judge was alive to B’s dealings with other
police agencies.  Having heard that evidence, however, he found as a fact that
the evidence in the case required that B’s dealings with the SQ be considered
differently.  The judge referred to several differences in support of this
conclusion, which is amply supported by the evidence. [110]                     
B had contacted the police for the purpose of
providing them with information.    During the initial encounter with the SQ, B
was taken into custody and arrested for his crime.  As I have reviewed above, B
made a number of statements.  While in some cases, B was promised that the
statements would not be used as evidence against B, in many cases it was made
perfectly clear to B, and B clearly understood, that they could be used as
evidence in court against others.  That use of B’s statements, of
course, is completely inconsistent with any notion that B’s identity as the
supplier of that information would remain confidential.  In short, the dealings
with the SQ consisted of plea bargaining and protracted negotiations of a
possible co-operating witness contract, which contemplated B testifying for the
Crown in public trials. [111]                     
These considerations lead me to the view that
the application judge did not fail to consider whether a promise of
confidential informer status could be implicit.  Rather, the judge was careful
to consider whether any promise was made implicitly as well as
explicitly, even though B’s evidence was solely to the effect that the SQ had
made repeated explicit promises. This was the sole basis for his professed
belief that he had informer status. In any event, as I will discuss in the next
section, the existence of a supposed “implicit promise” was never a live issue
on this record. C.     Is There a Live Issue on This Record as to Whether There
may Have Been an Implicit Promise of Informer Privilege by the SQ? [112]                     
I see no basis on this record for thinking that
a reasonable person in the position of B would or could reasonably think his
identity as the supplier of the information would remain confidential.  This
point requires considerable reference to the record as well as to the judge’s
findings of fact. [114]                     
During the application hearing, the appellant
was very clear about the basis upon which he claimed informer privilege: The
police had explicitly promised him informer privilege status.  Indeed,
at the beginning of his testimony, B indicated asking the SQ what his status
would be shortly after the beginning of his co-operation.  According to him,
this is what happened: [translation]   [115]                     
He added that for some months after his first
contact with the SQ, he was regularly told by SQ officers that they could not
tell him whether or not he would be retained as a co-operating witness, but
that, in any event, he was a confidential informer in the meantime: [translation]  [B]  They said: “. . . [W]e can’t say you’re a special witness,
we don’t know that Named Person B, you aren’t a co-operating witness, we don’t
know that.  So you’re a ‘source’”. [116]                     
Later in his testimony, the appellant identified
the individuals who allegedly expressly told him that he would be considered a
confidential informer until his co-operating witness candidacy was settled. [117]                     
Never in his testimony did the appellant suggest
that his understanding of his alleged confidential status had its origins in
anything other than repeated express promises by the SQ.  B never suggested in
evidence that his dealings with the SQ had given the impression that he had that
status.  All of the SQ officers testified that not only had no such promises
ever been made but that the possibility of B becoming a confidential informer
had never been discussed with B or considered by them. [118]                     
The application judge made clear findings of fact
regarding the probative value that he attached to the appellant’s testimony. 
He found that it lacked credibility, and that the appellant himself had always,
since his first meeting with the SQ, understood that he would testify in the
trial of other individuals (and therefore his identity could necessarily not
remain confidential).  This is consistent with the numerous cautions given to
the appellant in relation to the many statements given to the SQ.  The
application judge further found that the appellant’s request for informer
privilege was essentially a vain attempt by a disgruntled individual to get
back at the Crown and the SQ for the unfair treatment he believed he had
experienced in relation to his desire to become a co-operating witness.  The judge
found as a fact that it was only after B was asked to renounce any intention to
claim informer privilege that B started to claim the status of confidential
informer.  Moreover, as noted, the judge also found as a fact that the SQ never
did anything that could have allowed B to understand that he was or might be a
confidential police informer. In short, the application judge disbelieved the
bulk of the appellant’s version of facts, including his allegation that an
explicit promise had been made to him.  Significantly, the appellant does not
contest the application judge’s devastating findings of credibility regarding
his testimony. [119]                     
In addition to rejecting the centrepiece of the
appellant’s version of facts, the application judge found as a matter of fact
that the SQ officers had always had in mind to have the
appellant testify and that they had never intended to
make him a confidential informer.  This corresponds largely to what the SQ
officers who testified said and is, in my view, a perfectly defensible finding
of fact, on the record before us. [120]                     
To sum up, the appellant’s own testimony was
clear and unequivocal that the claim of informer privilege arose solely from
alleged express promises — promises which the application judge concluded had
never been made.  Moreover, the judge accepted police evidence that there was never
even any thought of making B a confidential informer and that they did
nothing that could let B understand that he had that status. The judge also
found that it was some years after B’s initial dealings with the SQ that B
started to claim the status of a confidential police informer. These findings
leave no room for the imputed or implied promise theory. [121]                     
Moreover, as I touched on earlier, we know that
SQ officers arrested the appellant for his criminal activity soon after their
first meeting.  The appellant was cautioned and specifically informed that
anything he would say could be used against him in a court of law.  We also
know that throughout his relationship with the SQ, his statements were
generally accompanied by a warning that either the evidence could be used
against him, or, at the very least, that it could be used in the trial of
others.  The record discloses that the appellant understood this. [122]                     
Indeed, when cross-examined by the Crown, the
appellant clearly stated that he understood that his first statements to the SQ
could be used against him and entered into evidence in a public trial: [translation]  Q     So you, when they tell you “it can be used as evidence against
you”, what do you understand that to mean?  A     Well, it can be used as evidence against me.  That’s what I
understand; it’s clear.  Q     In what context can it be used as evidence against you?  A     Well, it can be used as evidence against me.  What do you want
me to say? . . .  Q     During what?  During the trial?  During a public trial? 
So it means that that statement will be used if they say. . . .  A     Exactly.  Yes, Yes.  Q     Do you understand that clearly?  A     Yes.  Yes.  [Emphasis added.] [123]                     
And later, again during his testimony on
cross-examination, the Crown attorney read to the appellant a portion of the
transcript of one of his interviews conducted after his arrest by the SQ. 
Therein, an SQ officer explained to the appellant that he had a right to
counsel and that anything he would say could be used as evidence in an eventual
trial.  The Crown attorney then asked the appellant if he had properly
understood what the SQ had told him: [translation]  Q     You understood clearly what you were told at that time?  You
knew that it could be used . . . .  A     Yes.  Q     . . . as evidence in court?  A     Yes.  Yes.  [124]                     
Not only did the appellant understand that the
statements he gave the SQ could be used against him, he even stated that he
hoped, at first, to get a co-operating witness contract precisely because he
hoped they would not be if he acquired that status: [translation]   A     At first, I hoped to have one, because I didn’t want my
statements to be held against me, since . . . .  . . .  Yes,
I hoped to at first.  But then, they kept on telling me: “No, Named Person B,
we’ll cross that bridge when we get there.” [Emphasis added.]  [125]                     
On account of this evidence, it appears to me
that the application judge did not err in deciding that the appellant
understood that the information he provided the SQ could be used in public
trials and that his identity as the purveyor of that information would not
remain confidential, and therefore that he did not benefit from informer
privilege in regard to that information.  The SQ had
told him that at the time of their first contact with B and reiterated it when
he started making his statements. [126]                     
In any event, even had he had such an
expectation, this expectation as well as any belief that the police had acted
on it and guaranteed him confidentiality would have been unreasonable.  Indeed,
the very fact that he was cautioned several times that his statements could at
the very least be entered into evidence against others in public trials is
fundamentally incompatible with an expectation or belief in a guarantee of
confidentiality. [127]                     
My colleague Abella J. mentions several elements
which she believes support her position that the appellant could have believed,
on reasonable grounds, that he benefited from informer privilege. 
Respectfully, I find none to be persuasive. [128]                     
When he was formally charged and cautioned, he
would have known that everything he said from that point on could be used as
evidence in a court of law.  Being treated in that fashion by the police is
absolutely incompatible with any notion that it would have somehow led someone
to believe that his or her identity as the purveyor of statements to them would
be kept confidential.  B of course would have fully understood this. [129]                     
 I have already discussed my colleague’s
suggestion that B repeatedly asked the SQ about his status and did not receive
a straight answer.  Neither the application judge’s conclusions nor the record
permit any such inference to be drawn.  I have also referred to the police
evidence about confidentiality; the application judge considered this evidence
and found that the SQ had done nothing that would allow B to infer that he was
a confidential police informer.  My colleague also places weight on some
documents to support the possibility that B thought he had been implicitly
promised confidential source status.  The reason that this cannot be so,
however, is that there is no evidence that B was even aware of them.  The
documents could therefore not bear on his belief.  The police officers who were
in a position to provide the appellant with confidential informer status
testified that they never had in mind to make the appellant a confidential
informer.  The only “status” he had with the SQ, in their mind, was that of an
individual in the process of becoming a co-operating witness.  This testimony
was accepted by the application judge. [130]                     
My colleague points to the fact that the appellant
was referred to as a source in two documents while having been named in many
others. My colleague concludes that this inconsistent treatment of B may have
led B to reasonably assume that he had confidential status with the SQ.
Respectfully, this is not an inference that is open on this record.  B never
suggested any such thing during his extensive testimony.  Moreover, there is no
evidence that this fact was known by the appellant at the relevant time and it
therefore cannot have given rise to any implied promise in the appellant’s
mind.  If this evidence is seen as undermining the SQ’s evidence that it never
considered giving B confidential source status, that use is directly contrary
to clear findings of fact by the application judge.  Finally, the evidence is
inconsequential placed in the correct factual context.  The appellant is
referred to by name in many documents and this is incompatible with the police
having an actual desire to keep his identity confidential.  The evidence of the
documents provides no basis to set aside the application judge’s finding of
fact that the SQ did not ever treat B as a confidential source.  The fact that
B was not aware of any of this at the time of course means that this could not
have given rise to any implied promise of confidentiality. [131]                     
Finally, counsel for the appellant made much of
the fact that the Crown tried to get the appellant to sign a document whereby
he would undertake not to seek to invoke informer privilege regarding the
information he had provided the SQ.  At the outset, it bears mentioning that
the document in question did not assume that the appellant was a confidential
informer.  Rather, it only asked the appellant to provide assurances that he
would not seek confidential informer status in the future.  In any
event, the evidence is clear that this initiative came from the Crown and not
the SQ.  While the Crown may have had its reasons to seek such assurances, I do
not think that this can be used, without supporting evidence, to conclude that
the SQ thought the appellant was a confidential informer or that it gave rise
to a reasonable belief that an implied promise of confidentiality had been
given. This point was fully considered by the application judge and rejected. [132]                     
To conclude, I am of the view that the implicit
promise of confidentiality was never a live issue on this record. D.     Is the Application Judge’s Finding of Fact That B Actually
Knew That He Did Not Have Confidential Informer Status Fatal to B’s Claim? [133]                     
The application judge in effect found that B actually
knew that his identity was not protected with respect to the information
given to the SQ. My colleague maintains that there was no such finding, but I
respectfully disagree.  This finding, in my view, is supported by the evidence
and fatal to the suggestion that there could be some implied understanding to
the contrary.  To develop this point, I must touch first on some principles of
the law about confidential informers and then return to examine the application
judge’s findings. [134]                     
The traditional view is that informer privilege
has “contract-like” elements of offer and acceptance.  The privilege arises
where a police officer promises protection and confidentiality to a prospective
informer in exchange for information.  In a clear case, confidentiality is
explicitly sought and agreed to:  R. v. Barros, 2011 SCC 51, [2011] 3
S.C.R. 368, at paras. 31-32; R. v. Basi, 2009 SCC 52, [2009] 3 S.C.R.
389, at para. 36.  This promise may be express or implied: Bisaillon,
at p. 105. While the subjective intent of the police may be relevant to
assessing the evidence, subjective intent on their part to confer the privilege
is not a necessary element of the test for whether the privilege has been
conferred.  All of the leading cases from this Court put this rule on this
“contract-like” basis. [135]                     
I therefore agree with my colleague Abella J.
when she says that the test for whether there was an implicit promise of
confidentiality in this case is whether the police conduct would have led
someone in B’s position to believe, on reasonable grounds, that such a promise
had been made in exchange for the information provided.  There is thus both a
subjective and an objective element:  the alleged source must in fact believe
that confidentiality was promised in exchange for the information and that
belief must be reasonable, judged from the point of view of a reasonable person
in the alleged source’s position.  If there is such a belief and it is
reasonable, an implicit promise has been established. [136]                     
I note that appellant’s counsel in this Court
agrees that the alleged source must believe that the protection has been
accorded. As appellant’s counsel put it, [translation]
“B’s belief and perception as to his status as an informer is of prime
importance”. [137]                     
I emphasize this fundamental point because I am
respectfully of the view that my colleague has lost sight of it in her
analysis.  My colleague spends much effort in trying to demonstrate that if B
had believed that he had been promised confidentiality, that belief would have
been reasonable.  I of course do not accept that contention.  But be that as it
may, the reasonableness of the belief of some hypothetical person in B’s
situation is not sufficient to establish the existence of the privilege unless
B also established that he actually believed that the implicit promise had been
made. There can be no such finding here and that is fatal to B’s claim. [138]                     
I repeat that B’s position in his extensive
testimony was never that there was some sort of implicit promise. B’s alleged
belief was based solely on alleged express — and repeated — promises of being
given confidential informer status.  There is no basis in fact to support the
conclusion that B in fact believed that he was an informer. Quite the contrary. [139]                     
The judge correctly noted that the evidence
showed that in the circumstances of this case, B could not be at the same
time a prosecution witness and a police informer with respect to the
information given to the SQ.  The application judge also proceeded on the basis
that in the circumstances here, this would have been clear to B.  The
application judge makes repeated reference to B’s knowledge that he would be a
witness and to the cautions which he had heard and signed that made this
explicit.  This approach cannot be faulted and accords with the evidence. [140]                     
  So far as I am aware, there is no hard and
fast rule that a confidential informer cannot become a witness to testify
regarding the very information he provided to police in confidence.  However,
as a practical matter, such situations would be extremely rare.  It is hard to
see how an informer could testify about certain things without making it
obvious that he was a source of the police knowledge about those things.  In
other words, such testimony could only rarely if at all be given without
creating a risk that the informer’s identity as the purveyor of the privileged
information would be discovered, an outcome, I would emphasize, the Crown is
under a legal obligation to do all in its power to avoid.  As a practical matter,
unless both the Crown and the witness agree to renounce it, informer
privilege must be seen as barring, for all practical purposes, the Crown from
calling an informer to testify at trial about the very information provided to
the police in confidence.  The two roles are almost invariably incompatible. 
Of course, a potential witness would fully understand this as it will generally
be obvious that the testimony will reveal the source of the information.   The
application judge, as noted, concluded that this was the situation in this
case. It is also important to remember that the application judge specifically
rejected B’s evidence that B was expressly promised the status of confidential
informer pending the decision about the possible co-operating witness contract. [141]                     
Taking all of the evidence into account, the judge concluded that
B knew he was to be a witness in relation to the information
that he provided to the SQ and this necessarily required B to know that he was
not a confidential informer.  Moreover, and perhaps even more significantly,
the judge found that it was only some years after B’s first dealings with the
SQ and his being told that his evidence would not for the moment be required
that B’s behaviour gradually changed. The judge also found that it was only
after B was requested to sign the renunciation of any intention to claim
informer privilege and the unsuccessful negotiations with the witness
protection service that he asserted confidential informer status.  In short,
the judge concluded that B knew all along that he had no informer protection
and that B’s assertion to the contrary was an after-the-fact exercise of
obvious opportunism. [142]                     
In my view, these clear and strong findings are
supported by a mountain of evidence, not the least of which is that B in his
testimony before the judge at no time suggested that his belief that informer
protection had been accorded depended on anything other than express promises
by members of the SQ to that effect.  The judge found, of course, that there
were no such express promises and indeed that the SQ officers did nothing that
would let B understand that any such promise was being made. [143]                     
  The judge’s conclusions that B actually knew
that he did not have informer privilege and that B’s claim of that status was
an after-the-fact exercise of opportunism make irrelevant any possibility that
some hypothetical person in B’s circumstances might have thought that the
promise was implicit.  B knew he had no such promise and provided the
information anyway.  B was a disappointed suitor for a potentially lucrative
co-operating witness contract and an opportunist, not a police informer. [144]                     
To conclude on this point, B never claimed to
have a subjective belief that he had been promised confidentiality in exchange
for the information provided to the SQ on any basis other than express
promises. In light of the application judge’s findings, there is no evidence to
support the view that B in fact had any such subjective belief on any basis.
This, to my way of thinking, makes irrelevant what some hypothetical person in
B’s position might reasonably have believed. [145]                     
In light of the record and the findings of fact
of the application judge in this case, there is, in my view, no reason to
interfere with the application ruling. However, I would underline that I share
the application judge’s view that the police and the prosecution could have
handled this matter in a more satisfactory manner. Nothing that I have said,
therefore, should be taken as undermining the importance of the police being
clear with potential sources about their status; quite the contrary. [146]                     
Police informer status plays an important role in the
investigation and prosecution of crimes. As this Court noted in Leipert,
at para. 10, “[t]he rule is of fundamental importance to the workings of a
criminal justice system”. In order for it to be effective, the protection
provided to police informers must be virtually inviolable, subject only to the
narrow innocence at stake exception. Indeed this Court has previously described
the privilege as “absolute”: Vancouver Sun, at para. 4. [147]                     
Both the police and the public at large benefit from the
existence of this privilege because it encourages people to come forward to
assist in police investigations:                            Police
work, and the criminal justice system as a whole, depend to some degree on the
work of confidential informers.  The law has therefore long recognized that
those who choose to act as confidential informers must be protected from the
possibility of retribution.  The law’s protection has been provided in the form
of the informer privilege rule, which protects from revelation in public or in
court of the identity of those who give information related to criminal matters
in confidence.  This protection in turn encourages cooperation with the
criminal justice system for future potential informers.  (Vancouver Sun,
at para. 16) [148]                     
Given the important role that informer status plays in the
detection and prosecution of crime, courts must not undermine its effectiveness
by condoning police actions which leave potential informers uncertain or
confused as to their status. Police actions which amount to deliberate attempts
to confuse a person about his status, or even inadvertent actions that have the
same effect, reduce confidence in the protection provided by informer
privilege. That reduced confidence discourages people with information about
criminal activity from reporting to the police, which erodes a powerful
investigative avenue. [149]                     
The application judge in this case was clearly alive to these
concerns, as he ought to have been, and reached the conclusions he did after a
careful and thorough review of all of the evidence. His decision should not be
disturbed. [150]                     
I must now turn briefly to two further issues. E.      Should a New Hearing Be Granted on the Basis That the
Application Judge Failed to Pay Heed to the Principles Established by Our Court
in R. v. Basi? [151]                     
The Other Individuals submit that the
application judge did not follow the principles established in Basi and
therefore disregarded their rights to full answer and defence.  However, as I
find that the appellant does not benefit from informer privilege, the Other
Individuals would be entitled to whatever relevant discloseable evidence came
out of the SQ’s dealings with the appellant.  It follows that any procedural
failings on the part of the application judge, if there were such, did not in
the end prejudice the Other Individuals. F.  Would Any Privilege Have
Been Lost Through Disclosure of B’s Identity? [152]                     
The Other Individuals submit that even if the
privilege arose, it would have been lost through disclosure of B’s identity.  
As in my view, the privilege did not arise, I do not have to address this
issue. I simply note that it seems to me that this issue would have to be
decided if one were of the view that the privilege may have indeed arisen. IV.  Disposition [153]                     
I would dismiss the appeal with no order as to
costs.                     Appeal
allowed, Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the appellant:  Guy Bertrand Avocats,
Québec.                     Solicitor
for the respondent:  Poursuites criminelles et pénales du Québec,
Québec.                     Solicitors
for the Others:  Shadley Battista, Montréal.                     Solicitor for the intervener the Director of Public Prosecutions:  Public
Prosecution Service of Canada, Ottawa.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario:  Attorney General
of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association (Ontario):  Kapoor
Barristers, Toronto.  * Deschamps J. took no part in the judgment. * Deschamps J. took no part in the judgment. [1] B, whose identity is anonymous, is referred to in the masculine
throughout these reasons.  To further protect B’s identity, the name of the
police force which granted him informer status, the names of the officers who
dealt with him, and the dates of relevant meetings and conversations, have not
been disclosed in these reasons. [2] B and all other individuals are referred to in the masculine
throughout these reasons.  