  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation:
  R. v. Khawaja, 2012 SCC 69, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 555 Date:
  20121214 Docket: 
  34103  Between: Mohammad
Momin Khawaja Appellant and Her
Majesty the Queen Respondent -
and - Attorney
General of Ontario, Groupe d’étude en droits et libertés de la Faculté de droit
de l’Université Laval, Canadian Civil Liberties Association and British
Columbia Civil Liberties Association Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell
and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 132) McLachlin C.J. (LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell
  and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)     R. v. Khawaja, 2012 SCC 69, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 555 Mohammad Momin Khawaja                                                                       Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Attorney General of Ontario, Groupe d’étude en droits et libertés de la Faculté de droit de l’Université
Laval, Canadian Civil Liberties Association and
British Columbia Civil
Liberties Association                                                                           Interveners Indexed as:  R. v. Khawaja 2012 SCC 69 File No.:  34103. 2012:  June 11; 2012:  December 14. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein,
Cromwell and Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                     National security —
Terrorism — Sentencing — Totality principle — Accused guilty of terrorism
offences sentenced by trial judge to 10 and a half years of imprisonment, with
parole eligibility set at 5 years — Court of Appeal substituting sentence of
life imprisonment coupled with 24 years of consecutive sentences, with parole
eligibility set at 10 years — Whether Court of Appeal erred in overturning
sentence.                     Held:  The appeal should be
dismissed. Constitutionality of the Provisions                     K challenges the constitutionality
of the legislation on the ground that the motive clause would produce a
chilling effect on the expression of beliefs and opinions and thus violates
s. 2  of the Charter .  In their companion appeals (Sriskandarajah
v. United States of America, 2012 SCC 70, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 609), S and N
also claim that the legislation’s purpose violates s. 2  of the Charter . 
They also challenge the constitutionality of s. 83.18  for overbreadth,
under s. 7  of the Charter .  For convenience, all these
constitutional claims are considered in this appeal.                     Section 83.18  does not
violate s. 7  of the Charter .  A purposive interpretation of the actus
reus and mens rea requirements of s. 83.18  excludes convictions
(i) for innocent or socially useful conduct that is undertaken absent any
intent to enhance the abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out
a terrorist activity, and (ii) for conduct that a reasonable person would
not view as capable of materially enhancing the abilities of a terrorist group
to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity.  The legitimate purpose of the
Terrorism section of the Criminal Code  is to provide means by which
terrorism may be prosecuted and prevented.  This purpose commands a high mens
rea threshold.  To convict under s. 83.18 , a judge must be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused specifically intended to enhance the
ability of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity. 
There may be direct evidence of this intention.  Or the intention may be
inferred from evidence of the knowledge of the accused and the nature of his
actions.  The use of the words “for the purpose of” in s. 83.18  requires a
subjective purpose of enhancing the ability of a terrorist group to facilitate
or carry out a terrorist activity.  The accused must specifically intend his
actions to have this general effect.  Further, the actus reus of
s. 83.18  does not capture conduct that discloses, at most, a negligible
risk of enhancing the abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out
a terrorist activity.  The scope of the provision excludes conduct that a
reasonable person would not view as capable of materially enhancing the
abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist
activity.  The determination of whether a reasonable person would view conduct
as capable of materially enhancing the abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate
or carry out a terrorist activity hinges on the nature of the conduct
and the relevant circumstances.  When the tailored reach of s. 83.18  is
weighed against the objective of the law, it cannot be said that the selected
means are broader than necessary or that the impact of the section is
disproportionate.                     The purpose of the law does not
infringe freedom of expression.  While the activities targeted by the Terrorism
section of the Criminal Code  are in a sense expressive activities, most
of the conduct caught by the provisions concerns acts or threats of violence.  Threats
of violence, like acts of violence, are excluded from the scope of the s. 2 (b)
guarantee.  Moreover, the particular nature of the conduct enumerated in s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(A),
(B), (C) and (D) justifies treating counselling, conspiracy or being an
accessory after the fact to that conduct as being intimately connected to
violence — and to the danger to Canadian society that such violence
represents.  As such, the conduct falls outside the protection of s. 2 (b)
of the Charter .  However, it is not necessary to decide whether
counselling, conspiracy or being an accessory after the fact fall outside the
s. 2 (b) guarantee as a general matter. Read as a whole and
purposively, s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(E), which is directed to acts that
intentionally interfere with essential infrastructure without which life may be
seriously disrupted and public health threatened, is also confined to the realm
of acts and threats of violence. However, it cannot be ruled out that
s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(E) might in some future case be found to capture
protected activity. In such a case, the issue would be
whether the incursion on free expression is justified under s. 1  of the Charter . Application of the Provisions in This
Appeal and Sentencing                     The uncontradicted evidence before
the trial judge established beyond a reasonable doubt that K’s conduct did not
fall within the armed conflict exception in s. 83.01(1)  in fine,
which provides that terrorist activity does not include acts or omissions
committed during an armed conflict in accordance with international law.  The
Crown bears the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the acts
alleged against an accused fall within the definition of terrorist activity,
and any reasonable doubt must be resolved in the accused’s favour.  However,
since the armed conflict exception functions as a defence, the accused must
raise it and make a prima facie case that it applies.  Here K could not
do so, as there was no evidential foundation to support its applicability.  The
trial judge expressly found that K knew that the terrorist group’s activities
extended beyond the armed conflict in Afghanistan and that he supported the
terrorist objectives, and the evidence is overwhelmingly contrary to the
proposition that K’s acts were part of an armed conflict governed by
international law.  There is no air of reality to the suggestion that K
believed that the group intended to act in compliance with international law,
or that he cared if it did. Cases Cited Statutes and Regulations
Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 1 , 2 , 7 . Authors Cited Canada.  House of Commons.  House of Commons Debates, vol. 137,
No. 95, 1st Sess., 37th Parl., October 16, 2001, p. 6165. Parent, Hugues, et Julie Desrosiers.  Traité de droit criminel,
t. 3, La peine.  Montréal:  Thémis, 2012. Roach, Kent.  “Terrorism Offences and the Charter :  A Comment on R.
v. Khawaja” (2007), 11 Can. Crim. L.R. 271. United Nations.  Security Council.  U.N. Doc. S/RES/1373,
September 28, 2001.                     APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario
Court of Appeal (Doherty, Moldaver and Cronk JJ.A.),
2010 ONCA 862, 103 O.R. (3d) 321, 271 O.A.C. 238, 273 C.C.C. (3d) 415, 82 C.R.
(6th) 122, [2010] O.J. No. 5471 (QL), 2010 CarswellOnt 9672, overturning a
constitutional ruling by Rutherford J. (2006), 214 C.C.C. (3d) 399, 42
C.R. (6th) 348, 147 C.R.R. (2d) 281, 2006 CanLII 63685, [2006] O.J. No. 4245
(QL), 2006 CarswellOnt 6551, affirming convictions entered by
Rutherford J. (2008), 238 C.C.C. (3d) 114, [2008] O.J. No. 4244 (QL),
2008 CarswellOnt 6364, and varying sentences imposed by Rutherford J.
(2009), 248 C.C.C. (3d) 233, [2009] O.J. No. 4279 (QL), 2009 CarswellOnt
6322.  Appeal dismissed.                     Lawrence Greenspon and Eric Granger, for the
appellant.                     Croft Michaelson and Ian Bell, for the respondent.                     Michael Bernstein, for the intervener the Attorney General
of Ontario.                     Anil K. Kapoor and Lindsay L. Daviau, for the
intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association.                     Kent Roach and Michael Fenrick, for the
intervener the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association.                      The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                      The Chief Justice — I.  Introduction [1]                             
The appellant, Mohammad Momin Khawaja, was
convicted of five offences under Part II.1 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C.
1985, c. C-46 , the Terrorism section. He faces a life sentence and a concurrent
sentence of 24 years of imprisonment, with a 10-year period of parole
ineligibility.  He appeals on a variety of grounds, which may be summarized as
follows: (1) that the provisions in Part II.1 of the Criminal Code  under
which he was convicted violate the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and
are unconstitutional; (2) that the provisions were misapplied or
misinterpreted, resulting in an unfair trial or an unreasonable verdict; and (3)
that the Ontario Court of Appeal erred in imposing his sentence. [2]                             
For the reasons that follow, I would reject each
of the contentions of the appellant.  The issues in this appeal overlap with
some of the issues in the companion appeals of Sriskandarajah and Nadarajah (Sriskandarajah
v. United States of America, 2012 SCC 70, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 609).  For
convenience, I will consider all the constitutional issues in these reasons. II.  The Evidence [3]                             
The facts underlying the offences were largely
undisputed. Voluminous email correspondence attested in
graphic detail to the appellant’s ideological commitment to violent “jihad” and
to his acts in Canada and elsewhere to further jihad-inspired terrorist
activities. [4]                             
While living with his siblings in Canada, the
appellant became obsessed with Osama Bin Laden and his cause.  The appellant
began communicating with other people committed to violence in the name of
Islam, some of whom he referred to as “the bros”.  He entered into covert email
correspondence with Junaid Babar, an American of Pakistani descent who
eventually pled guilty in New York City to five counts of providing material
support or resources to Al Qaeda.  He also communicated extensively with Omar
Khyam, the leader of a terrorist cell based in London, England, who was
convicted along with several co-conspirators of a plot to bomb targets in the
U.K. and elsewhere in Europe. [5]                             
The appellant repeatedly offered Khyam and Babar
support.  He gave Khyam money for an explosives operation in the United Kingdom
or elsewhere in Europe. He gave Babar cash, supplies and SIM cards so that
Babar could contact Khyam when transporting detonators to Europe.  He provided
funds to support Babar, Khyam and “the bros” in their jihadist efforts.  He
designed a remote arming device for explosives that he referred to as the
“hifidigimonster”, and offered to smuggle it into the U.K. and train the U.K.
cell on its use.  He recruited a woman in Ottawa to facilitate transfers of
money. He also offered to procure night goggles for use by the group. [6]                             
The appellant travelled to Pakistan alone and
with Khyam, and attended Babar’s small arms training camp. He made his parents’
home in Pakistan available to the “bros”.  He suggested
members of the U.K. group travel to Canada for weapons training. He also
proposed to Khyam via email that a supporter of the Khyam group be sent to
Israel on a suicide mission. [7]                             
On March 29, 2004, the RCMP arrested the
appellant and searched his house in Orleans, Ottawa.  They seized the
“hifidigimonster”, electronic components and devices, parts suitable for
constructing more remote arming devices, documents corroborating the assembly
process for the device, instructional literature and tools, military calibre
rifles and ammunition, other weapons, hard drives, $10,300 in one-hundred
dollar bills, military books and jihad-related books.  No blasting caps, other
detonators or explosives components were discovered. III.  Judicial History [8]                             
By direct indictment, the appellant was charged
with seven offences under the Terrorism section of the Criminal Code . 
The appellant brought a preliminary constitutional motion (allowed in part) and
a motion for a directed verdict of acquittal (dismissed).  He elected to be
tried by judge alone, and was convicted on five counts and found guilty of two
included offences. A.  The Pre-trial Charter  Challenge (2006), 214 C.C.C. (3d) 399 [9]                             
Prior to trial, the appellant sought a
declaration that several terrorism provisions of the Criminal Code  (ss.
83.01(1) , 83.03 (a), 83.18 , 83.18(1) , 83.18(3) (a), 83.19 , 83.2  and
83.21(1) ) are unconstitutional.  The motion judge found that the impugned
provisions are neither unconstitutionally vague nor overbroad. [10]                         
However, the motion judge held that
s. 83.01(1) (b)(i)(A), which provides that a terrorist activity must
be an act or omission committed in whole or in part “for a political, religious
or ideological purpose, objective or cause” was a prima facie
infringement of s. 2 (a), (b) and (d) of the Charter .
He found that the effect of this “motive clause” would be “to focus
investigative and prosecutorial scrutiny on the political, religious and
ideological beliefs, opinions and expressions of persons and groups”, which in
turn would produce a chilling effect on the expression of beliefs and opinions
(para. 58).  He found that the infringement could not be justified under s. 1 
and accordingly severed the motive clause from s. 83.01(1) . B.        The Trial (2008), 238 C.C.C. (3d) 114 [11]                         
The trial proceeded on the basis that the motive
clause was severed from the legislation.  The trial judge found the appellant
guilty of seven offences. [12]                         
The trial judge held that the first two counts
(wanting to cause an explosion with specified consequences at the behest of a
terrorist group and possessing an explosive substance with the intent of
enabling a terrorist group to endanger others) required knowledge of the U.K.
group’s bomb plot, which the Crown failed to establish beyond a reasonable
doubt. Since defence counsel had admitted that there was evidence of lesser
included offences, the trial judge found the appellant guilty of working on the
development of a detonator contrary to s. 81(1) (a) of the Criminal
Code  and keeping an explosive substance contrary to s. 81(1) (d). He
conditionally stayed proceedings on the latter count, under the Kienapple principle
(Kienapple v. The Queen, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 729).  He held that the
remaining five counts were not restricted by a requirement that the appellant
know the U.K. group was planning a bomb plot. His findings with respect to each
count can be summarized as follows: Count 3: The appellant participated
in a terrorist group by taking weapons training at the camp in northern
Pakistan for the purpose of enhancing the ability of a terrorist group to
facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity;  Count 4: The appellant deceived a
young woman into acting as a conduit to pass funds for the purpose of enhancing
the ability of the Khyam group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity;  Count 5: The appellant made his
parents’ residence in Pakistan available for the use of the Khyam group in
pursuit of a common objective of violent jihad, thereby making property
available for the purpose of facilitating a terrorist activity or for the
benefit of a terrorist group;  Count 6: Everything the appellant
did in relation to developing the remote detonator device amounted to
participating in or contributing to the activity of a terrorist group for the
purpose of enhancing the group’s ability to carry out a terrorist activity; and  Count 7: The appellant knowingly
facilitated terrorism by, inter alia, transporting money, a medical kit,
SIM cards and invisible ink pens to Babar; offering to acquire equipment;
suggesting that Khyam and another group member come to Canada for shooting
practice; offering a course in electronics; suggesting that a third party be
sent on a suicide mission to Israel; discussing putting his computer skills to
work to assist “the bros”.  [13]                         
The trial judge found that the U.K. cell
qualified as a terrorist group within the meaning of the Terrorism section of
the Criminal Code .  On the basis of judicial notice of facts available, inter
alia, from documents on the United Nations website, he held that the insurgents’
conduct in Afghanistan is terrorist activity, because it results in death and
destruction and it is intended to intimidate the Afghan population and diminish
support for the legitimate government. Consequently, by preparing for and
supporting the insurgency against the coalition forces in Afghanistan, the U.K.
cell was facilitating terrorist activity and qualified as a terrorist group.
The trial judge held that the appellant “knew he was dealing with a group whose
objects and purposes included activity that meets the Code definition of
terrorist activity” (para. 131). [14]                         
The trial judge refused to apply the exception
for armed conflict in the definition of “terrorist activity” in s. 83.01(1)  in
fine.  Pursuant to that subsection, terrorist activity does not include
acts or omissions committed during an armed conflict in accordance with
international law.  The trial judge found that neither the appellant
nor any member of the U.K. cell was engaged in armed conflict. C.  The Sentence (2009), 248 C.C.C. (3d) 233 [15]                         
The trial judge took into account the mitigating
personal circumstances raised by the appellant, but noted that there was no
information available respecting his attitude or expected future behaviour,
because he had refused to be interviewed for a pre-sentence report. The trial
judge held that while terrorism sentencing must emphasize denunciation,
deterrence and protection of the public, the potential for rehabilitation could
not be overlooked.  He refused to order a life sentence similar to those given
to the cell members in the U.K. because he was not persuaded that the appellant
was a similar offender in similar circumstances, as opposed to just a willing
helper and supporter. [16]                         
The trial judge sentenced the appellant to 10
and a half years in a penitentiary.  He gave no credit for time served on the
basis that that would be incompatible with a denunciatory sentence.  He set
parole ineligibility at 5 years to reflect the absence of any evidence of
remorse, willingness to make amends or commitment to future compliance with
Canada’s laws and values. D.  The Court of Appeal, 2010 ONCA
862, 103 O.R. (3d) 321 [17]                         
The Court of Appeal dismissed the appellant’s
conviction appeal. However, the Court of Appeal held that the trial judge had
erred in finding the motive clause unconstitutional. It stated that expressive
activity that takes the form of violence is not protected by s. 2 (b) of
the Charter , since violence is destructive of the very values that
underlie the right to freedom of expression. For the same reason, threats of
violence are not protected by s. 2 (b). Thus, the legislation limits a
form of expression that is destructive of the principles underlying freedom of
expression and, consequently, cannot constitute an infringement of s. 2 (b).
Moreover, the Court of Appeal held that the trial judge’s conclusion that the
impugned provisions had a chilling effect was founded entirely on speculation,
rather than on evidence to the effect that members of the community actually
felt constrained in the expression of their beliefs or opinions. [18]                         
The Court of Appeal found, as had the trial
judge, that the armed conflict exception did not apply to the appellant’s
conduct. There was no evidence that the appellant or the insurgents in
Afghanistan undertook armed conflict in accordance with international law.
The record showed that the appellant himself viewed the violent jihad he was
committed to as unlawful. Moreover, the appellant’s actions were directed at
supporting terrorist activities inside and outside of the forum of conflict in
Afghanistan. [19]                         
The Court of Appeal stated that the trial judge
did not err in taking judicial notice of the nature of hostilities in
Afghanistan. Further, the verdicts reached by the trial judge were amply
supported by the record at trial and were reasonable. [20]                         
Finally, the Court of Appeal dismissed the
appellant’s appeal from the sentences, but allowed the Crown’s cross-appeal. 
The Court substituted a sentence of life imprisonment on the conviction for
building a detonator to cause a deadly explosion. Emphasizing the seriousness
of the conduct, it substituted a total of 24 years of consecutive sentences for
the remaining counts, to be served concurrently with the life sentence, and set
parole ineligibility at 10 years instead of 5. IV.  The Legislation [21]                         
The Anti-terrorism Act, S.C. 2001, c. 41 ,
part of which now forms Part II.1 of the Criminal Code , was passed in
2001, in the aftermath of the Al Qaeda attacks in the United States and
Resolution 1373 of the United Nations Security Council, which called on member
states to take steps to prevent and suppress terrorist activity (U.N. Doc.
S/RES/1373).  The purpose of the legislation is to provide a means by which
terrorism may be prosecuted and prevented: Application under s. 83.28 of the
Criminal Code (Re), 2004 SCC 42, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 248. [22]                         
While the immediate impetus for the legislation
may have been concern following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001,
the legislation has a much broader history and context.  As the recitals to the
U.N. Resolution make clear, these events were part of an unfolding and
escalating international problem.  Canada, which had experienced the Air India
and Narita bombings, was no stranger to this problem.  The legislation is not
emergency legislation, but a permanent part of the criminal law of this
country:  Application under s. 83.28 of the Criminal Code (Re), at
para. 39. [23]                         
The appellant says that the definition section
of the legislation, s. 83.01(1) , offends Charter  guarantees,
notably freedom of religion and freedom of expression.  I will at this point describe in general terms the definitions of
“terrorist activity” and “terrorist group”, and the offences that the
provisions create. The full text of the relevant provisions is reproduced in
the Appendix. [24]                         
“Terrorist activity” is defined (i) as an act or
omission committed inside or outside Canada that, if committed inside Canada,
would constitute one of the Criminal Code  offences enumerated in s.
83.01(1) (a), or (ii) as an act or omission, a conspiracy, an attempt or
threat to commit any act or omission, counselling an act or omission and being
an accessory after the fact to an act or omission, that causes one of the
consequences described in s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(A) to (E). These
consequences are: causing death or serious bodily harm to a person by the use
of violence (clause (A)); endangering a person’s life (clause (B)); causing a
serious risk to the health or safety of the public or any segment thereof
(clause (C)); causing substantial property damage, whether to public or private
property, if causing such damage is likely to result in the conduct or harm
referred to in clauses (A) to (C) (clause (D)); or causing serious interference
with or serious disruption of an essential service, facility or system, whether
public or private, other than as a result of advocacy, protest, dissent or
stoppage of work that is not intended to result in the conduct or harm referred
to in any of clauses (A) to (C) (clause (E)).  However, conduct otherwise
captured by s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(A) to (E) does not constitute “terrorist
activity” if it falls within the exception for armed conflict conducted in
accordance with international law (s. 83.01(1)  in fine). [25]                         
Furthermore, the act or omission that causes one
of the consequences enumerated in 83.01(1)(b)(ii)(A) to (E) only
constitutes “terrorist activity” if it is accompanied by the requisite mental
state. The act or omission must be done with the intention of causing one of
the enumerated consequences. In addition, the act or omission must be done with
the ulterior intention of intimidating the public or a segment of the public as
regards its security, or to compel a person, a government or an organization —
whether inside or outside of Canada — to do or refrain from doing any act (s.
83.01(1) (b)(i)(B)). Finally, the act or omission must be done in whole
or in part for a political, religious or ideological purpose, objective or
cause (s. 83.01(1) (b)(i)(A)). [26]                         
“Terrorist group” is defined as a person or
group that has as one of its purposes or activities the facilitation or
carrying out of any “terrorist activity”, or a person or group identified in a
regulation adopted under s. 83.05. [27]                         
Based on these definitions, the legislation goes
on to create a number of offences, including: -                  Providing or making available property or
services for terrorist purposes (s. 83.03) (maximum term of imprisonment
of 10 years); -                  Participating in or contributing to the activity
of a terrorist group (s. 83.18 ) (maximum term of imprisonment of 10 years); -                  Facilitating a terrorist activity (s. 83.19 )
(maximum term of imprisonment of 14 years); -                  Instructing people to carry out an activity for a
terrorist group (s. 83.21) (liable to imprisonment for life). [28]                         
The counts on which the appellant was convicted
variously engage all of these offences. [29]                         
The terrorism offences attract specific
sentencing provisions. Pursuant to s. 83.26, sentences for terrorism offences
must be served consecutively. Further, s. 718.2 provides that the commission of
a terrorism offence is to be considered an aggravating factor for the purposes
of sentencing. Finally, I set out the provisions of the Charter  relevant
to the appeal.  The overbreadth argument advanced in the companion appeals is
grounded in s. 7  of the Charter : 7.  Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person
and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the
principles of fundamental justice. [30]                         
The appellant in this appeal bases his argument
that the provisions are unconstitutional on s. 2  of the Charter : 2.
Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms:  (a)
freedom of conscience and religion;  (b)
freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the
press and other media of communication;  (c)
freedom of peaceful assembly; and  (d)
freedom of association. [31]                         
Breaches of Charter  guarantees can be
justified under s. 1 , which provides: 1. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  guarantees the
rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits
prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
society. V.  Issues [32]                         
The issues are as follows: A.     Constitutionality
of the provisions; 1.      Does s. 83.18 of the Criminal
Code  violate s. 7  of the Charter ?          (a)      The test for overbreadth;          (b)      The scope of the law;          (c)      The objective of the law;          (d)      Are the impugned provisions broader than necessary
or is their impact disproportionate? 2.      Does the law, specifically the motive clause, infringe s. 2 
of the Charter ?          (a)      Unconstitutional purpose;          (b)      Unconstitutional effect; 3.      Conclusion on the constitutionality of the law; B.     Application of the provisions; 1.      Did the deletion and subsequent re-insertion of the motive clause make the trial and convictions unfair? 2.      Does the armed conflict exception apply? 3.      Were the verdicts unreasonable? C.     Did the Court of Appeal err in overturning the sentence imposed
by the trial judge and substituting a term of life imprisonment? [33]                         
The appellant challenges the constitutionality
of the legislation only on one ground: that its chilling effect violates s. 2 
of the Charter .  The appellants in the companion appeals also allege a
violation of s. 2  of the Charter , and additionally challenge the
constitutionality of s. 83.18  for overbreadth pursuant to s. 7  of the Charter . VI.    Analysis A.      Constitutionality
of the Provisions          1.        Does Section 83.18 of the Criminal Code 
Violate Section 7 of the Charter ? [34]                         
The appellant challenged the provisions under
which he was charged as unconstitutional for vagueness and overbreadth on a
pre-trial constitutional motion. The trial judge rejected this submission and
the appellant does not pursue it before this Court.  However, s. 83.18 of the Criminal
Code  is challenged for overbreadth in the companion appeals.  Since all
three cases depend on the ultimate constitutionality of the legislation, I
propose to consider all the constitutional arguments, including overbreadth, in
these reasons. [35]                         
It is a principle of fundamental justice that
criminal laws not be overbroad. Pursuant to s. 7  of the Charter , laws
that restrict the liberty of those to whom they apply must do so in accordance
with principles of fundamental justice. Criminal laws that restrict liberty
more than is necessary to accomplish their goal violate principles of
fundamental justice. Such laws are overbroad.  The
appellants Nadarajah and Sriskandarajah say that the combined effect of the
definition of terrorist activity (s. 83.01(1) ) and of the provision prohibiting
participation in terrorist activity (s. 83.18 ) results in overbreadth, by
criminalizing conduct that creates no risk of harm and is only tenuously
connected to Parliament’s objective of preventing terrorist activity. [36]                         
I will first review the legal test for
overbreadth.  I will then apply this test to the definition of terrorist
activity and the prohibition of participation in terrorist activity.           (a)     The Test for Overbreadth [37]                         
In R. v. Heywood, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 761,
this Court explained that a law is overbroad if the state, in pursuing a
legitimate objective, uses means which are broader than is necessary to
accomplish that objective.   In determining
overbreadth, a measure of deference must be paid to the means selected by the
legislator. [38]                         
The appellants argue that the law is overbroad
because it is grossly disproportionate to the objective it seeks to achieve.
The appellants conflate overbreadth and gross disproportionality. Heywood suggested
that gross disproportionality was a concept subsumed by overbreadth: “The
effect of overbreadth is that in some applications the law is arbitrary or
disproportionate” (p. 793). However, gross disproportionality seemed to be
recognized as a distinct breach of principles of fundamental justice in the
marihuana case R. v. Malmo-Levine, 2003 SCC 74, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 571. 
Some confusion arises from the fact that Malmo-Levine’s companion case R.
v. Clay, 2003 SCC 75, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 735, could be read as suggesting that
gross disproportionality is simply the standard by which overbreadth is
measured. Indeed, this Court wrote in Clay that “[o]verbreadth . . . addresses the potential infringement of
fundamental justice where the adverse effect of a legislative measure on the
individuals subject to its strictures is grossly disproportionate to the
state interest the legislation seeks to protect” (para. 38 (emphasis in
original)). [39]                         
The authorities continue to suggest that
overbreadth and gross disproportionality are — at least analytically —
distinct. Indeed, Professor Hogg refers to gross disproportionality as the
“sister” doctrine of overbreadth (P. W. Hogg, Constitutional Law of Canada
(5th ed. Supp.), vol. 2, at p. 47-58). Further, in Canada (Attorney General)
v. PHS Community Services Society, 2011 SCC 44, [2011] 3
S.C.R. 134, this Court considered overbreadth and gross disproportionality
under separate headings (paras. 133-35). [40]                         
For the purposes of this appeal, I need not
decide whether overbreadth and gross disproportionality are distinct
constitutional doctrines. Certainly, these concepts are interrelated, although
they may simply offer different lenses through which to consider a single
breach of the principles of fundamental justice. Overbreadth occurs when the
means selected by the legislator are broader than necessary to achieve the
state objective, and gross disproportionality occurs when state actions or
legislative responses to a problem are “so extreme as to be disproportionate to
any legitimate government interest”: PHS Community Services Society, at
para. 133; see also Malmo-Levine, at para. 143.  In order to address the
appellants’ s. 7  constitutional challenge, I will (1) examine the scope of the
law (2) determine the objective of the law and (3) ask whether the means
selected by the law are broader than necessary to achieve the state objective
and whether the impact of the law is grossly disproportionate to that objective.
Thus, I will examine both overbreadth and gross disproportionality in a
single step, without however deciding whether they are distinct constitutional
doctrines.           (b)     The Scope of the Law [41]                         
Section 83.18(1)  criminalizes participation
in or contributions to the activities of a terrorist group.  It requires for
conviction that the accused (a) knowingly (b) participate in or contribute to,
(c) directly or indirectly, (d) any activity of a terrorist group, (e) for the
purpose of enhancing the ability of any terrorist group to facilitate or carry
out a terrorist activity.  Subsection (2) specifies that, in order to secure a
conviction, the Crown does not have to prove that (a) the terrorist group actually
facilitated or carried out a terrorist activity, that (b) the accused’s acts
actually enhanced the ability of a terrorist group to do so, or that (c) the
accused knew the specific nature of any terrorist activity facilitated or
carried out by a terrorist group. As the Ontario Court of Appeal found in United
States of America v. Nadarajah (No. 1), 2010 ONCA 859, 109 O.R. (3d) 662:                             . . . s. 83.18 applies to persons who,
by their acts, contribute to or participate in what they know to be activities
of what they know to be a terrorist group.  In addition, those acts must be
done for the specific purpose of enhancing the ability of that terrorist group
to facilitate or carry out activity that falls within the definition of
terrorist activity. [para. 28] [42]                         
The appellants argue that s. 83.18 is overbroad
because it captures conduct that does not contribute materially to the creation
of a risk of terrorism, such as direct and indirect participation in
legitimate, innocent and charitable activities carried out by a terrorist
group.  They contend that, “[i]n the absence of some explicit disassociation
from the group’s terrorist ideology, participating in any activity of
the group could be viewed as intending to enhance the group’s abilities to
carry out terrorist activities” (Nadarajah factum, at para. 35 (emphasis
added)).  Thus, innocent individuals, who may or may not sympathize with the
cause of a terrorist group, could be convicted under s. 83.18 purely on the
basis of attending a visibility-enhancing event held by the charitable arm of a
group that also engages in terrorist activity. Professor Roach has opined that
even lawyers and doctors who legitimately provide their professional services
to a known terrorist could be convicted under s. 83.18:  see K. Roach, “The New
Terrorism Offences and the Criminal Law”, in R. J. Daniels, P. Macklem and K.
Roach, eds., The Security of Freedom: Essays on Canada’s
Anti-Terrorism Bill (2001), 151, at p. 161. According to the appellants,
these scenarios demonstrate that the law is overbroad. [43]                         
The first step in assessing the validity of this
argument is to interpret s. 83.18 to determine its true scope:  Ontario v.
Canadian Pacific Ltd., [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1031, per Lamer C.J., at
para. 10. [44]                         
The Terrorism section
of the Criminal Code , like any statutory provision, must be interpreted
with regard to its legislative purpose.  That purpose is “to provide means by
which terrorism may be prosecuted and prevented” (Application under s. 83.28 of the Criminal Code (Re), at para. 39) — not
to punish individuals for innocent, socially useful or casual acts which,
absent any intent, indirectly contribute to a terrorist activity. [45]                         
This purpose commands a high mens rea threshold. 
To be convicted, an individual must not only participate in or contribute to a
terrorist activity “knowingly”, his or her actions must also be
undertaken “for the purpose” of enhancing the abilities of a terrorist
group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity.  The use of the words
“for the purpose of” in s. 83.18 may be interpreted as requiring a “higher
subjective purpose of enhancing the ability of any terrorist group to carry out
a terrorist activity”: K. Roach, “Terrorism Offences and the Charter : A Comment
on R. v. Khawaja” (2007), 11 Can. Crim. L.R. 271, at p. 285. [46]                         
To have the subjective purpose of
enhancing the ability of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a
terrorist activity, the accused must specifically intend his
actions to have this general effect. The specific nature of the terrorist activity,
for example the death of a person from a bombing, need not be intended (s.
83.18(2)(c)); all that need be intended is that his action will enhance
the ability of the terrorist group to carry out or facilitate a terrorist
activity. [47]                         
The effect of this heightened mens rea is
to exempt those who may unwittingly assist terrorists or who do so for a valid
reason. Social and professional contact with terrorists — for example, such as
occurs in normal interactions with friends and family members — will not, absent
the specific intent to enhance the abilities of a terrorist group, permit a
conviction under s. 83.18. The provision requires subjective fault, as opposed
to mere negligent failure to take reasonable steps to avoid unwittingly
assisting terrorists:  see K. Roach, “Terrorism Offences and the Charter : A
Comment on R. v. Khawaja”, at p. 285.  For example, a lawyer who represents a
known terrorist may know that, if successful at trial, his client will
thereafter pursue his contributions to terrorism. However, the lawyer could
only be convicted under s. 83.18  if his intent was specifically to enable the
client to pursue further terrorist activities, as opposed to simply affording
his client a full defence at law. [48]                         
To convict under s. 83.18, the judge must be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused intended to enhance the ability of a
terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity.  There may be
direct evidence of this intention. Or the intention may be inferred from
evidence of the knowledge of the accused and the nature of his actions. [49]                         
The appellants argue that, even if the scope of
s. 83.18 is narrowed by the high mens rea requirement, it is still
overbroad because it captures conduct that, while perhaps animated by the
intent to enhance the abilities of a terrorist group, is essentially harmless.
For example, a person who marches in a non-violent rally held by the charitable
arm of a terrorist group, with the specific intention of lending credibility to
the group and thereby enhancing the group’s ability to carry out terrorist
activities, is not necessarily contributing to terrorism in any meaningful way.
Yet, on the basis of the plain meaning of s. 83.18, that person could be
convicted for participating in terrorism. [50]                         
This argument relies on an incorrect
interpretation of s. 83.18.  The actus reus of s. 83.18 does not capture
conduct that discloses, at most, a negligible risk of enhancing the abilities
of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity. Although
s. 83.18(1) punishes an individual who “participates in or contributes to . . .
any activity of a terrorist group”, the context makes clear that
Parliament did not intend for the provision to capture conduct that creates no
risk or a negligible risk of harm. Indeed, the offence carries with it a sentence
of up to 10 years of imprisonment and significant stigma.  This provision is
meant to criminalize conduct that presents a real risk for Canadian society. [51]                         
A purposive and contextual reading of the
provision confines “participat[ion] in” and “contribut[ion] to” a terrorist
activity to conduct that creates a risk of harm that rises beyond a de
minimis threshold. While nearly every interaction with a terrorist group
carries some risk of indirectly enhancing the abilities of the group, the scope
of s. 83.18 excludes conduct that a reasonable person would not view as capable
of materially enhancing the abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate or
carry out a terrorist activity. [52]                         
The determination of whether a reasonable person
would view conduct as capable of materially enhancing the abilities of a
terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity
hinges on the nature of the conduct and the relevant circumstances. For
example, the conduct of a restaurant owner who cooks a single meal for a known
terrorist is not of a nature to materially enhance the abilities of a terrorist
group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity: K. E. Davis, “Cutting
off the Flow of Funds to Terrorists: Whose Funds? Which Funds? Who Decides?”,
in The Security of Freedom: Essays on Canada’s Anti-Terrorism Bill, 299,
at p. 301. By contrast, giving flight lessons to a known terrorist is clearly
conduct of a nature to materially enhance the abilities of a terrorist group to
facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity: House of Commons Debates,
vol. 137, No. 95, 1st Sess.,  37th Parl., October 16, 2001, at p. 6165 (Hon.
Anne McLellan). [53]                         
I conclude that a purposive interpretation of
the actus reus and mens rea requirements of s. 83.18 excludes
convictions (i) for innocent or socially useful conduct that is undertaken
absent any intent to enhance the abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate
or carry out a terrorist activity, and (ii) for conduct that a reasonable person
would not view as capable of materially enhancing the abilities of a terrorist
group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity. [54]                         
Having determined that the scope of the law is
narrower than was argued by the appellants, I turn to the second step of the
analysis, the objective of the law.             (c)        The
Objective of the Law [55]                         
The parties agree that the objective of the
terrorism provisions is to prosecute and prevent terrorism.  The need to
prosecute acts that support or assist terrorist activity that may never
materialize into acts of terrorism flows from the great harm resulting from
terrorism offences, the Crown contends.  The appellants agree that it is
legitimate for the state to prevent terrorist acts from taking place.             (d)       Are the Impugned Provisions Broader Than
Necessary or Is Their Impact Disproportionate? [56]                         
Finally, I must ask whether the impugned
provisions are broader than necessary to prevent and prosecute terrorism, or
have an impact that is grossly disproportionate to that objective. [57]                         
The appellants argue that, in relation to its
objective, s. 83.18 is broader than necessary and has a grossly
disproportionate impact because it criminalizes acts (1) which do not disclose
a risk of harm, (2) which are not connected to a real or contemplated terrorist
act, and (3) which are preliminary to the commission of an inchoate offence. 
The first two arguments are answered by the limited scope of s. 83.18.  As we
have seen, conviction under s. 83.18 entails  (1) an actus reus that
excludes conduct that a reasonable person would not view as capable of
materially enhancing the abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry
out a terrorist activity, and (2) a high mens rea (specific intent to
enhance the abilities of a terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a
terrorist activity).  The Crown must prove both these elements beyond a
reasonable doubt. Conduct that meets both these requirements discloses a
non-negligible risk of harm and is sufficiently connected to real or
contemplated terrorist activity. [58]                         
As stated above, the appellants’ third argument
is that the impact of s. 83.18 is grossly disproportionate to Parliament’s
objective of curbing terrorism because it criminalizes acts that are
preliminary to the commission of an inchoate offence.  The appellants agree
that stopping a terrorist act before it takes place is a legitimate legislative
objective.  However, they argue that the existing crimes of conspiracy and
attempt are sufficient to achieve this objective, and that it is unnecessary
and disproportionate to reach back further and criminalize activity that is
preliminary or ancillary to those preparatory acts. [59]                         
The appellants rely on this Court’s statement in
R. v. Déry, 2006 SCC 53, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 669, per Fish J., that
criminal liability does not attach “to fruitless
discussions in contemplation of a substantive crime that is never committed,
nor even attempted, by any of the parties to the discussions” (para. 37).  They argue that s. 83.18 goes even further and
criminalizes “indirect and fruitless contributions to non-terrorist activities
where the intention is to enhance the ability of a group to commit such
preliminary acts as conspiring or counselling, even where no terrorist act is
facilitated or carried out and the accused is unaware of the specific nature of
the act contemplated” (Nadarajah factum, at para. 43). [60]                         
In my opinion, Déry does not assist the
appellants.  First, Déry was concerned with interpretation, not
constitutional boundaries.  Indeed, the reasons contemplate that Parliament could,
if it wished, create an offence of attempted conspiracy:  “Recognition of
attempted conspiracy as a crime might well capture cases of feigned agreement,
but this sort of change in the law is best left to Parliament” (para. 36). [61]                         
Second, the reason given in Déry for not
punishing acts preceding the commission of an inchoate offence is that such
acts would not be sufficiently proximate to a substantive offence and the
harmful conduct that it seeks to address (see paras. 43-46).  Here, there is no
problem of remoteness from a substantive offence because Parliament has defined
the substantive offence, not as a terrorist act, but as acting in ways that
enhance the ability of a terrorist group to carry out a terrorist activity. [62]                         
I return to the central question:  Is s. 83.18
broader than necessary or does it have a grossly disproportionate impact,
considering that the state objective is the prevention and prosecution of
terrorism?  It is true that s. 83.18 captures a wide range of conduct. 
However, as we have seen, the scope of that conduct is reduced by the
requirement of specific intent and the exclusion of conduct that a reasonable
person would not view as capable of materially enhancing the abilities of a
terrorist group to facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity.  On the other
side of the scale lies the objective of preventing the devastating harm that
may result from terrorist activity.  When the tailored reach of the section is
weighed against the objective, it cannot be said that the selected means are
broader than necessary or that the impact of the section is disproportionate. [63]                         
I add this.  The breadth of the impugned
provisions reflects Parliament’s determination that “there is substantive harm
inherent in all aspects of preparation for a terrorist act because of the great
harm that flows from the completion of terrorist acts”:  R. v. Ahmad
(2009), 257 C.C.C. (3d) 199 (Ont. S.C.J.), at para. 60.  In the context of the
present analysis, it is appropriate to exhibit due deference to this
determination. The criminalization under s. 83.18 of a broad range of
interactions that have the potential to — and are intended to — materially
enhance the abilities of terrorist groups is not grossly disproportionate nor
overbroad in relation to the objective of prosecuting and, in particular, of
preventing terrorism. [64]                         
For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that s.
83.18 does not violate s. 7  of the Charter . 2.         Does the Law, Specifically Section 83.01(1)(b)(i)(A),
Infringe Section 2 of the Charter ? (a)        Does the Purpose of the Law Violate Freedom of
Expression? [65]                         
The appellants in the companion appeals argue
that Part II.1 of the Criminal Code  criminalizes expressive activity and
therefore infringes the s. 2  guarantees of freedom of expression, freedom
of religion and freedom of association. A law may limit, or infringe, a right
either by its purpose or by its effect.  The appellants contend that the
terrorism legislation, by its very purpose, limits the rights guaranteed by
s. 2  of the Charter . [66]                         
The critical right at issue is freedom of
expression, because the s. 2 (b) argument as framed is the broadest of
the Charter  infringement claims.  If freedom of expression is not
infringed, on the facts of this case there is no basis to contend that freedom
of religion and association are infringed, as the Court of Appeal observed in
this appeal (para. 96). [67]                         
The activities targeted by the legislation —
committing a terrorist activity, assisting in the commission of a terrorist
activity, enhancing the ability of others to commit a terrorist activity and
instructing others in the commission of a terrorist activity — are in a sense
expressive activities.  However, violent activities are not protected by
s. 2 (b): Irwin Toy Ltd. v. Quebec (Attorney General), [1989]
1 S.C.R. 927.  The Crown argues that this extends to all the conduct
caught by the terrorism provisions of the Criminal Code  and that
consequently, s. 2 (b) protections do not apply to Part II.1 of the Criminal
Code . [68]                         
The appellants accept that activity that takes
the form of violence is not protected by s. 2 (b).  However, they argue
that the Court of Appeal noted that this Court has not yet set out “the exact
parameters of the violence exception to the broad meaning of expressive
activity protected by s. 2 (b)” (C.A. Khawaja, at para. 102).   The
violence exception, it is argued, should be construed narrowly to exclude from
s. 2 (b) protection only expressive activity that involves actual
physical violence. [69]                         
The trial judge in the companion cases, Pattillo
J., held that the violence exception extends to threats and other acts
supporting violent activity.  The Court of Appeal in this case found it
unnecessary to decide the issue, holding that even if conduct captured by the
definition of “terrorist activity” fell within s. 2 (b), the conduct
would nevertheless not be protected because it undermines the values underlying
the right to freedom of expression — the pursuit of truth, participation in
society and individual self-fulfillment. [70]                         
This Court’s jurisprudence supports the
proposition that the exclusion of violence from the s. 2 (b) guarantee of
free expression extends to threats of violence: Greater Vancouver
Transportation Authority v. Canadian Federation of Students — British Columbia
Component, 2009 SCC 31, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 295,
at para. 28; Suresh v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration),
2002 SCC 1, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 3, at para. 107; RWDSU
v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573, at
p. 588. As this Court held in Greater Vancouver
Transportation Authority, “violent expression or threats of violence
fall outside the scope of the s. 2 (b) guarantee” (para. 28 (emphasis
added)).  It makes little sense to exclude acts of violence from the ambit of
s. 2 (b), but to confer protection on threats of violence.  Neither
are worthy of protection. Threats of violence, like violence, undermine the
rule of law. As I wrote in dissent in R. v. Keegstra, [1990]
3 S.C.R. 697, threats of violence take away free choice and undermine freedom
of action. They undermine the very values and social conditions that are
necessary for the continued existence of freedom of expression (pp. 830-31).  I
therefore reject that the violence exception to s. 2 (b) is confined to
actual physical violence, without however deciding the precise ambit of the
exception. Threats of violence fall outside the s. 2 (b) guarantee of
free expression. [71]                         
Most of the conduct caught by the terrorism
provisions in Part II.1 of the Criminal Code  concerns acts of violence
or threats of violence.  As such, the conduct falls outside the protection of
s. 2 (b) of the Charter .  The violent nature of the conduct
targeted is clear.  Part II.1 prohibits acts of serious violence and threats of
such acts, which go beyond the scope of protected expressive activity.  A
“terrorist activity” is defined as an act or an omission that “intentionally”
“causes death or serious bodily harm”, “endangers a person’s life”, “causes a
serious risk to the health or safety of the public”, or “causes substantial
property damage . . . likely to result” in these bodily
harms: s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(A), (B), (C) and (D).  These acts, and threats
to commit them, constitute serious violence or threats of serious violence, and
hence are not protected by s. 2 (b). The provision also captures
counselling, conspiracy and being an accessory after the fact in relation to
conduct enumerated in s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(A), (B), (C) and (D). I need
not decide whether counselling, conspiracy or being an accessory after the fact
fall within the violence exception to the free expression guarantee as a
general matter.  In the case of the impugned terrorism provisions, however,
the conduct enumerated in s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)(A), (B), (C) and (D) rises
to a high level of gravity. The particular nature of the enumerated conduct
justifies treating counselling, conspiracy or being an accessory after the fact
to that conduct as being intimately connected to violence — and to the danger
to Canadian society that such violence represents. Consequently, counselling,
conspiracy or being an accessory after the fact to conduct enumerated in s.
83.01(1) (b)(ii)(A), (B), (C) and (D) can find no protection under s. 2 (b). [72]                         
More problematic is the extension of the meaning
of “terrorist activity”  in s. 83.01(1)(b)(ii)(E), which catches “an act
or omission . . . that . . . causes serious interference with or serious
disruption of an essential service, facility or system, whether public or
private, other than as a result of advocacy, protest, dissent or stoppage of
work that is not intended to result in the conduct or harm referred to in any
of clauses (A) to (C)”.  This provision, it is argued, captures “interference”
and “disruption” that involve neither violence nor threats of violence, and
that thus may be protected by the free expression guarantee of s. 2 (b)
of the Charter . [73]                         
Read as a whole and purposively, s. 83.01(1)(b)(ii)(E)
is confined to the realm of acts of violence and threats of violence.  The
clause is directed to acts that intentionally interfere with essential
infrastructure, upon which people depend, and without which life may be
seriously disrupted and public health threatened.  First, clause (E) is
confined to “serious interference” and “serious disruption”.  Second, this
disruption must be to an “essential service, facility or system”.  Third, the clause
specifically excludes “advocacy, protest, dissent or stoppage of work that is
not intended to result in the conduct or harm referred to in any of clauses (A)
to (C)”.  Clauses (A) to (C) respectively target death or bodily harm by
violence, endangering a person’s life and serious risk to the health or safety
of the public.  This removes from the ambit of clause (E) a large slice of
expressive activity, provided it is not aimed at the violent, dangerous ends
contemplated in clauses (A) to (C). [74]                         
I am not persuaded on the submissions before us
that the activities targeted by s. 83.01(1)(b)(ii)(E) fall within the
protected zone of free expression.  This said, I would not rule out the
possibility that s. 83.01(1)(b)(ii)(E) might in some future case be
found to capture protected activity.  In such a case, the issue would be
whether the incursion on free expression is justified under s. 1  of the Charter . [75]                         
I conclude that the purpose of the law does not
infringe freedom of expression. (b)  Does the Effect of the Law Violate Freedom of
Expression? [76]                         
The appellants all argue that s. 83.01(1)(b)(i)(A),
the motive clause, is unconstitutional because (1) it has the effect of
chilling the exercise of freedom of expression, freedom of religion and freedom
of association; and (2) it would legitimize law enforcement action aimed at
scrutinizing individuals based on their religious, political or ideological
beliefs.  The trial judge in this case accepted this argument and severed the
motive clause; the Court of Appeal disagreed and restored it. [77]                         
The Crown responds that there is no evidence of
a chilling effect on expression or of illegitimate targeting.  The respondent
further argues that the conduct caught by the provisions is not protected by
the s. 2 (b) guarantee, as it amounts to violence or threats of violence
and does not fall within the purposes that underlie the guarantee.  If there is
no chilling effect with respect to the exercise of freedom of expression, there
can be none with respect to freedom of religion or association. [78]                         
The first question is what sort of evidentiary
basis is required to establish that legislation has a chilling effect on the
exercise of s. 2  freedoms.  The appellants say that a chilling effect can be
inferred on the basis of logic, common sense and the academic literature, as
the trial judge did.  The respondent says that there must be proof of a
chilling effect in the form of credible empirical or anecdotal evidence, as the
Court of Appeal held. [79]                         
In some situations, a chilling effect can be
inferred from known facts and experience.  For example, no reasonable person
would dispute that a law that makes the press liable in damages for responsible
reporting on political figures will probably have a chilling effect on what the
press says.  In such a case, it may be unnecessary to call evidence of a
chilling effect.  Therefore, if the Court of Appeal is understood as suggesting
that a claimant under s. 2  of the Charter  must always call evidence of a
chilling effect, I could not agree. [80]                         
However, in this case, it is impossible to
infer, without evidence, that the motive clause will have a chilling effect on
the exercise of s. 2  freedoms by people holding religious or ideological views
similar to those held by some terrorists.  The reasons of the Court of Appeal
detail why such an inference cannot be made. [81]                         
First, a causal connection between the motive
clause and the chilling of expression of religious or ideological views has not
been demonstrated. The chill in the expression of religious and ideological
views referred to by the trial judge flowed from the post-“9/11” climate of
suspicion, not from the motive clause in the terrorism legislation. [82]                         
Second, a chilling effect that results from a
patently incorrect understanding of a provision cannot ground a finding of
unconstitutionality. Indeed, the motive clause would only have a chilling
effect on individuals who have cursory or incomplete knowledge of s. 83.01.
Anyone who reads the entire provision will take notice of s. 83.01(1.1), which
expressly declares that “terrorist activity” within the meaning of the Criminal
Code  does not include the non-violent expression of a political, religious
or ideological thought, belief or opinion. Only individuals who go well beyond the
legitimate expression of a political, religious or ideological thought, belief
or opinion, and instead engage in one of the serious forms of violence — or
threaten one of the serious forms of violence — listed in s. 83.01(1) (b)(ii)
need fear liability under the terrorism provisions of the Criminal Code . [83]                         
Third, any chilling effect that results from
police misconduct, such as profiling based exclusively on ethnicity or
religious belief, is not a chill created by the terrorism legislation. I agree
with the following statement made by the Court of Appeal, at para. 134: Nor can improper conduct by
the state actors charged with enforcing legislation render what is otherwise
constitutional legislation unconstitutional. Where the problem lies with the
enforcement of a constitutionally valid statute, the solution is to remedy that
improper enforcement, not to declare the statute unconstitutional: Little
Sisters Book and Art Emporium v. Canada (Minister of Justice), [2000 SCC
69,] [2000] 2 S.C.R. 1120, . . . at paras. 133-35.  Criminal liability should
not be based on a person’s political, religious or ideological views.  Police
should not target people as potential suspects solely because they hold or
express particular views.  Nor should the justice system employ improper
stereotyping as a tool in legislation, investigation or prosecution. In the
present case, the impugned provision is clearly drafted in a manner respectful
of diversity, as it allows for the non-violent expression of political,
religious or ideological views. It raises no concerns with respect to improper
stereotyping. [84]                         
For these reasons, I agree with the Court of
Appeal that the appellants have not established that the motive clause has a
chilling effect on the exercise of s. 2  liberties and results in an
infringement of s. 2  of the Charter .  The motive clause is
constitutional and need not be excised from the law, as the trial judge held. 
This is not altered by the fact that terrorist legislation in some countries
does not contain a motive clause, or by the argument that the clause is
unnecessary to the Canadian legislative scheme. 3.         Conclusion
on the Constitutionality of the Law [85]                         
I conclude that the impugned provisions do not
infringe s. 7  or s. 2  of the Charter .  It is therefore
unnecessary to consider s. 1  of the Charter . B.  Was the Law Correctly Applied? 1.     Did the Deletion and Subsequent
Re-insertion of the Motive Clause Make the Trial and Convictions Unfair? [86]                         
The trial judge found the motive clause
unconstitutional and severed it.  The trial proceeded on the basis that this
clause was removed from the legislation, and the accused was convicted on the
charges from which he appeals.  The Court of Appeal held that the motive clause
is constitutional and should not have been severed. It nevertheless upheld the
convictions under the curative proviso of the Criminal Code, s. 686(1) (b)(iii),
on the ground that the trial judge concluded that motive had been proven in any
event. [87]                         
The appellant argues that the removal and later
re-insertion of the motive clause made his trial and the convictions unfair. 
He argues that he has been convicted of different crimes on appeal than those
he faced at trial.  The curative proviso cannot be applied, he argues, to
errors committed by a trial judge that compromise the fairness of the trial. 
By convicting the appellant of different charges (i.e. under different
provisions) than he faced at trial, the Court of Appeal ran afoul of this
principle.  The appellant says that had motive been an essential element of the
offence at trial, he would have testified in his own defence to raise a
reasonable doubt. [88]                         
I cannot accept the appellant’s submissions. 
First, the trial judge made a specific factual finding that the motive
component of the definition of terrorist activity had been proved beyond a
reasonable doubt, which suffices to fully support the motive requirement of the
convictions.  At para. 89, he stated:          . . . I consider my
pre-trial ruling [concerning the constitutionality of the motive clause] to
have no real effect on the case.  I say that because there is such an abundance
of evidence that what was being done by Khawaja, Babar, Khyam, and his
associates was clearly motivated “in whole or in part for a political,
religious or ideological purpose, objective or cause.” Whether that is an
essential ingredient of these offences or not, it has been abundantly proven.
[Emphasis added.]  [89]                         
Second, the evidence of motive and the
appellant’s knowledge that the motive was shared by him and the Khyam terrorist
cell was overwhelming and essentially undisputed.  The appellant’s extremist
religious ideology suffused his actions and emails.  He literally describes
dedicating his life to violent jihad.  His own correspondence established
beyond dispute that his religious motive was shared by Khyam and the other
“bros” in the terrorist cell, and that the appellant was aware of that fact. 
The appellant’s motives were, simply put, beyond reasonable doubt. [90]                         
Third, there is no air of reality to the
appellant’s statement that he could have taken the stand and testified to raise
a reasonable doubt on motive, had the clause not been struck.  The facts just
recited completely undermine the idea that it would have been possible for the
appellant to offer testimony putting in doubt his knowledge that the Khyam
terrorist cell shared his religious motivation and commitment to violent jihad. [91]                         
Fourth, it is disingenuous of the appellant to
claim that, but for the pre-trial ruling on the constitutionality of the motive
clause, he would have made different tactical decisions during the course of
his trial. Although the pre-trial ruling removed motive as a legal issue,
motive remained a live factual issue. Crown evidence regarding motive had the
potential to ground inferences with respect to the legal issues of knowledge
and intent to enhance the abilities of a terrorist group to carry on or
facilitate a terrorist activity. There is simply no credible basis on which to
conclude that the appellant’s defence would have been conducted differently
absent pre-trial severance of the motive clause. [92]                         
In essence, this is a case where no prejudice
flowed from the re-insertion of an essential element of the offence on appeal. 
It is abundantly clear that the trial judge would have convicted with or
without the motive clause, and it is irrational to suppose that the
overwhelming evidence of religious, political and ideological motivation could
have been challenged. [93]                         
This is an exceptional result, appropriate in
the exceptional circumstances of this case.  Generally speaking, if an appellate
court finds that the offence for which an appellant was convicted includes an
additional essential element, fairness would require ordering a new or directed
trial.  In this particular case, however, this Court can be confident that the
appellant suffered no prejudice deserving of a new trial only because the
evidence on the additional element of the offence was overwhelming, as indeed
the trial judge found, and it is plain that the appellant’s strategy would not
have changed had the element been recognized at trial. [94]                         
I would dismiss the argument that the Court of
Appeal erred in applying the curative proviso and upholding the convictions.                     2.  Does the
Armed Conflict Exception Apply? [95]                         
Counts 3 to 7 arguably dealt with insurgent
activities in relation to Afghanistan.  The appellant claims that to the extent
that his involvement with these activities was shown, he fell within the armed
conflict exception to the definition of terrorist activity.  The appellant
contends that the onus was on the Crown to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
he did not fall within the armed conflict exception, and that the Crown did not
do this. [96]                         
The trial judge held that the appellant was not
engaged in armed conflict, because his conduct did not fall within the
definition of the term, and because there was no armed conflict underway in
Canada, Pakistan and the United Kingdom, where the alleged acts were carried
out.  He took judicial notice of the conflict in Afghanistan and of the
counter-insurgency against the government and the civilian population.  The
Court of Appeal affirmed the propriety of taking judicial notice and the
finding that the alleged activities did not fall within the armed conflict
exception.  However, it held that the trial judge erred in holding that the armed
conflict exception is restricted to acts or omissions carried out within the
territorial limits of an area of armed conflict. [97]                         
A number of sub-issues emerge.  The first is
whether the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the armed conflict
exception is inapplicable.  The second concerns the use of judicial notice to
decide whether the alleged acts fall within a particular armed conflict or
not.  The third is the scope of the armed conflict exception to the definition
of terrorist activity. [98]                         
On the burden of proof, the Crown bears the
burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the acts alleged against an
accused fall within the definition of terrorist activity.  The ultimate burden
of showing this is on the Crown, and any reasonable doubt must be resolved in
the accused’s favour. However, the armed conflict exception functions as a
defence. The accused must raise the exception and make a prima facie case
that it applies. In the present appeal, the accused could not make a prima
facie case that the exception applied, as there was no evidential
foundation to support its applicability. There was simply no air of reality to
the claim that the armed conflict exception applied. [99]                         
On the second issue, I agree with the courts
below that judicial notice could be taken of the ongoing war in Afghanistan and
the counter-insurgency acts in that country which, subject to the armed
conflict exception, meet the definition of terrorist activity.  These facts
were beyond contestation, and thus meet the test for judicial notice. [100]                     
The critical question in this case is whether
the conduct of the appellant, as found by the trial judge, falls within the
scope of the armed conflict exception.  Like the courts below, I conclude that
it did not.  The purpose of the armed conflict exception is to exempt conduct
taken during an armed conflict in accordance with applicable international law.
There is no evidential foundation for the application of this exception in the
present case: the conduct cannot be said to have been taken solely in support
of an armed conflict, nor was it in accordance with applicable international
law. [101]                     
First, the trial judge expressly found that the
appellant knew that the Khyam group’s terrorist activities extended beyond the
armed conflict in Afghanistan, and supported these terrorist objectives (paras.
130-31).  Thus, the appellant’s actions were not “directed solely at supporting
the insurgency in Afghanistan” (C.A., at para. 168).  Even if the appellant’s
efforts with respect to Afghanistan could be considered part of an armed
conflict governed by international law, the verdicts would stand. [102]                     
Second, the evidence is overwhelmingly contrary
to the proposition that the appellant’s acts were part of an armed conflict
governed by international law.  There is no air of reality to the suggestion
that the appellant believed that the Khyam group intended to act in compliance
with international law, or that he cared if it did.  The evidence showed only
that “the appellant was a fervent purveyor of hatred, anti-Semitism, religious
bigotry and adulation for mass atrocities, who was making detonators, and
providing other support, for ‘amazing bros . . . who felt the same way’” (R.F.,
at para. 39). The violent jihadist ideology espoused by the appellant in his numerous
communications is fundamentally incompatible with international law.  The
Geneva Conventions prohibit acts aimed at spreading terror amongst civilian
populations, which are considered war crimes.  The appellant, by contrast, did
what he did in support of a group whose credo was to take arms against whoever
supports non-Islamic regimes and that recognized that suicide attacks on
civilians may sometimes be justified by the ends of jihad. [103]                     
This was the evidence before the trial judge. 
Uncontradicted, it established beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant’s
conduct did not fall within the armed conflict exception to the definition of
terrorist activity.                     3.  Were the
Verdicts Unreasonable? [104]                     
The appellant contends that the convictions for
counts 3 to 7 are unreasonable for three reasons: (1) the Crown failed to
establish his knowledge of the U.K. bomb plot; (2) there is no evidence that he
knew that the Khyam group was a terrorist group; and (3) the Crown failed to
prove the necessary particulars of these counts. [105]                     
These submissions are without merit.  Counts 3
to 7 were not confined to the U.K. bomb plot.  The trial judge appropriately
convicted the appellant only of included offences of making an explosive with
respect to the U.K. plot (counts 1 and 2).  Second, the trial judge, amply
supported by the evidence, expressly found that the Khyam group was a terrorist
group within the definition in the Criminal Code  and that the appellant
was aware of the terrorist objectives and knowingly supported and participated
in them.  Finally, much of the argument on unreasonable verdict is premised on
the armed conflict exception, which cannot succeed for the reasons discussed
above. C.  Did the Court of Appeal Err in
Overturning the Sentence Imposed by the Trial Judge and Substituting a Term of
Life Imprisonment?             1.         The Trial Judge’s Sentence [106]                     
The trial judge found the appellant guilty of
seven offences.  On the first two counts, he held that the appellant’s
knowledge of the U.K. bomb plot was not proved and convicted him only for acts
related to the development of the “hifidigimonster” for unspecified bombings. 
On counts 3 to 7, he convicted the appellant for various acts related to the
Khyam group’s terrorist activity. [107]                     
The trial judge sentenced the appellant to 10
and a half years of imprisonment in addition to the 5 years he had already
served in custody.  He held that the appellant should be sentenced in respect
of only one of the offences included in counts 1 and 2 on the Kienapple
principle, since both related to the same acts — development of the
“hifidigimonster”. [108]                     
The trial judge reviewed the principles and
purposes of sentencing and stated that in terrorism cases, denunciation,
general deterrence and public protection should be emphasized over personal
deterrence and rehabilitation.  He concluded that in the absence of any
evidence bearing on rehabilitation, this factor did not attract weight, and
noted the gravity of the offences and the aggravating effect of the appellant’s
motivation. [109]                     
The trial judge rejected the Crown’s argument
that the appellant should receive the same sentence imposed in the U.K. on
Khyam, one of the leaders of the London bomb plot, because the appellant’s
participation was at a lower level and did not merit life imprisonment.  The
trial judge referred, in his reasons for sentence, to the “amateurish effort[s]”
of the appellant (para. 33), and found that Khyam and his associates “were away
out in front” of the appellant, who was but “a willing helper and supporter”
(para. 37). [110]                     
The trial judge noted that s. 83.26  of the Criminal
Code  requires that consecutive sentences be imposed for terrorism
offences.  However, he held that this was subject to the “totality principle”
that the combined sentence should not be unduly long or harsh and should not
exceed the overall culpability of the offender. [111]                     
The trial judge declined to give the appellant
strict “two for one” credit for time served, in view of the need to denounce
the conduct.  However, he took into account generally the fact that the
appellant had already spent five years confined to a detention centre not
suited to long-term imprisonment.  Similarly, without adopting a precise
mathematical formula, he gave some credit for the appellant’s admissions at
trial. [112]                     
In conclusion, the trial judge imposed the
following sentence amounting to a total of 10 and a half years of imprisonment: 
4 years for count 1; 2 years for count 3; 2 years for count 4; 2 years for
count 5; and 3 months for each of counts 6 and 7.  He added the following
terms: no parole eligibility for 5 years; a mandatory DNA order (stayed pending
appeal); and a lifetime order prohibiting possession of firearms. 2.         The
Court of Appeal’s Sentence [113]                     
The Court of Appeal found three errors of
principle in the trial judge’s sentencing and increased the sentence to life
imprisonment for count 1 and consecutive terms of imprisonment totalling 24
years for the remaining counts. [114]                     
The first error was the trial judge’s finding
that the appellant’s level of involvement was of a low order, compared to Khyam
and his associates who were “away out in front” of him.  The Court of Appeal
held that this conclusion was unreasonable on the basis of all the evidence. 
The second error was in not treating the absence of evidence on rehabilitation
prospects as an important factor in sentencing.  The third error was in not
imposing consecutive sentences, which was contrary to the requirement of
s. 83.26 . 3.         Analysis [115]                     
At the outset, I wish to underscore that the
temptation to fashion rigid sentencing principles applicable to terrorism
offences as a distinct class of offences should be avoided, subject to the
provisions in the Criminal Code  that specifically pertain to those
offences. The general principles of sentencing, including the totality
principle, apply to terrorism offences. [116]                     
As regards the sentences imposed on the
appellant, I agree with the Court of Appeal that the trial judge made critical
errors in sentencing. [117]                     
The first error identified by the Court of
Appeal was the trial judge’s unreasonable devaluation of the seriousness of the
appellant’s conduct.  The Court of Appeal interpreted the trial judge’s
comments in this regard as concluding that the appellant was less morally
blameworthy than Khyam and other associates.  The trial judge’s comments might
also be interpreted as merely concluding that the appellant was not as directly
involved in terrorist activities as others.  On either view, however, it
appears that the trial judge effectively devalued the seriousness of the
appellant’s conduct in a way that was inconsistent with the evidence. [118]                     
The evidence, in brief, showed that the appellant
was determined to help the Khyam group perpetrate a number of acts of mass
violence against civilian and military targets; helped finance the Khyam group;
offered training in electronics to Khyam; built devices intended to serve as
remote triggers for improvised explosive devices (the “hifidigimonster”); and
went to Pakistan to train for “combat” in Afghanistan.  His emails showed that
he encouraged and applauded violent jihad. Particularly chilling is his email
speaking in positive terms of using a troublesome person as a suicide bomber in
an Israeli nightclub. [119]                     
A typical message gives the flavour of the
emails the appellant sent: Ok nigga, i’ll make a booking now,
InshaAllah i’m thinking of comin down on the February 20th or around then.
Lemme know if that’s good with u. also let me know soon how you want the
device. I just want to do a demo of it and show you how it works and stuff, it’s
range, and other things, so we gotta find a way we can get it into UK, maybe i
can courier it over, i don’t know if UK customs will grab it or not. pray to
the most high, he’ll find us a way. we’re startin to work on a few other much
more sophisticated projects that can be of great benefit to the J. i’ll speak
to you about them when we meet . . . . [Trial judgment, at para. 42.] [120]                     
Indeed, the trial judge was clear that Khawaja
was “fully responsible for his actions” (reasons for sentence, at para. 31). 
As the trial judge explained, at para. 31: . . . he went far out of his way, from
his home, from his country and from his gainful employment to engage with the
Khyam group and participate as he did in and to the group’s endeavors. This is
not a case of a vulnerable young person being lured or beguiled into criminal
misconduct in which he was not inclined to participate. Khawaja was a
willing and eager participant . . . . [Emphasis added.] [121]                     
In short, the appellant’s subjective
“determination to bring death, destruction and terror to innocent people” (para.
37) appears to have been strong — indeed, as strong as that of other members of
the Khyam group. [122]                     
The second error identified by the Court
of Appeal is that the trial judge failed to treat the absence of evidence of
the appellant’s rehabilitative prospects as an important factor in sentencing.
I agree that the absence of information on the likelihood of the appellant
re-offending was relevant to sentencing, particularly in regard to s. 718(c)
and to the need to separate offenders from society, where necessary. Indeed, as
O’Connor J. wrote in R. v. Downey, 2010 ONSC 1531 (CanLII), at para. 31: Where it is
apparent that the offender is a dangerous person, who is likely to compromise
public safety if released, he should be detained for a period of time sufficient
to reasonably conclude that such danger has subsided.  The duration of the
sentence must be sufficient to give the correctional authorities the necessary
time to properly treat the offender and for the National Parole Board to assess
the risk of his reoffending. [123]                     
The absence of evidence on the appellant’s
likelihood of re-offending gave the trial judge no assurance that he was no
longer committed to violent jihad and terrorism, or that there was any chance
that, over time, he could change and be released from state control without
undue risk of harm to the population.  The lack of information on a person’s
probability of re-offending, in the face of compelling evidence of
dangerousness, is sufficient to justify a stiffer sentence. [124]                     
I cannot accept the broad proposition that “the
import of rehabilitation as a mitigating circumstance is significantly reduced
in [the] context [of terrorism] given the unique nature of the crime . . . and
the grave and far-reaching threat that it poses to the foundations of our democratic
society”  (C.A., at para. 201).   The terrorism provisions catch a very wide
variety of conduct, suggesting that the weight to be given to rehabilitation in
a given case is best left to the reasoned discretion of trial judges on a
case-by-case basis. This does not, however, negate the fact that on the
evidence in this case, the absence of evidence on rehabilitation prospects
justified a stiffer sentence than otherwise might have been appropriate. [125]                     
The third error identified by the Court
of Appeal is that the trial judge erred in interpreting s. 83.26 , which
provides that convictions under ss. 83.02 to 83.04 and 83.18 to 83.23 require
consecutive sentences. The Court of Appeal took the view that the “totality
principle”, which requires that the cumulative sentence rendered for multiple
offences not exceed the overall culpability of the offender, should be
moderated or altered in the case of terrorism offences so that “the customary
upper range [of 15 to 20 years] for consecutive fixed-term sentences will not
be applicable” (para. 210). [126]                     
While I agree with the Court of Appeal that s.
83.26  requires that sentences for terrorist offences be served consecutively, I
do not agree that this result is inconsistent with the totality principle on
the evidence in this case.  The only restriction imposed by the totality
principle is that the sentence not exceed the overall culpability of the
offender. While the practice in Canadian courts is to impose sentences of
between 15 to 20 years if a life sentence is not appropriate, this practice is
not binding and is not part of the totality principle:  see R. v. M.
(C.A.), [1996] 1 S.C.R. 500, per Lamer C.J., at para. 56.  The fact
that sentences of over 20 years may be imposed more often in terrorism cases is
not inconsistent with the totality principle. It merely attests to the
particular gravity of terrorist offences and the moral culpability of those who
commit them.  I conclude that the heightened gravity of the terrorism offences
at issue in this case was sufficient to justify imposition of consecutive
sentences running over 20 years, without violating the totality principle. [127]                     
After reviewing the three errors committed by
the trial judge, the Court of Appeal went on to state that the sentence he
imposed failed to adequately reflect three critical matters. [128]                     
First, the sentence imposed did not reflect the
gravity of the appellant’s actions.  I agree.  The appellant was a willing
participant in a terrorist group.  He was committed to bringing death on all
those opposed to his extremist ideology and took many steps to provide support
to the group.  The bomb detonators he attempted to build would have killed many
civilians had his plan succeeded. A sentence of 10 and a half years does not
approach an adequate sentence for such acts. [129]                     
Second, the Court of Appeal found that the
sentence did not reflect the continuing danger this committed and apparently
remorseless man would pose to society on release.  For the reasons discussed
earlier, I agree.  The trial judge’s sentence failed to give adequate weight to
the ongoing danger the appellant posed to society. [130]                     
Finally, the Court of Appeal faulted the trial
judge’s sentence for failing to send a “clear and unmistakable message that
terrorism is reprehensible and those who choose to engage in it [in Canada]
will pay a very heavy price” (para. 246). Without suggesting that terrorism
offences attract special sentencing rules or goals, I agree that denunciation
and deterrence, both specific and general, are important principles in the sentencing
of terrorism offences, given their seriousness:  see s. 718.2 (a)(v) of
the Criminal Code ; H. Parent and J. Desrosiers, Traité de droit
criminel, vol. 3, La peine (2012), at pp. 76-78. [131]                     
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal
from sentence. VII.     Conclusion [132]                     
I would dismiss the appeal and affirm the
convictions and the sentence imposed by the Court of Appeal. APPENDIX Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46                     83.01 (1) . . .          “terrorist activity”
means . . .                     (b)  an act or omission,
in or outside Canada,                                    (i)          that
is committed                                    (A)   in whole or in part for
a political, religious or ideological
purpose, objective or cause, and                                    (B)   in whole or in part with the intention of intimidating the public, or a segment
of the public, with regard to its security, including its economic security, or compelling a person,
a government or a domestic or an international organization to do
or to refrain from doing any
act, whether the public or the person, government or organization is inside or outside
Canada, and                                    (ii)         that
intentionally                                    (A)   causes
death or serious bodily harm to a person by the
use of violence,                                    (B)     endangers
a person’s life,                                    (C)     causes
a serious risk to the health or safety of the public or any segment of the
public,                                    (D)     causes
substantial property damage, whether to public or private property, if causing
such damage is likely to result in the conduct or harm referred to in any of
clauses (A) to (C), or                                    (E)      causes
serious interference with or serious disruption of an essential service,
facility or system, whether public or private, other than as a result of
advocacy, protest, dissent or stoppage of work that is not intended to result
in the conduct or harm referred to in any of clauses (A) to (C),                     and
includes a conspiracy, attempt or threat to commit any such act or omission, or
being an accessory after the fact or counselling in relation to any such act or
omission, but, for greater certainty, does not include an act or omission that
is committed during an armed conflict and that, at the time and in the place of
its commission, is in accordance with customary international law or
conventional international law applicable to the conflict, or the activities
undertaken by military forces of a state in the exercise of their official
duties, to the extent that those activities are governed by other rules of
international law.             “terrorist
group” means                     (a)   an
entity that has as one of its purposes or activities
facilitating or carrying out any terrorist activity, or                     (b)   a
listed entity,             and includes
an association of such entities.                            (1.1)
For greater certainty, the expression of a political, religious or ideological
thought, belief or opinion does not come within paragraph (b) of
the definition “terrorist activity” in subsection (1) unless it constitutes an
act or omission that satisfies the criteria of that paragraph.                            83.18 (1) Every one who knowingly participates in or contributes to,
directly or indirectly, any activity of a terrorist
group for the purpose of enhancing the ability of any terrorist group to
facilitate or carry out a terrorist activity is guilty of an indictable offence
and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years.                             (2)   An
offence may be committed under subsection (1) whether
or not                            (a)     a
terrorist group actually facilitates or carries out a
terrorist activity;                     (b)   the
participation or contribution of the accused actually
enhances the ability of a terrorist group to facilitate
or carry out a terrorist activity; or                     (c)   the
accused knows the specific nature of any terrorist activity that may be
facilitated or carried out by a terrorist group.                            (3)   Participating in or contributing to an activity of a terrorist group includes                     (a)   providing,
receiving or recruiting a person to receive training;                     (b)   providing
or offering to provide a skill or an expertise for the
benefit of, at the direction of or in association with a terrorist group;                     (c)   recruiting
a person in order to facilitate or commit                             (i)    a
terrorism offence, or                            (ii)   an
act or omission outside Canada that, if committed in
Canada, would be a terrorism offence;                     (d)   entering
or remaining in any country for the benefit of, at the direction of or in
association with a terrorist group; and                     (e)   making
oneself, in response to instructions from any of the persons who constitute a
terrorist group, available to facilitate or commit                            (i)    a
terrorism offence, or                            (ii)   an
act or omission outside Canada that, if committed in
Canada, would be a terrorism offence.                            (4)   In
determining whether an accused participates in or contributes to any activity
of a terrorist group, the court may consider, among other factors, whether the
accused                     (a)   uses
a name, word, symbol or other representation that identifies, or is associated
with, the terrorist group;                     (b)   frequently
associates with any of the persons who constitute the terrorist group;                     (c)   receives
any benefit from the terrorist group; or                     (d)   repeatedly
engages in activities at the instruction of any of the persons who constitute
the terrorist group.                            83.26 A sentence, other than one of life imprisonment, imposed on a
person for an offence under any of sections 83.02 to 83.04 and 83.18 to 83.23
shall be served consecutively to                     (a)   any
other punishment imposed on the person, other than a sentence of life
imprisonment, for an offence arising out of the same event or series of events;
and                     (b)   any
other sentence, other than one of life imprisonment, to which the person is
subject at the time the sentence is imposed on the person for an offence under
any of those sections.                            718.2   A court that imposes a sentence shall also take into consideration
the following principles:                     (a)   a
sentence should be increased or reduced to account for any relevant aggravating
or mitigating circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, . . .                            (v)   evidence
that the offence was a terrorism offence . . .                            719.
(1) A sentence commences when it is imposed, except
where a relevant enactment otherwise provides. . . .                            (3)   In
determining the sentence to be imposed on a person convicted of an offence, a court
may take into account any time spent in custody by the person as a result of
the offence.                     Appeal dismissed.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Greenspon, Brown & Associates, Ottawa.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Public Prosecution Service of Canada, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the intervener the
Attorney General of Ontario:  Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the intervener Groupe d’étude en droits
et libertés de la Faculté de droit de l’Université Laval:  Langlois
Kronström Desjardins, Québec.                     Solicitors for the intervener the Canadian Civil
Liberties Association:  Kapoor Barristers, Toronto.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the British Columbia Civil Liberties
Association:  Paliare, Roland, Rosenberg, Rothstein, Toronto.   