SCC Case Information: 36466, 36844   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Cawthorne, 2016 SCC 32, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 983 Appeals
  heard: April 25, 2016 Judgment
  rendered: July 22, 2016 Dockets: 36466, 36844 Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant  and  Ordinary
Seaman Cawthorne Respondent  - and -  Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney
General of Quebec, Attorney General of British Columbia and Director
of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions of Quebec Interveners  And Between:  Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant  and  Warrant
Officer J.G.A. Gagnon Respondent  And:  Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant  and  Corporal
A.J.R. Thibault Respondent  - and -  Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney
General of Quebec and Attorney General of British Columbia Interveners   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner, Gascon, Côté and Brown JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 44) McLachlin C.J. (Abella, Cromwell,
  Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner, Gascon, Côté and Brown JJ. concurring)    R. v. Cawthorne, 2016 SCC 32, [2016] 1 S.C.R. 983 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Ordinary Seaman Cawthorne                                                                    Respondent and Attorney General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney General of Quebec, Attorney General of British Columbia and Director of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions of
Quebec                          Interveners Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Warrant Officer J.G.A. Gagnon                                                               Respondent and Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Corporal A.J.R. Thibault                                                                           Respondent and Attorney General of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Attorney General of Quebec and Attorney General of British
Columbia                                                       Interveners Indexed as: R. v. Cawthorne 2016 SCC 32 File Nos.: 36466, 36844. 2016: April 25; 2016: July 22. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis, Wagner, Gascon, Côté and Brown JJ. on appeal from the court martial appeal court of canada                     G
and T were each charged with sexual assault. G was acquitted and the Minister
appealed, seeking a new trial. T presented a plea in bar of trial, on the basis
that the matter was not under military jurisdiction because of an insufficient
nexus with military service. The military judge allowed the plea and the
Minister appealed. G and T brought motions to quash the Minister’s appeals on
the basis that s. 230.1  of the National Defence Act , which gives
the Minister the authority to appeal to the Court Martial Appeal Court,
violates s. 7  of the Charter . The Court Martial Appeal Court
dismissed the motions to quash but agreed that s. 230.1  should be
invalidated, as it violates the right to an independent prosecutor. The
Minister appeals to this Court.                     Held: The motion
to quash should be dismissed and the appeals should be allowed.
Sections 230.1  and 245(2)  of the National Defence Act  are
constitutional.                     The
power that ss. 230.1  and 245(2)  of the National Defence Act  confer
on the Minister — that is, to initiate an appeal — may effect a deprivation of
liberty. Therefore, s. 7 of the Charter  is engaged. The law
recognizes as constitutional the principle that prosecutors must not act for
improper purposes, such as purely partisan motives. This principle is a basic
tenet of our legal system. It safeguards the rights of the individual and the
integrity of the justice system, and it satisfies the criteria to be considered
a principle of fundamental justice. A prosecutor — whether it be an Attorney
General, a Crown prosecutor, or some other public official exercising a
prosecutorial function — has a constitutional obligation to act independently
of partisan concerns and other improper motives.                     The
Minister, like the Attorney General or other public officials with a
prosecutorial function, is entitled to a strong presumption that he exercises
prosecutorial discretion independently of partisan concerns. The mere fact of
the Minister’s membership in Cabinet does not displace that presumption. The
law presumes that the Attorney General, also a member of Cabinet, can and does
set aside partisan duties in exercising prosecutorial responsibilities, and
there is no compelling reason to treat the Minister differently in this regard.
Accordingly, Parliament’s conferral of authority over appeals in the military
justice system on the Minister does not violate s. 7  of the Charter .
As to the argument that the impugned provisions violate the right to an
independent tribunal guaranteed by s. 11 (d) of the Charter ,
it cannot succeed. Cases Cited Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 1 , 7 , 11 (d). Authors Cited Rosenberg, Marc. “The Attorney General and the Administration of
Criminal Justice” (2009), 34 Queen’s L.J. 813. Scott, Ian. “Law, Policy, and the Role of the Attorney General:
Constancy and Change in the 1980s” (1989), 39 U.T.L.J. 109. Sterling, Lori, and Heather Mackay. “Constitutional Recognition of
the Role of the Attorney General in Criminal Prosecutions: Krieger v. Law
Society of Alberta” (2003), 20 S.C.L.R. (2d) 169.                     MOTION
to quash the appeal from a judgment of the Court Martial Appeal Court of Canada
(Veit, Zinn and Abra JJ.A.), 2015 CMAC 1, 472 N.R. 47, [2015] C.M.A.J.
No. 1 (QL), 2015 CarswellNat 1361 (WL Can.), setting aside the accused’s
convictions for possession of child pornography and accessing child pornography
and ordering a new trial. Motion to quash dismissed. Appeal allowed.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Court Martial Appeal Court of Canada (Bell C.J. and
Deschênes and Cournoyer JJ.A.), 2015 CMAC 2, [2015] C.M.A.J. No. 2 (QL),
2015 CarswellNat 7156 (WL Can.), declaring invalid s. 230.1  of the National
Defence Act . Appeal allowed.                     David Antonyshyn, Dylan
Kerr and B. W. MacGregor, for the appellant.                     François Lacasse and
Ginette Gobeil, for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada.                     Patrick J.
Monahan and Jamie Klukach, for the intervener the Attorney General
of Ontario.                     Sylvain Leboeuf, for
the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.                     Joanne Marceau and Patrick
Michel, for the intervener the Director of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions
of Quebec.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     The Chief Justice — I.             
Introduction [1]                             
These appeals present two issues. First, do
provisions of the National Defence Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-5 , giving
the Minister of National Defence (“Minister”) the authority to appeal from
decisions of a court martial or the Court Martial Appeal Court violate ss. 7  or
11 (d) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms ? Second, did
the military judge in the Cawthorne matter err in declining to grant a
mistrial? II.          
Background A.          
Ordinary Seaman Cawthorne [2]                             
In July 2012, Ordinary Seaman Cawthorne was on exercise near Hawaii. On
July 20, an able seaman found an iPhone on board the ship. To determine the
owner of the phone, the seaman swiped the screen. He saw an image of a man
having sex with a child. The seaman took the phone to a superior. The phone
belongs to O.S. Cawthorne. [3]                             
O.S. Cawthorne was charged with two child pornography offences under s.
130  of the National Defence Act . O.S. Cawthorne did not contest
ownership of the phone, nor did he deny accessing and possessing pornographic
images of teenage girls. He testified, however, that his practice was to
download an entire thread of pornographic images, without reviewing each image
individually. He claimed that his download of the child pornography was
inadvertent, and that he had not knowingly possessed or accessed child
pornography. [4]                             
O.S. Cawthorne’s former girlfriend testified for
the prosecution at trial. During her examination-in-chief, she testified about
several conversations she had with him. She stated that he told her that he had
been arrested “for having inappropriate images on his phone”. She also asked him
what types of images were on his phone. When asked if she recalled his answer,
her response was the following: “He said they were children and I believe that
he said they were both male and female.” [5]                             
In brief cross-examination, she was asked
whether her conversations with O.S. Cawthorne amounted to his merely advising
her of the allegations against him (i.e., as opposed to his admitting
culpability). She agreed. [6]                             
In re-examination, she was asked, “During any of
those conversations, do you recall him saying that he did in fact do these
things?” She said: “Yes.” [7]                             
Defence counsel objected, and the military judge
ruled that her evidence on re-examination was inadmissible because it did not
arise from cross-examination. The military judge advised the jury panel to
disregard the question and answer. [8]                             
The defence then brought a motion for a mistrial
on the basis of the prejudice arising from the inadmissible re-examination
evidence. The military judge dismissed the motion and gave a further limiting
instruction to the panel: . . . I
further instruct you that you shall not draw any inference against the accused
. . . from that inadmissible evidence because it is both unreliable and
prejudicial. I therefore instruct you to completely and absolutely ignore the
inadmissible evidence and that you shall evacuate from your mind anything about
it. [9]                             
The panel returned a verdict of guilty on both
counts charged. [10]                         
A majority of the Court Martial Appeal Court
found that the mistrial ought to have been granted. The court allowed O.S.
Cawthorne’s appeal and ordered a new trial (2015 CMAC 1, 472 N.R. 47). [11]                         
The Minister appeals as of right to this Court,
pursuant to s. 245(2) (a) of the National Defence Act . The Minister
argues that the military judge made no error in declining to grant a mistrial.
O.S. Cawthorne seeks to quash the Minister’s appeal on the basis that s. 245(2) 
violates ss. 7  and 11 (d) of the Charter . B.           
Warrant Officer Gagnon
and Corporal Thibault [12]                         
Warrant Officer Gagnon and Corporal Thibault
were each charged with sexual assault. [13]                         
Warrant Officer Gagnon was acquitted. The
Minister appealed to seek a new trial, on the basis that the military judge
erred by putting the defence of honest but mistaken belief in consent to the
panel. [14]                         
Corporal Thibault presented a plea in bar of trial,
claiming that the matter was not under military jurisdiction because of an
insufficient nexus with military service. The military judge allowed the plea
(2015 CM 1001). The Minister appealed. [15]                         
Warrant Officer Gagnon and Corporal Thibault
brought motions to quash the Minister’s appeals on the basis that s. 230.1  of
the National Defence Act , which gives the Minister the authority to
appeal to the Court Martial Appeal Court, violates s. 7  of the Charter . [16]                         
The Court Martial Appeal Court dismissed the
motions to quash but agreed that s. 230.1  of the National Defence Act  should
be invalidated. It found that the law’s conferral of the authority to appeal on
the Minister violates the right to an independent prosecutor, which it held is
a principle of fundamental justice under s. 7  of the Charter  (2015 CMAC
2). III.       
The Challenged Legislation [17]                         
Sections 230.1  and 245(2)  of the National Defence Act  provide
the following: 230.1 The
Minister, or counsel instructed by the Minister for that purpose, has, subject
to subsection 232(3), the right to appeal to the Court Martial Appeal Court
from a court martial in respect of any of the following matters: (a) with leave of
the Court or a judge thereof, the severity of the sentence, unless the sentence
is one fixed by law; (a.1 ) the
decision not to make an order under subsection 745.51(1)  of the Criminal
Code ; (b) the legality
of any finding of not guilty; (c) the legality
of the whole or any part of the sentence; (d) the legality
of a decision of a court martial that terminates proceedings on a charge or
that in any manner refuses or fails to exercise jurisdiction in respect of a
charge; (e) the legality
of a finding of unfit to stand trial or not responsible on account of mental
disorder; (f) the legality
of a disposition made under section 201, 202 or 202.16; (f.1) the
legality of an order for a stay of proceedings made under subsection
202.121(7); (g) the legality
of a decision made under any of subsections 196.14(1) to (3); or (h) the legality
of a decision made under subsection 227.01(2).        
245 . . .       
(2) The Minister,
or counsel instructed by the Minister for that purpose, may appeal to the
Supreme Court of Canada against a decision of the Court Martial Appeal Court (a) on any question of law on which a judge of the Court Martial
Appeal Court dissents; or (b) on any question of law, if leave to appeal is granted by the
Supreme Court of Canada. IV.       
Analysis A.          
Is the Conferral of the Authority to Appeal on
the Minister of National Defence Unconstitutional? [18]                         
The main question on these appeals is whether
provisions of the National Defence Act  that give the Minister the
authority to appeal from decisions of a court martial or Court Martial Appeal
Court infringe the right to liberty under s. 7  of the Charter , and if
so, whether the limitation is justified under s. 1  of the Charter . It
is also argued that the law infringes the right to trial by an independent
tribunal under s. 11 (d) of the Charter . [19]                         
Section 7  of the Charter  provides: 7.  Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person
and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the
principles of fundamental justice. [20]                         
The power that ss. 230.1  and 245(2)  of the National
Defence Act  confer on the Minister — that is, to initiate an appeal — may
effect a deprivation of liberty. Section 7  is engaged. [21]                         
The next question is whether the deprivation of
liberty conforms to the principles of fundamental justice. If it does not, the
law violates s. 7 . [22]                         
The answer is found in this Court’s
jurisprudence on prosecutorial independence and abuse of process. It
establishes, as a matter of constitutional law, that partisan or other improper
considerations must not influence prosecutorial decisions. [23]                         
Our cases on prosecutorial independence tend to
discuss this principle in the context of the role of the Attorney General. In Krieger
v. Law Society of Alberta, 2002 SCC 65, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 372, Iacobucci and
Major JJ., writing for the Court, noted that there is a “constitutional
principle in this country that the Attorney General must act independently of
partisan concerns when supervising prosecutorial decisions”: para. 30. Charron
J. reiterated this point in Miazga v. Kvello Estate, 2009 SCC 51, [2009]
3 S.C.R. 339, describing the independence of the Attorney General as a
“constitutionally entrenched” principle that “requires that the Attorney
General act independently of political pressures from government”: para. 46.
But the logic of these statements clearly extends to Crown prosecutors and
other public officials exercising a prosecutorial function. Indeed, both Krieger
and Miazga cited with approval Binnie J.’s reasons (dissenting on
another point) in R. v. Regan, 2002 SCC 12, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 297, at
para. 157, where he remarked that a Crown Attorney’s duty “to respect his or
her ‘Minister of Justice’ obligations of objectivity and independence” easily
met the criteria for a principle of fundamental justice under s. 7  of the Charter . [24]                         
These cases establish that a prosecutor — whether
it be an Attorney General, a Crown prosecutor, or some other public official
exercising a prosecutorial function — has a constitutional obligation to act
independently of partisan concerns and other improper motives: see generally L.
Sterling and H. Mackay, “Constitutional Recognition of the Role of the Attorney
General in Criminal Prosecutions: Krieger v. Law Society of Alberta”
(2003), 20 S.C.L.R. (2d) 169, at p. 170; see also M.
Rosenberg, “The Attorney General and the Administration of Criminal Justice”
(2009), 34 Queen’s L.J. 813, at pp. 832-36. [25]                         
This principle is also reflected in this Court’s
abuse of process jurisprudence. We have long recognized that the Crown’s unfair
or oppressive treatment of an accused can rise to the level of an abuse of the
court’s process and warrant judicial intervention: see R. v. Power,
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 601, at pp. 612-15. Both the common law and s. 7  of the Charter 
empower a court to stay proceedings where compelling an accused to
stand trial would violate those fundamental principles of justice which
underlie the community’s sense of fair play and decency and to prevent the
abuse of a court’s process through oppressive or vexatious proceedings.  (R.
v. Jewitt, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 128, at pp. 136-37, quoted in R. v. O’Connor,
[1995] 4 S.C.R. 411, at p. 455.) Those principles of justice may be
violated where there is “conspicuous evidence of improper motives or of bad
faith” on the Crown’s part: Power, at p. 616. [27]                         
I emphasize that the scope of “partisan” in this
context is narrow. “Partisan” is not broadly synonymous with “political”. An
Attorney General — like other public officials exercising a prosecutorial
function — is a “protector of the public interest”: Sterling and Mackay, at p.
179. As L’Heureux-Dubé J. explained in Power, at p. 616: . . . the Attorney General is a member
of the executive and as such reflects, through his or her prosecutorial
function, the interest of the community to see that justice is properly done.
The Attorney General’s role in this regard is not only to protect the public,
but also to honour and express the community’s sense of justice. Accordingly,
courts should be careful before they attempt to “second-guess” the prosecutor’s motives when he or she makes a decision. [28]                         
Decisions to prosecute (or to not prosecute) can
have broad social repercussions, and regard for those repercussions properly informs
prosecutorial discretion: Sterling and Mackay, at p. 179; Rosenberg, at pp.
821-22, fn. 24. It is not open to a court to scrutinize this exercise of
discretion, or to question a prosecutor’s particular conception of the public
interest. A government policy of strict prosecution of certain offences, if
motivated by concerns for the public interest, does not offend s. 7 . It is only
when the considerations underlying a prosecution are partisan — that is, when a
prosecutor acts not for the public good, but “for the good of the government of
the day” — that a court’s intervention is warranted:  Sterling and Mackay, at
p. 179, citing I. Scott, “Law, Policy, and the Role of the Attorney General:
Constancy and Change in the 1980s” (1989), 39 U.T.L.J. 109, at p. 121. [29]                         
Whether a prosecutor’s purposes are “improper”
will depend on the facts of the case. It would be impossible to exhaustively
define all considerations that are improper in the context of a prosecution,
but our abuse of process decisions provide some guidance on that issue. These
decisions indicate that, whatever the circumstances of the particular case, the
bar for finding that a prosecutor’s conduct was prompted by an improper motive
is rightly very high. [30]                         
Recognition of this principle as one of fundamental
justice does not affect the existing and well-developed doctrine of abuse of
process; indeed, the two are integrally related. Claims of improper
prosecutorial conduct, including partisan-motivated conduct, will continue to
be brought and assessed under the doctrine of abuse of process, which
determines the standard for improper conduct and the appropriate remedy: see Power,
at pp. 615-16; O’Connor, at pp. 465-68. [31]                         
There is no evidence of any improper
prosecutorial conduct in the cases before us. But the respondents say such
evidence is unnecessary. In their view, the principle of prosecutorial
independence requires both that a prosecutor be independent and that a
reasonable person perceive him or her as independent. The Minister, they say,
is independent neither in fact nor in appearance. They emphasize that the
Minister is a member of Cabinet not bound by the conventions of independence
that apply to the Attorney General, and that the Minister’s “quasi-judicial”
role is incompatible with his control and administration of the Canadian
Forces. Accordingly, the respondents argue that the law’s conferral on the
Minister of authority over appeals in the military justice system violates s. 7 
of the Charter . [32]                         
I cannot agree. The Minister, like the Attorney
General or other public officials with a prosecutorial function, is entitled to
a strong presumption that he exercises prosecutorial discretion independently
of partisan concerns. The mere fact of the Minister’s membership in Cabinet
does not displace that presumption. Indeed, the law presumes that the Attorney
General — also a member of Cabinet — can and does set aside partisan duties in
exercising prosecutorial responsibilities. There is no compelling reason to
treat the Minister differently in this regard. [33]                         
It follows that Parliament’s conferral of
authority over appeals in the military justice system on the Minister does not
violate s. 7  of the Charter . [34]                         
It is conceivable that a statute could create a
prosecutorial framework that genuinely casts doubt on a prosecutor’s
independence, for example, by requiring the prosecutor to take partisan or
other improper considerations into account in the exercise of prosecutorial
discretion. But short of such a statutory regime, and in the absence of
“conspicuous evidence” of partisan conduct in a particular case, there is no
violation of s. 7  of the Charter . [35]                         
The respondents did not press the argument that
the law violates s. 11 (d) of the Charter , except to suggest that
an abusive prosecution may taint the entire judicial process. In my view, the
argument that the law violates the right to an independent tribunal cannot
succeed. [36]                         
I conclude, accordingly, that the impugned
provisions of the National Defence Act  do not violate s. 7  or s. 11 (d)
of the Charter . B.           
Did the Military Judge in the Cawthorne Matter
Err in Declining to Grant a Mistrial? [37]                         
The Crown says that the Court Martial Appeal
Court should not have disturbed the military judge’s considered decision to not
grant a mistrial. It argues that the evidence of O.S. Cawthorne’s former
girlfriend was not inadmissible, but that even if it was, the military judge
correctly applied the proper law. The respondent says that the inadmissibility
of the evidence is not properly before this Court, and further that the
military judge erred in dismissing the motion for a mistrial. [38]                         
I would give effect to this ground of appeal.
Even if the evidence in question was inadmissible, of which I am not convinced,
the military judge did not err in declining to grant a mistrial. [39]                         
The legal principles on the granting of a
mistrial were discussed by LeBel J. in his reasons in R. v. Khan,
2001 SCC 86, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 823. Once an error has occurred at trial, a trial
judge may, in deciding whether to grant a mistrial, consider whether the error
has been or can be remedied at trial: para. 79. The decision of whether to
grant a mistrial “falls within the discretion of the judge, who must assess
whether there is a real danger that trial fairness has been compromised”: ibid.
That discretion is not absolute, but “its exercise must not be routinely
second-guessed by the court of appeal”: ibid. [40]                         
The majority of the Court Martial Appeal Court
did not ask itself whether the judge had erred in declining to grant a
mistrial, but instead focused on the curative proviso of s. 686(1) (b)(iii) of
the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 . The curative proviso applies
only when an error has been established. The issue on appeal is the following:
Did the military judge commit a reviewable error in declining to grant a
mistrial? Only if the answer to that question is yes do we turn to the curative
proviso. The Court Martial Appeal Court erred in failing to ask itself the
right question: see Khan, at para. 19, per Arbour J. [41]                         
In my view, the military judge did not err in
declining to grant the motion for a mistrial. As LeBel J. stated in Khan,
at paras. 80-82: A
decision on whether an incident has affected trial fairness in a way which
would warrant declaring a mistrial must take into account any corrective
measure which has been brought, or could be brought, by the judge to remedy the
irregularity . . . .  Thus,
when a trial judge realizes that an error has occurred but decides not to order
a mistrial, the court should consider the remedy selected by the judge, if any,
as one of the elements in its assessment of whether the trial has been or has
appeared unfair. If the remedy chosen by the judge consisted of a warning to
the jury on what they should or should not consider in reaching their verdict,
the ability of a jury to follow instructions must be recognized, although this
reality is obviously subject to its own limits. . . .  Thus,
we should not presume that jurors are incapable of following instructions given
by the judge. On the contrary, when the judge issues a clear and forceful
warning about the use of some information, we are entitled to presume that it
diminishes the danger that the jury will misuse this information when rendering
its verdict. [Emphasis added.] [42]                         
Here, the decision not to grant a mistrial was
within the military judge’s discretion. He made a reasonable attempt to remedy
the error through two instructions, one immediate and another mid-trial. In his
mid-trial instruction, he instructed the panel to disregard the evidence
because it was both “unreliable and prejudicial”. Nothing suggested to the
judge that the panel was unwilling or unlikely to follow his instruction. I
would not interfere with his decision. V.          
Conclusion [43]                         
In the Cawthorne matter, I would dismiss O.S.
Cawthorne’s motion to quash the appeal. Section 245(2)  of the National
Defence Act  is constitutional. The Minister’s appeal is allowed and the
convictions entered at trial against O.S. Cawthorne are reinstated. [44]                         
In the Gagnon and Thibault matter, I would allow
the Minister’s appeal.  Section 230.1  of the National Defence Act  is
constitutional.  The matter is remitted to the Court Martial Appeal Court for
the hearing of the appeals on the merits.                     Motion
to quash appeal dismissed. Appeals allowed.                     Solicitor
for the appellant: Canadian Military Prosecution Service, Ottawa.                     Solicitor
for the respondents: Defence Counsel Services, Gatineau.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada: Attorney General of
Canada, Ottawa.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario: Attorney General of
Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Quebec: Attorney General of
Quebec, Québec.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia: Attorney
General of British Columbia, Victoria.                     Solicitor for
the intervener the Director of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions of
Quebec: Director of Criminal and Penal Prosecutions of Quebec, Québec.  