  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 1089 Date: 20151217 Docket: 36001  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant and Tommy
Lacasse Respondent - and - Attorney
General of Alberta Intervener   Official English Translation  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner,
Gascon and Côté JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 121) Wagner J. (Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis
  and Côté JJ. concurring)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 122 to 183) Gascon J. (McLachlin C.J. concurring)    R. v. Lacasse, 2015 SCC 64,
[2015] 3 S.C.R. 1089 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Tommy Lacasse                                                                                           Respondent and Attorney General of Alberta                                                                        Intervener Indexed as: R. v.
Lacasse 2015 SCC 64 File No.: 36001. 2015: May 15; 2015: December 17. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner, Gascon and Côté JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec                     On
June 17, 2011, at about 4:00 a.m., L lost control of his vehicle
while entering a curve on a country road in the Beauce region. He was speeding,
and his ability to drive was impaired by alcohol. Two passengers sitting in the
back seat of the vehicle died instantly. Neither the vehicle’s mechanical
condition nor the weather contributed to the accident. L is entirely responsible
for it, and he pleaded guilty to two counts of impaired driving causing death.                     The
trial judge sentenced L, on each count, to six years and six months’
imprisonment; the two sentences were to be served concurrently. He also
prohibited L from operating a vehicle for a period of 11 years starting
from the sentencing date. The Court of Appeal replaced the sentence imposed by
the trial judge with one of four years’ imprisonment. It also reduced the
length of the driving prohibition to four years commencing at the end of L’s
incarceration.                     Held
(McLachlin C.J. and Gascon J. dissenting): The appeal should be
allowed and the sentence imposed by the trial judge restored except as regards
the driving prohibition, which should be reduced to two years and four months
commencing at the end of L’s incarceration.                     Per
Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner and Côté JJ.: Sentencing remains
one of the most delicate stages of the criminal justice process in Canada.
Although this task is governed by ss. 718 et seq. of the Criminal Code ,
and although the objectives set out in those sections guide the courts and are
clearly defined, it nonetheless involves, by definition, the exercise of a
broad discretion by the courts in balancing all the relevant factors in order
to meet the objectives being pursued in sentencing.                     The
Court has on many occasions noted the importance of giving wide latitude to
sentencing judges. Since they have, inter alia, the advantage of
having heard and seen the witnesses, sentencing judges are in the best position
to determine, having regard to the circumstances, a just and appropriate
sentence that is consistent with the objectives of the Criminal Code .
Ultimately, except where a sentencing judge makes an error of law or an error
in principle that has an impact on the sentence, an appellate court may not
vary the sentence unless it is demonstrably unfit.                     Proportionality
is the cardinal principle that must guide appellate courts in considering the
fitness of a sentence imposed on an offender. The more serious the crime and
its consequences, or the greater the offender’s degree of responsibility, the
heavier the sentence will be. In other words, the severity of a sentence
depends not only on the seriousness of the crime’s consequences, but also on the
moral blameworthiness of the offender. Determining a proportionate sentence is
a delicate task. Both sentences that are too lenient and sentences that are too
harsh can undermine public confidence in the administration of justice.
Moreover, if appellate courts intervene without deference to vary sentences
that they consider too lenient or too harsh, their interventions could
undermine the credibility of the system and the authority of trial courts.                     Although
sentencing ranges are used mainly to ensure the parity of sentences, they
reflect all the principles and objectives of sentencing. Sentencing ranges are
nothing more than summaries of the minimum and maximum sentences imposed in the
past, which serve in any given case as guides for the application of all the
relevant principles and objectives. However, they should not be considered
“averages”, let alone straitjackets, but should instead be seen as historical
portraits for the use of sentencing judges, who must still exercise their
discretion in each case.                     There
will always be situations that call for a sentence outside a particular range:
although ensuring parity in sentencing is in itself a desirable objective, the
fact that each crime is committed in unique circumstances by an offender with a
unique profile cannot be disregarded. The determination of a just and
appropriate sentence is a highly individualized exercise that goes beyond a
purely mathematical calculation. It involves a variety of factors that are
difficult to define with precision. This is why it may happen that a sentence
that, on its face, falls outside a particular range, and that may never have
been imposed in the past for a similar crime, is not demonstrably unfit.
Everything depends on the gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of
responsibility and the specific circumstances of each case. Thus, the fact that
a judge deviates from a sentencing range established by the courts does not in
itself justify appellate intervention.                     In
this sense, the Court of Appeal erred in this case in basing its intervention
on the fact that the sentence fell outside the sentencing range established by
the courts, while disregarding the criteria that are normally applied in the
determination of a just and appropriate sentence. Any other conclusion would
have the effect of authorizing appellate courts to create categories of
offences with no real justification and accordingly intervene without deference
to substitute a sentence on appeal. But the power to create categories of
offences lies with Parliament, not the courts.                     The
Court of Appeal was therefore wrong to reduce the sentence imposed by the trial
judge. Even though the trial judge had made an error in principle by
considering an element of the offence as an aggravating factor (the fact that L
was intoxicated), that error had clearly had no impact on the sentence. The
sentence of six years and six months’ imprisonment imposed by the trial
judge, although severe, falls within the overall range of sentences normally imposed
in Quebec and elsewhere in the country and is not demonstrably unfit. It must
therefore be restored.                     As
to the term of the driving prohibition, the length of the presentence driving
prohibition should be subtracted from that of the prohibition imposed in the
context of the sentence. In this case, the driving prohibition of four years
and seven months is demonstrably unfit and must be reduced to two years and
four months to take account of the recognizance entered into by L under
which he was to refrain from driving from his release date until his sentencing
date (two years and three months).                     Finally,
the Court of Appeal erred in not admitting the fresh evidence of L’s breaches
of his recognizances. That evidence was relevant. It could have affected the weight
given to the favourable presentence report and could therefore have affected
the final sentencing decision. In particular, the Court of Appeal might have
reached a different conclusion if it had admitted that evidence, which would
have helped it in assessing the fitness of the sentence that had been imposed
at trial.                     Per McLachlin C.J. and Gascon J. (dissenting): Sentencing
judges must take into consideration, inter alia, the objectives of
deterrence and rehabilitation, any relevant aggravating and mitigating
circumstances relating to the offence or the offender, and the principle that a
sentence should be similar to sentences imposed on similar offenders for
similar offences committed in similar circumstances. If a judge fails to
individualize a sentence and to consider the relevant mitigating factors while
placing undue emphasis on the circumstances of the offence and the objectives
of denunciation and deterrence, all that is done is to punish the crime. The
reconciliation of the different factors requires that the sentence be
consistent with the fundamental principle of proportionality.  This principle
requires that full consideration be given to each of the factors.
Proportionality is a limiting principle that requires that a sentence not exceed
what is just and appropriate in light of the moral blameworthiness of the
offender and the gravity of the offence. Deterrence can thus work through
conditions tailored to fit the offender. This is even more important in the
case of a young person with no criminal record.                     The
standard of intervention to be applied by appellate courts in sentencing
matters is well known: a sentence can only be interfered with if it is
demonstrably unfit or if it results from an error in principle, the failure to
consider a relevant factor or the overemphasis of a relevant factor. If a party
shows that the trial judge made an error in principle, failed to consider a
relevant factor or overemphasized appropriate factors, there is no requirement
that the sentence also be shown to be demonstrably unfit before an appellate
court can intervene. Even if none of these three situations exists, however,
intervention may be necessary if the sentence is demonstrably unfit.                     Where
a reviewable error is shown in the reasoning on which a sentence is based, it
is appropriate for an appellate court to be able to intervene and assess the
fitness of the sentence. The error that is identified thus opens the door to
intervention and permits an appellate court to reopen the sentencing analysis.
However, the court of appeal’s role in ensuring consistency in sentencing
requires it before intervening to ascertain, among other things, that the
sentence represents a substantial and marked departure from the sentences
customarily imposed for similar offenders who have committed similar crimes.
There is no such thing as a uniform sentence for a particular crime, and
sentencing is an inherently individualized process. A sentence must reflect a
consideration of all the relevant factors, and it is in this sense that the
“process” of sentencing is important. It is by correctly repeating the
analytical exercise that the court can determine whether the sanction imposed
on the offender is just and appropriate or whether it should be varied, and the
court need not show deference in such a case.                     The
sentencing ranges established by appellate courts are only guidelines, and not
hard and fast rules. A judge can therefore order a sentence outside the
established range as long as it is in accordance with the principles and
objectives of sentencing. As a corollary, the mere fact that a sentence falls
within the range applicable to a certain type of crime does not necessarily
make it fit. It is by analyzing the trial judge’s reasoning or thought process
that an appellate court can determine whether a sentence that falls within the
proper range is tailored to fit the circumstances of the offender and is
therefore individualized and proportionate.                     The
Court of Appeal properly justified its intervention in this case. The trial judge
committed a number of errors, and the sentence that resulted from his analysis
was thus neither proportionate nor individualized; it also represented a
substantial and marked departure from the sentences customarily imposed on
similar offenders who have committed similar crimes in similar circumstances.
In his analysis, the trial judge began by identifying some aggravating factors
that were not really aggravating factors, namely an element of the offence —
the fact that L was intoxicated — and the impact on those close to L. Next, he
discounted some relevant factors that are normally characterized as mitigating
factors and that must be considered in determining the appropriate sentence —
namely the youth of the accused and the facts that he had expressed remorse,
that he had no criminal record and that the presentence report was favourable
to him. Indeed, the trial judge failed to discuss the presentence report and
its positive findings, which represented a mitigating factor that was relevant
to and important for the determination of the appropriate sentence. Finally,
his failure to consider certain mitigating factors that favoured L’s potential
for rehabilitation and the emphasis he placed on exemplarity led him to impose
an excessive sentence that departed from the principle of proportionality.                     The
local situation factor clearly magnified the exemplary focus of the sentence
with which the Court of Appeal took issue. When considered in the
sentencing context, the frequency of a crime in a given region does not help
paint a portrait of the accused, but instead reflects external factors. The degree of
censure required to express society’s condemnation of the offence is limited by
the principle that an offender’s sentence must be equivalent to his or her moral
culpability. Even though courts of appeal have noted that a trial judge can sometimes
consider the local situation when imposing a sentence, the judicial notice that
judges can take of their communities is not without limits, and caution must be
exercised in establishing its scope. Being familiar with the local situation in
one’s region is one thing, but claiming to compare that situation with what
happens elsewhere in order to draw conclusions or inferences from it is
something else. Although a court has wide latitude as to the sources and types of evidence upon
which to base the sentence to be imposed, it must never lose sight of
the importance of procedural fairness and must bear in mind the importance of the
facts in question and the impact on the offender of how they are dealt with. In this case,
there is no indication that the trial judge was in a position to take judicial
notice of the fact that impaired driving is trivialized in the Beauce region
more than elsewhere. Knowing the impact on sentencing of that factor, which he
considered to be aggravating, and the particular weight he was going to attach
to it in imposing a more severe sanction, he should, in the interest of
procedural fairness, have informed L of his concerns on this point and requested
submissions from him. But he did not do so, even though the importance he
attached to that aggravating factor ultimately led him to impose a sentence
that favoured exemplarity at the expense of proportionality.                     On
the issue of the driving prohibition, the length of the presentence prohibition
is a factor to be considered in analyzing the reasonableness and
appropriateness of the prohibition to be imposed under s. 259(3.3) (b)
of the Criminal Code . In light of the length of the presentence
prohibition in this case, it is appropriate to reduce the length of L’s driving
prohibition to one year and nine months, plus the period of 48 months
to which he was sentenced to imprisonment.                     Finally,
the Court of Appeal did not make an error warranting intervention when it
declined to admit the fresh evidence of two breaches by L of his
recognizances.  Absent an error of law or a palpable and overriding error of
fact, the Court should not reconsider the weight attached by the Court of
Appeal to those breaches and substitute its view of what would have been
relevant. Cases Cited By Wagner J. By Gascon J.
(dissenting)                     R.
v. Nur, 2015 SCC 15, [2015] 1 S.C.R. 773; R. v. Proulx, 2000 SCC 5,
[2000] 1 S.C.R. 61; R. v. Gladue, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 688; R. v.
Nasogaluak, 2010 SCC 6, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 206; R. v. M. (C.A.), [1996]
1 S.C.R. 500; R. v. Priest (1996), 30 O.R. (3d) 538; R. v. Paré,
2011 QCCA 2047; R. v. R. (M.), 2010 QCCA 16, 73 C.R. (6th) 136; R. v.
J.L.M.A., 2010 ABCA 363, 499 A.R. 1; R. v. Hamilton (2004), 72 O.R.
(3d) 1; R. v. Hawkins, 2011 NSCA 7, 298 N.S.R. (2d) 53; R. v.
Wismayer (1997), 33 O.R. (3d) 225; R. v. Coffin, 2006 QCCA 471, 210
C.C.C. (3d) 227; R. v. Leask (1996), 113 Man. R. (2d) 265;
R. v. Stone, [1999] 2 S.C.R.
290; R. v. Shropshire, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 227; R. v. McDonnell,
[1997] 1 S.C.R. 948; R. v. Gallon, 2006 NBCA 31, 297 N.B.R. (2d) 317; R.
v. Biancofiore (1997), 35 O.R. (3d) 782; R. v. Gagnon (1998), 130
C.C.C. (3d) 194; R. v. Gardiner, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 368; R. v. Orr,
2008 BCCA 76, 228 C.C.C. (3d) 432; R. v. Flight, 2014 ABCA 380, 584 A.R.
392; R. v. Stimson, 2011 ABCA 59, 499 A.R. 185; R. v. Dass, 2008
CanLII 13191; R. v. Dankyi (1993), 86 C.C.C. (3d) 368; R. v. Spence,
2005 SCC 71, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 458; R. v. Valiquette, 2004 CanLII 20126; R.
v. Z.Z., 2013 QCCA 1498; R. v. Hernandez, 2009 BCCA 546, 277
B.C.A.C. 120; R. v. Lévesque, 2000 SCC 47, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 487; R. v.
Witvoet, 2015 ABCA 152, 600 A.R. 200; R. v. Bartlett, 2005 NLCA 75,
252 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 154; R. v. Joseph, 2012 BCCA 359, 326 B.C.A.C.
312; R. v. Provost, 2006 NLCA 30, 256 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 205; R. v.
Alarie (1980), 28 C.R. (3d) 73; R. v. Junkert, 2010 ONCA 549, 103
O.R. (3d) 284; R. v. Ruizfuentes, 2010 MBCA 90, 258 Man. R. (2d) 220; R.
v. Lépine, 2007 QCCA 70; R. v. Brutus, 2009 QCCA 1382; R. v.
Charles, 2011 BCCA 68, 10 M.V.R. (6th) 177, aff’g 2009 BCSC 1391; R. v.
McIlwrick, 2008 ABQB 724, 461 A.R. 16; R. v. Olsen, 2011 ABCA 308,
515 A.R. 76; R. v. Pelletier, 2009 QCCQ 6277; R. v. Nottebrock,
2014 ABQB 662, 15 Alta. L.R. (6th) 114; R. v. Cooper, 2007 NSSC 115, 255
N.S.R. (2d) 18; R. v. Kummer, 2011 ONCA 39, 103 O.R. (3d) 641; R. v.
Cote, 2007 SKPC 100, 300 Sask. R. 194; R. v. York, 2015 ABCA 129, 78
M.V.R. (6th) 4; R. v. Gravel, 2013 QCCQ 10482; R. v. Comeau, 2008
QCCQ 4804, aff’d 2009 QCCA 1175; R. v. Côté, 2002 CanLII 27228; R. v.
Morneau, 2009 QCCA 1496, aff’g 2009 QCCQ 1271; R. v. Bois, 2005
CanLII 10575; R. v. Wood (2005), 196 C.C.C. (3d) 155; R. v. R.N.S.,
2000 SCC 7, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 149; R. v. Bilodeau, 2013 QCCA 980; R. v.
Pellicore, [1997] O.J. No. 226 (QL); Palmer v. The Queen,
[1980] 1 S.C.R. 759. Statutes and Regulations Cited Act to amend the Criminal Code  (impaired driving causing death and
other matters), S.C. 2000, c. 25. Tackling Violent Crime Act, S.C. 2008,
c. 6 . Authors Cited Béliveau, Pierre, et Martin Vauclair. Traité général de
preuve et de procédure pénales, 22e éd. Montréal:
Yvon Blais, 2015. Dadour, François. De la détermination de la peine: Principes et
applications. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2007. Davis,
Kenneth Culp. Administrative Law Text, 3rd ed. St. Paul, Minn.:
West Publishing Co., 1972. Delisle,
Ronald Joseph, Don Stuart and David M. Tanovich. Evidence:
Principles and Problems, 9th ed. Toronto: Carswell,
2010. Desjardins, Tristan. L’appel en droit criminel et pénal, 2e
éd. Montréal: LexisNexis, 2012. Renaud, Gilles. Principes de la détermination de la peine.
Cowansville, Que.: Yvon Blais, 2004. Renaud, Gilles. The Sentencing Code of
Canada: Principles and Objectives. Markham, Ont.:
LexisNexis, 2009. Ruby, Clayton C., Gerald J. Chan and Nader R. Hasan. Sentencing,
8th ed.  Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2012. Thomas, D. A. Principles of Sentencing, 2nd ed. London:
Heinemann, 1979.                     Alain Dumas and Geneviève
Bertrand,
for the respondent.                     Joanne Dartana, for the intervener.                     English version of the judgment of Abella,
Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner and Côté JJ. delivered by                     Wagner
J. — I.             
Introduction [2]                             
For this purpose, the courts have developed
tools over the years to ensure that similar sentences are imposed on similar
offenders for similar offences committed in similar circumstances — the
principle of parity of sentences — and that sentences are proportionate by
guiding the exercise of that discretion, and to prevent any substantial and
marked disparities in the sentences imposed on offenders for similar crimes
committed in similar circumstances. For example, in Quebec and other provinces,
the courts have adopted a system of sentencing ranges and categories designed
to achieve these objectives. [3]                             
The credibility of the criminal justice system
in the eyes of the public depends on the fitness of sentences imposed on
offenders. A sentence that is unfit, whether because it is too harsh or too
lenient, could cause the public to question the credibility of the system in
light of its objectives. [4]                             
One of the main objectives of Canadian criminal
law is the rehabilitation of offenders. Rehabilitation is one of the
fundamental moral values that distinguish Canadian society from the societies
of many other nations in the world, and it helps the courts impose sentences
that are just and appropriate. [8]                             
This sad situation, which unfortunately
continues to prevail today, was denounced by Cory J. more than
20 years ago:                         Every year, drunk driving leaves a terrible
trail of death, injury, heartbreak and destruction. From the point of view of
numbers alone, it has a far greater impact on Canadian society than any other
crime. In terms of the deaths and serious injuries resulting in
hospitalization, drunk driving is clearly the crime which causes the most
significant social loss to the country. (R. v. Bernshaw, [1995] 1 S.C.R. 254, at para. 16) [9]                             
Such is the backdrop to the main issues in the
case at bar. The appellant is appealing a Quebec Court of Appeal judgment that
reduced from six and a half to four years a term of imprisonment imposed on the
respondent by the trial judge after the respondent had pleaded guilty to two
counts of impaired driving causing death. [10]                         
This appeal affords this Court, first of all, an
occasion to clarify the standard on the basis of which an appellate court may
intervene and vary a sentence imposed by a trial judge. The Court must
determine, inter alia, the extent to which a deviation from a sentencing
range that is otherwise established and adhered to may justify appellate
intervention. [11]                         
This Court has on many occasions noted the
importance of giving wide latitude to sentencing judges. Since they have, inter alia,
the advantage of having heard and seen the witnesses, sentencing judges are in
the best position to determine, having regard to the circumstances, a just and
appropriate sentence that is consistent with the objectives and principles set
out in the Criminal Code  in this regard. The fact that a judge deviates
from the proper sentencing range does not in itself justify appellate
intervention. Ultimately, except where a sentencing judge makes an error of law
or an error in principle that has an impact on the sentence, an appellate court
may not vary the sentence unless it is demonstrably unfit. [12]                         
In such cases, proportionality is the cardinal
principle that must guide appellate courts in considering the fitness of a
sentence imposed on an offender. The more serious the crime and its
consequences, or the greater the offender’s degree of responsibility, the
heavier the sentence will be. In other words, the severity of a sentence
depends not only on the seriousness of the crime’s consequences, but also on
the moral blameworthiness of the offender. Determining a proportionate sentence
is a delicate task. As I mentioned above, both sentences that are too lenient
and sentences that are too harsh can undermine public confidence in the
administration of justice. Moreover, if appellate courts intervene without deference
to vary sentences that they consider too lenient or too harsh, their
interventions could undermine the credibility of the system and the authority
of trial courts. With respect, I am of the opinion that the Court of Appeal was
wrong in this case to reduce the sentence imposed by the trial judge by basing
its intervention on the fact that he had departed from the established
sentencing range. [13]                         
Secondly, this appeal also raises the question
whether it is appropriate for a judge to consider the fact that a type of
offence occurs with particular frequency in a given region as a relevant factor
in determining a just and appropriate sentence. In this case, I am of the
opinion that it was open to the trial judge, in balancing the relevant
sentencing factors, to consider the frequency of impaired driving offences in
the district where the crime was committed. Moreover, the Court of Appeal
failed completely to address this question. [14]                         
Another question raised in this appeal relates
to the length and other terms of the driving prohibition imposed by the trial
judge. In this case, the length of the presentence driving prohibition should
be subtracted from that of the prohibition imposed in the context of the
sentence. In addition, the driving prohibition of four years and seven months
is demonstrably unfit and must be reduced to two years and four months to take
account of the recognizance entered into by the respondent under which he was
to refrain from driving from his release date until his sentencing date (two
years and three months). [15]                         
Finally, the appeal also concerns the
admissibility of fresh evidence. In this case, the evidence in question was of
two breaches of recognizances the respondent had entered into. The Court of
Appeal found that the fresh evidence was inadmissible. Unlike the Court of
Appeal, I am of the opinion that the evidence was admissible and that it
provided information that was relevant to the determination of a just and
appropriate sentence. [16]                         
In short, I respectfully find that the Court of
Appeal erred in intervening, without valid grounds, to substitute a sentence it
considered appropriate for the one that had been imposed by the trial judge.
Even though the trial judge had made an error in principle by considering an
element of the offence as an aggravating factor, that error had clearly had no
impact on the sentence, which, moreover, was not demonstrably unfit. In this
sense, the Court of Appeal erred in basing its intervention on the fact that
the sentence fell outside the sentencing range established by the courts, while
disregarding the criteria that are normally applied in the determination of a
just and appropriate sentence. It also failed completely to address the factor
relating to the local situation, that is, to the frequency of the type of
offence at issue, on which the trial judge had relied. For these reasons, the
appeal should be allowed and the sentence of imprisonment imposed by the trial
judge should be restored. II.          
Background and Judicial History A.          
Facts [19]                         
The respondent admitted to having smoked a joint
of cannabis at about 7:00 p.m., after which he had drunk four small beers
between 7:30 p.m. and midnight, another between 1:00 and 2:30 a.m.
and about 100 mL of a lemonade and vodka mixture between 10:30 and
11:00 p.m. The parties agreed that it was the alcohol and not the cannabis
that had impaired the respondent’s ability to drive. [20]                         
The collision investigation report concluded
that the vehicle had been travelling at 130 km/h, whereas the recommended
speed for taking the curve was 75 km/h. The vehicle skidded more than
60 metres before hitting the bottom of a ditch, lifting off the ground and
rolling over several times. [21]                         
The respondent did not testify at the sentencing
hearing, although the defence adduced some evidence to show that he had been
deeply distressed during the weeks and months following the accident. The
evidence also showed that he had become suicidal and had said that he wished he
had died instead of the victims. B.           
Court of Québec, 2013 QCCQ 11960 [24]                         
Judge Couture began by listing the aggravating
factors: the facts that the respondent had been intoxicated and had smoked
cannabis, the context in which he had been drinking alcohol, the speed at which
he had been driving, his driving record with the Société de l’assurance
automobile du Québec, the number of victims and the impact of the accident on
the victims’ families. He also identified a few mitigating factors, but he
reduced the weight to be attached to them, except as regards the fact that the
presentence report was favourable to the respondent. [25]                         
More specifically, Judge Couture attached less
weight to the fact that the respondent had pleaded guilty on the ground that he
had done so relatively late, long after he was in a position to make decisions
about the conduct of his trial. Judge Couture also attached less weight to
the fact that the respondent did not have a criminal record, because in his
view, the offence was one that was likely to be committed by people who do not
have criminal records. He relied in this regard on this Court’s decision in Proulx,
at para. 129. He also noted that the respondent had sustained injuries,
but pointed out that this was merely a consequence of the respondent’s own
actions. In addition, Judge Couture reduced the weight attached to the
respondent’s youth. [27]                         
Furthermore, Judge Couture emphasized the
particular situation in the Beauce region, where approximately one in five
cases involves an impaired driving offence. He even posed the question whether
driving while impaired is trivialized more there than elsewhere. [28]                         
In the end, he found that the aggravating
circumstances outweighed the mitigating circumstances in this case. C.           
Quebec Court of Appeal, 2014 QCCA 1061 [30]                         
The Court of Appeal essentially focused its
analysis on the application of the sentencing range outlined in R. v. Comeau,
2008 QCCQ 4804, which it had confirmed in R. v. Paré, 2011 QCCA 2047.
According to that range, which is divided into three categories, sentences are
to be imposed as follows: (1)   lenient sentences varying between 18 months’ and three years’
imprisonment where the predominant factors favour the accused; (2)   harsh sentences varying between three and six years’ imprisonment
where the factors of deterrence and denunciation outweigh the personal factors
of the accused; [32]                         
The Court of Appeal found that the sentence of
six years and five months was excessive because it departed from the principle
of proportionality. In the court’s opinion, the trial judge should have given
greater consideration to the respondent’s potential for rehabilitation and
placed less emphasis on the objective of making an example of an offender. [34]                         
In addition, the Court of Appeal held that the
fresh evidence the appellant wanted to adduce was inadmissible. The record
showed that the respondent had breached two recognizances with which he had
agreed to comply while awaiting trial. First, he had failed to comply with
the terms of a curfew imposed on him by the court and, second, he had contacted
Maxime Pruneau, the brother of one of the victims, although he was prohibited
from doing so. According to the Court of Appeal, this fresh evidence was
inadmissible because the breaches in question had been punished separately, by
an additional 15 days’ imprisonment. Moreover, they were not indicative of
a risk of the respondent’s reoffending in this case. The Court of Appeal also
held that the fresh evidence in question was unlikely to affect the result of
the appeal, because the disparity between the sentence imposed at trial and the
one that, in the court’s opinion, had to be substituted for it was too great. III.       
Issues [35]                         
The appeal raises the following issues: 1.         Was it
open to the Court of Appeal to substitute the sentence it considered
appropriate for the one imposed by the trial judge, primarily on the basis that
the trial judge had deviated from the sentencing range established by the
courts for impaired driving offences? 2.         Was it
open to the trial judge to consider the frequency of impaired driving in the
region where the offence was committed as a relevant sentencing factor? If so,
was it open to the Court of Appeal to disregard this factor in analyzing the
fitness of the sentence? 3.         Were the
length and the other terms of the driving prohibition imposed by the trial
judge appropriate? 4.         Did the
Court of Appeal err in holding that the fresh evidence the appellant wished to
file was inadmissible? IV.       
Analysis A.          
Standard for Intervention on an Appeal From a
Sentence [36]                         
Appellate courts generally play a dual role in
ensuring the consistency, stability and permanence of the case law in both the
criminal and civil law contexts. First, they act as a safeguard against errors
made by trial courts and are thus required to rectify errors of law and review
the reasonableness of the exercise of discretion. They must ensure that trial
courts state the law correctly and apply it uniformly. [37]                         
Second, appellate courts must ensure the
coherent development of the law while formulating guiding principles to ensure
that it is applied consistently in a given jurisdiction. They must therefore
clarify the law where clarification is necessary or where conflicting decisions
have been rendered: T. Desjardins, L’appel en droit criminel et pénal
(2nd ed. 2012), at p. 1. In Quebec, the Court of Appeal has an
additional responsibility in civil cases, since it ensures the harmonious
interpretation of the distinctive rules of Quebec civil law. [38]                         
In the criminal law context, appellate courts play
this dual role in appeals from both verdicts and sentences. In the case of an
appeal from a sentence, the power of an appellate court to substitute a
sentence for the one imposed by the trial judge is provided for in s. 687 
of the Criminal Code :                           687. (1) Where
an appeal is taken against sentence, the court of appeal shall, unless the
sentence is one fixed by law, consider the fitness of the sentence appealed
against, and may on such evidence, if any, as it thinks fit to require or to
receive, (a) vary the sentence within
the limits prescribed by law for the offence of which the accused was
convicted; or (b) dismiss the appeal.                           (2) A
judgment of a court of appeal that varies the sentence of an accused who was
convicted has the same force and effect as if it were a sentence passed by the
trial court. [40]                         
In this regard, Iacobucci J. explained in Shropshire
that consideration of the fitness of a sentence does not justify an appellate
court taking an interventionist approach on appeal:                     An
appellate court should not be given free rein to modify a sentencing order
simply because it feels that a different order ought to have been made. The
formulation of a sentencing order is a profoundly subjective process; the trial
judge has the advantage of having seen and heard all of the witnesses whereas
the appellate court can only base itself upon a written record. A variation in
the sentence should only be made if the court of appeal is convinced it is not
fit. That is to say, that it has found the sentence to be clearly unreasonable.
[para. 46] [41]                         
In Proulx, this Court, per
Lamer C.J., discussed these same principles, which continue to be
relevant:                                     Put
simply, absent an error in principle, failure to consider a relevant factor, or
an overemphasis of the appropriate factors, a court of appeal should only
intervene to vary a sentence imposed at trial if the sentence is demonstrably
unfit. Parliament explicitly vested sentencing judges with a discretion
to determine the appropriate degree and kind of punishment under the Criminal
Code . [First emphasis added; second emphasis in original.] . . . These principles have
since been reiterated in L.M. and Nasogaluak. [42]                         
My colleague states that a sentence may be unfit
if there is a reviewable error in the thought process or reasoning on which it
is based (para. 140). For this reason, in his view, where there is a
reviewable error in the trial judge’s reasoning, for example where the judge
has characterized an element of the offence as an aggravating factor
(para. 146), it is always open to an appellate court to intervene to
assess the fitness of the sentence imposed by the trial judge. Having done so,
the court can then affirm that sentence if it considers the sentence to be fit,
or impose the sentence it considers appropriate without having to show
deference (paras. 139 and 142). In other words, any error of law or error
in principle in a trial judge’s analysis will open the door to intervention by
an appellate court, which can then substitute its own opinion for that of the
trial judge. [44]                         
In my view, an error in principle, the failure
to consider a relevant factor or the erroneous consideration of an aggravating
or mitigating factor will justify appellate intervention only where it appears
from the trial judge’s decision that such an error had an impact on the
sentence. [45]                         
For example, in R. v. Gavin, 2009 QCCA 1,
the Quebec Court of Appeal found, first, that the trial judge had erred in
considering a lack of remorse and the manner in which the defence had been
conducted as aggravating circumstances (para. 29 (CanLII)). However, it
then considered the impact of that error on the sentence and stated the
following, at para. 35 :                         [translation]  I find that the lack of
remorse was a secondary factor in the trial judge’s assessment. This is apparent
in the wording of the judgment. The judge referred to and considered all of the
relevant sentencing factors, and the issue of lack of remorse was nothing more
than incidental. . . . Consequently, unless the Court finds that
the sentence imposed was harsher because the judge erroneously determined that
the defence’s conduct (as in R. v. Beauchamp, supra) and the lack
of remorse were aggravating circumstances, this error in principle had no real
effect on the sentence. Essentially, therefore, our task now is to ensure that
the sentence is not clearly unreasonable . . . . Thus, the Court of
Appeal, finding that the error in principle made by the trial judge was not
determinative and had had no effect on the sentence, rightly concluded that the
error in question could not on its own justify the court’s intervention. This
ultimately led the court to inquire into whether the sentence was clearly
unreasonable having regard to the circumstances. [46]                         
The Quebec Court of Appeal also adopted this
reasoning in R. v. Sidhu, 2009 QCCA 2441. As in Gavin, the trial
judge had considered lack of remorse as an aggravating factor (para. 23
(CanLII)), but the Court of Appeal found that this error was not determinative
and had had no effect on the sentence (para. 24). Since the sentence the
judge imposed would not have been different had there been no mistake in that
respect (para. 26), the error was not reviewable (para. 55). Thus,
rather than simply substituting its opinion for that of the trial judge because
he had made an error in principle, the Court of Appeal limited itself to
considering whether, independently of that error, the sentence was unreasonable
or demonstrably unfit. On finding that that was not the case, it decided not to
intervene (para. 55). [48]                         
The reminder given by this Court about showing
deference to a trial judge’s exercise of discretion is readily understandable.
First, the trial judge has the advantage of having observed the witnesses in
the course of the trial and having heard the parties’ sentencing submissions.
Second, the sentencing judge is usually familiar with the circumstances in the
district where he or she sits and therefore with the particular needs of the
community in which the crime was committed: R. v. M. (C.A.), [1996]
1 S.C.R. 500, at para. 91. Finally, as Doherty J.A. noted in R. v.
Ramage, 2010 ONCA 488, 257 C.C.C. (3d) 261, the appropriate use of judicial
resources is a consideration that must never be overlooked:                     Appellate
repetition of the exercise of judicial discretion by the trial judge, without
any reason to think that the second effort will improve upon the results of the
first, is a misuse of judicial resources. The exercise also delays the final
resolution of the criminal process, without any countervailing benefit to the
process. [para. 70] [49]                         
For the same reasons, an appellate court may not
intervene simply because it would have weighed the relevant factors
differently. In Nasogaluak, LeBel J. referred to R. v. McKnight
(1999), 135 C.C.C. (3d) 41 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 35, in this
regard:                     To
suggest that a trial judge commits an error in principle because in an
appellate court’s opinion the trial judge gave too much weight to one relevant
factor or not enough weight to another is to abandon deference altogether. The
weighing of relevant factors, the balancing process is what the exercise of
discretion is all about. To maintain deference to the trial judge’s exercise of
discretion, the weighing or balancing of relevant factors must be assessed
against the reasonableness standard of review. Only if by emphasizing one
factor or by not giving enough weight to another, the trial judge exercises his
or her discretion unreasonably should an appellate court interfere with the
sentence on the ground the trial judge erred in principle. [para. 46]                     [translation]  There is no doubt that he
focused on the mitigating circumstances, overemphasizing them in the
appellant’s opinion, but that balancing exercise was within his jurisdiction
and the reasons he gave make it easy to follow his reasoning. [51]                         
Furthermore, the choice of sentencing range or
of a category within a range falls within the trial judge’s discretion and
cannot in itself constitute a reviewable error. An appellate court may not
therefore intervene on the ground that it would have put the sentence in a different
range or category. It may intervene only if the sentence the trial judge
imposed is demonstrably unfit. [52]                         
It is possible for a sentence to be demonstrably
unfit even if the judge has made no error in imposing it. As Laskin J.A.
mentioned, writing for the Ontario Court of Appeal, the courts have used a
variety of expressions to describe a sentence that is “demonstrably unfit”:
“clearly unreasonable”, “clearly or manifestly excessive”, “clearly excessive
or inadequate”, or representing a “substantial and marked departure” (R. v.
Rezaie (1996), 31 O.R. (3d) 713 (C.A.), at p. 720). All these
expressions reflect the very high threshold that applies to appellate courts
when determining whether they should intervene after reviewing the fitness of a
sentence. [53]                         
This inquiry must be focused on the fundamental
principle of proportionality stated in s. 718.1  of the Criminal Code ,
which provides that a sentence must be “proportionate to the gravity of the
offence and the degree of responsibility of the offender”. A sentence will
therefore be demonstrably unfit if it constitutes an unreasonable departure
from this principle. Proportionality is determined both on an individual basis,
that is, in relation to the accused him or herself and to the offence committed
by the accused, and by comparison with sentences imposed for similar offences
committed in similar circumstances. Individualization and parity of sentences
must be reconciled for a sentence to be proportionate: s. 718.2 (a)
and (b) of the Criminal Code . [54]                         
The determination of whether a sentence is fit
also requires that the sentencing objectives set out in s. 718  of the Criminal
Code  and the other sentencing principles set out in s. 718.2  be taken
into account. Once again, however, it is up to the trial judge to properly
weigh these various principles and objectives, whose relative importance will
necessarily vary with the nature of the crime and the circumstances in which it
was committed. The principle of parity of sentences, on which the Court of
Appeal relied, is secondary to the fundamental principle of proportionality.
This Court explained this as follows in M. (C.A.):                     It
has been repeatedly stressed that there is no such thing as a uniform sentence
for a particular crime. . . . Sentencing is an inherently individualized
process, and the search for a single appropriate sentence for a similar
offender and a similar crime will frequently be a fruitless exercise of
academic abstraction. [para. 92] [55]                         
This principle of parity of sentences also means
that the deference owed to the sentencing judge must be shown except in the
circumstances mentioned above. The Court said the following in this regard in L.M.:                         This
exercise of ensuring that sentences are similar could not be given priority
over the principle of deference to the trial judge’s exercise of discretion,
since the sentence was not vitiated by an error in principle and the trial
judge had not imposed a sentence that was clearly unreasonable by failing to
give adequate consideration to certain factors or by improperly assessing the
evidence (M. (C.A.), at para. 92, quoted in McDonnell,
at para. 16; W. (G.), at para. 19; see also Ferris, at
p. 149, and Manson, at p. 93). [para. 35] B.           
Sentencing Ranges [56]                         
The principle of parity of sentences has
sometimes resulted in the adoption of a system of sentencing ranges and
categories. This concern for parity in sentencing did not originate with the
codification of the principle in 1996. As early as the 19th century, “tariffs”
were being used by the English courts: D. A. Thomas, Principles of
Sentencing (2nd ed. 1979), at p. 29. The tariffs
synthesized, as it were, the relevant principles applicable to each type of
crime in order to standardize sentencing for it:                              While in certain contexts the Court
articulates a principle, or series of principles, in a systematic manner, it is
frequently necessary to identify the operative principles from the examination
of a considerable number of cases, none of which specifically identifies the
relevant criteria, but which, when viewed collectively, clearly conform
substantially to a pattern which can be described. This is particularly true of
what is conventionally known as “the tariff”, the principles governing the
lengths of sentences of imprisonment. (Thomas, at p. 5)                     Even when an appellate court has established a
range, it may be that a fact pattern will arise, which is sufficiently
dissimilar to past decisions that the “range”, as it were, must be expanded.
The fundamental point is that a “range” is not a straitjacket to the exercise
of discretion of a sentencing judge. (R. v. Keepness, 2010 SKCA 69, 359 Sask. R. 34, at
para. 24) [58]                         
There will always be situations that call for a
sentence outside a particular range: although ensuring parity in sentencing is
in itself a desirable objective, the fact that each crime is committed in
unique circumstances by an offender with a unique profile cannot be
disregarded. The determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a highly
individualized exercise that goes beyond a purely mathematical calculation. It
involves a variety of factors that are difficult to define with precision. This
is why it may happen that a sentence that, on its face, falls outside a
particular range, and that may never have been imposed in the past for a
similar crime, is not demonstrably unfit. Once again, everything depends on the
gravity of the offence, the offender’s degree of responsibility and the
specific circumstances of each case. LeBel J. commented as follows on this
subject:                     A judge can order a sentence outside that range
as long as it is in accordance with the principles and objectives of
sentencing. Thus, a sentence falling outside the regular range of appropriate
sentences is not necessarily unfit. Regard must be had to all the circumstances
of the offence and the offender, and to the needs of the community in which the
offence occurred. (Nasogaluak, at para. 44) [59]                         
In Brutus, the Quebec Court of Appeal
described the limits of the process of ensuring the similarity of sentences as
follows:                         [translation]  There is no doubt that the
sentence imposed in this case differs from certain sentences imposed in other
cases for the same offence. However, as our colleague Rochon J.A. stated
in Ferland v. R, 2009 QCCA 1168, with respect to the principle of parity
of sentences that is set out in section 718.2 (b) Cr.C., it “has
some limits because of the individualized nature of the sentencing process” and
cannot provide a basis for departing from the principle of deference to the
trial judge’s exercise of his or her sentencing discretion (R. v. L.M., supra,
at para. 35). [para. 12] [60]                         
In other words, sentencing ranges are primarily
guidelines, and not hard and fast rules: Nasogaluak, at para. 44.
As a result, a deviation from a sentencing range is not synonymous with an error
of law or an error in principle. Sopinka J. stated this clearly in McDonnell, although
he was referring in that case to categories of assault:                         . . .
in my view it can never be an error in principle in itself to fail to place a
particular offence within a judicially created category of assault for the
purposes of sentencing. . . . If the categories are defined
narrowly, and deviations from the categorization are generally reversed, the
discretion that should be left in the hands of the trial and sentencing judges
is shifted considerably to the appellate courts. [para. 32] [61]                         
Any other conclusion would have the effect of
authorizing appellate courts to create categories of offences with no real
justification and accordingly intervene without deference to substitute a
sentence on appeal. But the power to create categories of offences lies
with Parliament, not the courts: McDonnell, at para. 33. [62]                         
It should also be noted that Parliament has
regularly raised the level of the minimum and maximum sentences applicable to
impaired driving offences. For example, in 2000, the maximum sentence for the
crime of impaired driving causing death was raised from 14 years to
imprisonment for life: An Act to amend the Criminal Code (impaired driving
causing death and other matters), S.C. 2000, c. 25. [63]                         
Similarly, in 2008, the minimum sentences for
all crimes related to impaired driving were increased to $1,000 for a first
offence, imprisonment for 30 days for a second offence and
imprisonment for 120 days for any subsequent offence: Tackling Violent
Crime Act, S.C. 2008, c. 6 . [64]                         
The sentences imposed for such crimes in Quebec
have also changed. For example, before 2009, the terms of imprisonment imposed
for impaired driving causing death varied from one to 10 years: R. v.
Verreault, 2008 QCCA 2284, at para. 25 (CanLII); R. v. Morneau,
2009 QCCA 1496, at para. 21 (CanLII). Since Comeau, however, the
Quebec courts have used a new sentencing range divided into
three categories. As I mentioned above, the Court of Appeal held in Paré
that it was appropriate for the courts to use that range. [65]                         
The appellant correctly observes that Quebec is
the only province in which the courts have subdivided the sentencing range into
categories for the crime of impaired driving causing death. Other provinces
have also adopted the range system, but without subdividing the ranges into
categories. In those provinces, sentences vary from 18 months to two years in
the least serious situations and from seven to eight years in the most serious:
R. v. Bear, 2008 SKCA 172, 320 Sask. R. 12, at para. 59; R.
v. Berner, 2013 BCCA 188, 297 C.C.C. (3d) 69, at para. 37; R. v.
Smith, 2013 BCCA 173, 296 C.C.C. (3d) 386, at para. 60; Stimson,
at para. 18; Ruizfuentes, at para. 22. [66]                         
The Ontario Court of Appeal has refused to
define a sentencing range for the crime of impaired driving causing death,
noting that the crime can be committed in an infinite variety of circumstances:
Junkert, at para. 40; R. v. Kummer, 2011 ONCA 39, 103 O.R.
(3d) 641. This is why there is so much variation in the ranges and why
penitentiary sentences much longer than six and a half years have been reported
almost everywhere in Canada. [67]                         
Like the range itself, the categories it
comprises are tools whose purpose is in part to promote parity in sentencing.
However, a deviation from such a range or category is not an error in principle
and cannot in itself automatically justify appellate intervention unless the
sentence that is imposed departs significantly and for no reason from the
contemplated sentences. Absent an error in principle, an appellate court may
not vary a sentence unless the sentence is demonstrably unfit. [69]                         
I believe that the Court of Appeal was wrong to
apply the sentencing range rigidly. By saying that the sentence should have
been in the second category rather than at the lower end of the sentences in
the third category, the Court of Appeal substituted its own assessment for that
of the trial judge without first determining that the sentence in question was
demonstrably unfit. In doing so, the Court of Appeal erred in applying the
sentencing range mechanism as if it were a straitjacket. The sentencing ranges
must in all cases remain only one tool among others that are intended to aid
trial judges in their work. [72]                         
In sum, the sentence imposed by Judge Couture is
consistent with the sentencing objectives and principles set out in the Criminal
Code . Judge Couture properly emphasized the importance of deterrence and
denunciation in this case, but he did not overlook the objective of
rehabilitation (para. 92 (CanLII)). Indeed, the Court of Appeal
acknowledged that [translation]
“[t]he trial judge gave extensive reasons for the judgment to which the motion
relates, and it is clear that he very carefully weighed the sentencing
objectives and principles set out in sections 718  to 718.2  of the Criminal
Code ” (para. 5 (CanLII)). Because Judge Couture did not make a
reviewable error in his judgment, and because the sentence he imposed was not
demonstrably unfit, it was not open to the Court of Appeal to intervene and
substitute its own assessment for his. The Court of Appeal nevertheless reduced
the sentence imposed at trial, which was indeed severe, without taking account
of the principle that deterrence and denunciation must be emphasized in such
cases. In reducing the sentence imposed by Judge Couture on the basis that it
departed from the principle of proportionality, the Court of Appeal also
disregarded the local reality, thereby itself departing from the objectives of
deterrence and denunciation. C.           
Deterrence and Denunciation [74]                         
As I mentioned in the introduction, courts from
various parts of the country have adhered to the principle that the objectives
of deterrence and denunciation must be emphasized in imposing sentences for
this type of offence. For example, the Quebec Court of Appeal made the following comments in Lépine:                         Very often, the objective gravity of such
crimes is based more on their consequences and the extent of those consequences
than on consciousness of guilt, which is why Parliament has increased the
maximum sentences on the basis of the consequences of the operation of the
vehicle. [75]                         
Along the same lines, the Quebec Court of Appeal
said the following in Brutus:                         [translation] In closing, it should be
borne in mind that the courts have long been sharply critical in discussing the
commission of driving offences of this nature and have asserted that the
objectives of denunciation and deterrence must be emphasized in order to convey
their wish to give expression to society’s condemnation of such crimes by means
of exemplary sentences, particularly in cases (like this one) involving serious
consequences for the victims. Society’s condemnation may be reflected in longer
terms of imprisonment, which have a deterrent effect both on the offender and
on all those who might be tempted to imitate the offender. The sentence imposed
in this case is not unreasonable in light of this objective, nor is it
unreasonable in light of all the circumstances of the case. [para. 18] [76]                         
The Quebec Court of Appeal was right to note the
importance of the objectives of deterrence and denunciation. With respect,
however, it erred in the instant case in departing from those objectives and
intervening. [77]                         
My colleague is of the opinion that
Judge Couture overemphasized the objective of deterrence (para. 145).
He also maintains that Judge Couture made several errors of law by considering
aggravating factors that were not really aggravating factors and by failing to
consider some important mitigating factors, such as the respondent’s youth and
the facts that he had expressed remorse, that he had no criminal record and
that the presentence report was favourable to him (ibid.). For these
reasons, my colleague “believe[s] the Court of Appeal was justified in
intervening and reopening the analytical process in order to determine whether
the sentence was just and appropriate” (para. 164). [78]                         
Here again, I find that my colleague’s comments
need to be qualified. Judge Couture did not fail to consider the
mitigating factors in question (para. 33), but instead attached less
weight to them because of the nature of the offence at issue, as the respondent
himself acknowledges (at para. 29 of his factum). In short, what is being
criticized is the weight the trial judge attached to those factors. As I
mentioned above, however, determining the weight to be given to aggravating or
mitigating circumstances falls strictly within the sentencing judge’s
discretion. The decision to weigh such factors in a given way is not in itself
an error that opens the door to appellate intervention unless the weighing is
unreasonable. [79]                         
This being said, the trial judge was justified
in attaching less weight to the mitigating factors in this case. Although an
offender’s youth is often an important mitigating factor to consider, it should
be noted that it is young people who are affected the most by motor vehicle
accidents that result from impaired driving. In light of the importance that
must be attributed to the objectives of deterrence and denunciation in such
cases as well as the dire consequences of the accident in the instant case, for
which the respondent is entirely responsible, the trial judge was right to
reduce the weight attached to his youth as a mitigating factor. [80]                         
As to the fact that the respondent did not have
a criminal record, Judge Couture was right to point out that his driving
record was not clean. He had been convicted three times for speeding. This
showed that he was irresponsible when behind the wheel, and his convictions
under the Highway Safety Code were all the more relevant given that
speeding had played a part in the accident in this case. The respondent
repeatedly and frequently drove irresponsibly. [82]                         
I would also point out that the trial judge
considered the presentence report, which was favourable to the respondent, as
well as the latter’s prospects for rehabilitation. At para. 92 of his
judgment, he stated that [translation]
“[t]he objective of separation implies that the sentence should not be so long
as to hamper the rehabilitation of the accused.” However, for the reasons given
above, the trial judge cannot be criticized for having discounted this factor. [84]                         
Incidentally, I note that this enumeration of
aggravating factors also includes the fact that the respondent had consumed
cannabis. I agree with Judge Couture that even if the consumption of
cannabis played no role in the accident, it is nevertheless evidence of the
respondent’s irresponsibility. [85]                         
My colleague also states that “the impact on
those close to the accused cannot be considered an aggravating factor that
would justify a harsher sentence for the accused” (para. 147). He cites
s. 718.2  of the Criminal Code  in support of this assertion. But the
list of aggravating factors in that section is not exhaustive. Also, this
factor, like that of intoxication, played a secondary role in the determination
of the sentence. Moreover, contrary to the respondent’s contention, the impact
on those close to the victim can be an aggravating factor: R. v. J.B.,
2015 QCCQ 1884, at para. 59 (CanLII); R. v. Tang, 2010 QCCS
5009, at para. 23 (CanLII). [86]                         
In any event, the Court of Appeal justified its
decision not on the basis of these supposed errors by the trial judge but,
rather, by finding that the judge had departed from the sentencing range
established by the courts for impaired driving offences and that the sentence
he had imposed departed from the principle of proportionality. In short, the
arguments to the effect that the trial judge made errors in respect of the
mitigating and aggravating factors must fail. D.          
Local Situation [87]                         
In conducting his sentencing analysis, the trial
judge also referred to the [translation]
“local situation” factor (para. 73) and stressed the need to convey a strong
message of general deterrence and denunciation. The Court of Appeal completely
overlooked this in its decision. With all due respect, I find that in so doing,
the Court of Appeal made another error. [88]                         
I note in this regard that the respondent
submits that the trial judge erred in considering the particular situation in
the Beauce region with regard to impaired driving offences. In my view, the
respondent is wrong. [89]                         
Even though the Criminal Code  applies
everywhere in the country, local characteristics in a given region may explain
certain differences in the sentences imposed on offenders by the courts. The
frequency of a type of offence in a particular region can certainly be a
relevant factor for a sentencing judge. In M. (C.A.),
Lamer C.J. stated the following:                     The
determination of a just and appropriate sentence is a delicate art which
attempts to balance carefully the societal goals of sentencing against the
moral blameworthiness of the offender and the circumstances of the offence, while
at all times taking into account the needs and current conditions of and in the
community. [Emphasis added; para. 91.] He then added the
following in the next paragraph:                     As
well, sentences for a particular offence should be expected to vary to some
degree across various communities and regions in this country, as the “just and
appropriate” mix of accepted sentencing goals will depend on the needs and
current conditions of and in the particular community where the crime occurred.
[para. 92] [90]                         
Although the fact that a type of crime occurs
frequently in a particular region is not in itself an aggravating factor, there
may be circumstances in which a judge might nonetheless consider such a fact in
balancing the various sentencing objectives, including the need to denounce the
unlawful conduct in question in that place and at the same time to deter anyone
else from doing the same thing. It goes without saying, however, that the
consideration of this factor must not lead to a sentence that is demonstrably
unfit. [93]                         
Other Canadian courts of appeal have also
referred to the principle that the local situation may be one of the relevant
factors to consider in determining a just and appropriate sentence: R. v.
Morrissette (1970), 1 C.C.C. (2d) 307 (Sask. C.A.), at p. 310; R.
v. Laurila, 2010 BCCA 535, 296 B.C.A.C. 139, at para. 6; R. v.
Woghiren, 2004 CanLII 46649 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 3. [94]                         
It is true that considerations of procedural
fairness will generally require that a judge who intends to attach weight to
the local reality and to the frequency of a crime in a given region offer the
parties an opportunity to make representations on the subject. However, this
was not an issue in the case at bar, given that the local reality was not in
dispute. The record shows that the point about the local reality was raised by
the appellant in argument in a timely fashion and that the respondent therefore
had all the information he needed in deciding to say nothing in this regard:
transcript from September 14, 2013, A.R., vol. II, at p. 91. [95]                         
In any event, I am of the view that it was open
to Judge Couture to take judicial notice of the evil represented by the
large number of offences related to drinking and driving that are committed in
the Beauce district. Judge Couture was the resident judge in that
district. He was therefore in a position to observe and assess the magnitude of
the problem in his region, especially given that it is well established in our
law that judges can take judicial notice of the contexts in which they perform
the duties of their offices: R. v. Z.Z., 2013 QCCA 1498, at
para. 68 (CanLII); R. v. Hernandez, 2009 BCCA 546, 277
B.C.A.C. 120, at para. 29. This Court stated in R. v. MacDougall,
[1998] 3 S.C.R. 45, at para. 63, per McLachlin J., that trial judges
and provincial courts of appeal are in the best position to know the particular
circumstances in their jurisdictions. In the case at bar, the frequency of
impaired driving offences is something that can be determined objectively by
consulting the court rolls. In short, it is public information that is known
and uncontroversial, and the local reality was not in dispute in the instant
case. [96]                         
In the circumstances, requiring the preparation
and filing of additional evidence to establish that prosecutions for impaired
driving offences were regularly on the penal or criminal roll in the Beauce
district is in my opinion pointless. It is the trial judge who is in the best
position to know the nature of the cases before his or her court. [97]                         
My colleague agrees that, in the circumstances,
Judge Couture cannot be criticized for the comments he made on the situation in
his region in referring (at para. 72) to [translation]
“this scourge” in his district. Having said this, my colleague states that
Judge Couture was not in a position to take judicial notice of the fact that
impaired driving is trivialized in the Beauce region more than elsewhere in
Quebec. Yet that is not what Judge Couture did. Rather, he merely asked out
loud whether, given the large number of criminal charges involving impaired
driving that have been laid in the Beauce district, driving in such a state is
trivialized there more than elsewhere. [99]                         
At any rate, I am of the opinion that the mere
fact that the trial judge found that impaired driving is a scourge in the
Beauce district was in itself sufficient for him to consider this factor in
determining what would be a just and appropriate sentence. [100]                     
The case law of the Quebec Court of Appeal
supports this conclusion. For example, in Valiquette, that court found
that it had been open to the trial judge to consider an upsurge in crimes
involving the production of narcotics in the Joliette district as a relevant
factor in the sentencing process. It did not require the trial judge to
compare the local situation with the situation elsewhere before emphasizing the
objectives of general deterrence and denunciation, as it merely stated that [translation] “the judge [had] not
err[ed] in taking the local situation and the upsurge in this type of crime in
the Joliette area into account”: Valiquette, at para. 48. [102]                     
Moreover, the fact that trial judges normally
preside in or near the communities that have borne the consequences of the
crimes in question is one of the factors in support of deferring to their
sentencing decisions, and it is not necessary for them to have knowledge of the
situations in other judicial districts. They are accordingly aware of the
frequency of various offences in their communities, and for that reason in
particular, they are in the best position to determine what weight to attach to
this and [translation] “to
properly assess the particular combination of sentencing objectives that is
just and appropriate for the protection of [the] community”: R. v. Pelletier,
2008 QCCA 1616, at para. 3 (CanLII). [103]                     
For the reasons set out above, I am of the
opinion that Judge Couture did not make an error in principle by referring in
his decision to the particular situation in the Beauce region as one of the
relevant factors to consider in imposing an exemplary or deterrent sentence. [104]                     
For the same reasons, I respectfully find that
the Court of Appeal erred in principle by failing to consider the local
situation factor in its decision despite the fact that it had previously found
this factor to be legitimate in other cases. Given that Judge Couture had
stressed the relevance of the local situation in the circumstances of this
case, it was inappropriate for the Court of Appeal to disregard this factor in
assessing the fitness of the sentence, as that meant that its analysis was
incomplete. [105]                     
In conclusion, it is my opinion that the
sentence of six years and six months’ imprisonment imposed by Judge
Couture, although severe, falls within the overall range of sentences normally
imposed in Quebec and elsewhere in the country and is not demonstrably unfit.
It must therefore be restored. E.           
Driving Prohibition [107]                     
In my view, the appellant is wrong on this
point. The case on which the appellant relies for this, R. v. Laycock
(1989), 51 C.C.C. (3d) 65 (Ont. C.A.), was decided in 1989, at which time
s. 259(2) (a) of the Criminal Code  was worded as follows:                           259. . . .                           (2) Where an offender is convicted or
discharged under section 736 of an offence under section 220, 221,
236, 249, 250, 251, 252 or this section or subsection 255(2)  or (3) 
committed by means of a motor vehicle, vessel or aircraft, the court that
sentences the offender may, in addition to any other punishment that may be
imposed for that offence, make an order prohibiting the offender from operating
a motor vehicle on any street, road, highway or other public place, a vessel or
an aircraft, as the case may be, (a)
during any period that the court considers proper, if the offender is liable to
imprisonment for life in respect of that offence; [108]                     
This provision was subsequently amended. The
relevant paragraph currently reads as follows:                           (a.1) during any period that the
court considers proper, plus any period to which the offender is sentenced
to imprisonment, if the offender is liable to imprisonment for life in respect
of that offence and if the sentence imposed is other than imprisonment for
life; [109]                     
By adding the words “plus any period to which
the offender is sentenced to imprisonment”, Parliament was making it clear that
it intended driving prohibitions to commence at the end of the period of
imprisonment, not on the date of sentencing. Section 719(1)  provides that
a sentence commences when it is imposed, except where an enactment otherwise
provides. That is exactly what s. 259(2)  does. The Court of Appeal did not
err in this regard. [112]                     
The courts have seemed quite reluctant to grant
a credit where the release of the accused was subject to restrictions, given
that such restrictive release conditions are not equivalent to actually being
in custody (“bail is not jail”): R. v. Downes (2006), 79 O.R. (3d) 321
(C.A.); R. v. Ijam, 2007 ONCA 597, 87 O.R. (3d) 81, at para. 36;
R. v. Panday, 2007 ONCA 598, 87 O.R. (3d) 1. [113]                     
In the instant case, the driving prohibition has
the same effect regardless of whether it was imposed before or after the
respondent was sentenced. In R. v. Sharma, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 814,
Lamer C.J., dissenting, explained that the accused had in fact begun
serving his sentence, given that the driving prohibition would have been
imposed as part of his sentence had he been tried and found guilty within a
reasonable time. In short, where a driving prohibition is not only one of the
release conditions imposed on an accused but also part of the sentence imposed
upon his or her conviction, the length of the presentence driving prohibition
must be subtracted from the prohibition imposed in the context of the sentence. [114]                     
In my view, therefore, the driving prohibition
of four years and seven months imposed in this case is demonstrably unfit and
must be reduced to two years and four months to take account of the
recognizance entered into by the respondent under which he was to refrain from
driving from his release date until his sentencing date (two years and
three months). F.            
Fresh Evidence [115]                     
The criteria that apply to a court of appeal’s
decision whether to receive fresh evidence were articulated in Palmer v. The
Queen, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759: (1)       The
evidence should generally not be admit­ted if, by due diligence, it could have
been adduced at trial provided that this general principle will not be applied
as strictly in a criminal case as in civil cases . . . . (2)       The
evidence must be relevant in the sense that it bears upon a decisive or
potentially decisive issue in the trial. (3)       The
evidence must be credible in the sense that it is reasonably capable of belief,
and (4)       It must be such that if believed it could reasonably, when
taken with the other evidence adduced at trial, be expected to have affected
the result. [Citation omitted; p. 775.] [116]                     
Although that case involved an appeal from a
verdict, this Court has confirmed that the same criteria apply under
s. 687(1)  of the Criminal Code  when a court of appeal determines
whether it thinks “fit” to receive fresh evidence to decide an appeal against a
sentence: R. v. Lévesque, 2000 SCC 47, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 487. As
Charron J. noted in R. v. Angelillo, 2006 SCC 55, [2006] 2 S.C.R.
728, “[w]hat must guide the court of appeal in assessing the admissibility of
fresh evidence [are] the interests of justice” (para. 12). [117]                     
In the case at bar, only the
fourth criterion is problematic. The appellant submits that the evidence
of the respondent’s two breaches of his recognizances would have affected the
trial judge’s decision, since those breaches relate to the respondent’s
potential for rehabilitation. The respondent argues that the two breaches were
essentially minor and that the Court of Appeal was not wrong to find that the
evidence regarding them would have been unlikely to affect the final result. [118]                     
In my opinion, the fresh evidence was relevant.
Although the two breaches in question are not actually related to the operation
of a motor vehicle, they are evidence of a lack of respect on the respondent’s
part for court orders and for the law, which relates directly to the conditions
for his rehabilitation. [119]                     
In Lees v. The Queen, [1979] 2 S.C.R.
749, McIntyre J. found that evidence of potential but untried charges was
admissible on the issue of “the appellant’s character, conduct, and attitude,
all proper factors to be taken into consideration on sentencing” (p. 754).
In the instant case, the respondent pleaded guilty to two counts of
failure to comply with a recognizance. If made earlier, those guilty pleas
would certainly have been included in the presentence report in accordance with
s. 721(3) (b) of the Criminal Code . [120]                     
From this perspective, the evidence of the two
breaches of the recognizances could have affected the weight given to the
favourable presentence report and could therefore have affected the final
sentencing decision. In particular, the Court of Appeal might have reached a
different conclusion if it had admitted that evidence, which would have helped
it in assessing the fitness of the sentence that had been imposed at trial. V.          
Disposition [121]                     
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal and
restore the sentence imposed by the trial judge except as regards the driving prohibition,
which is reduced to two years and four months commencing at the end of the
respondent’s incarceration.                     English version
of the reasons of McLachlin C.J. and Gascon J. delivered by                     Gascon
J. (dissenting) — I.         
Introduction [122]                     
I have read the reasons of Wagner J., and I
will defer to his summary of the facts and of the decisions rendered by the
courts below. With respect, however, I disagree with my colleague’s disposition
of the issues. I am fully aware of the devastating consequences of the offences
in question for the victims and their families, but I nonetheless believe that
the Quebec Court of Appeal was right to intervene in this case. Although that
court’s comments about the application of the sentencing ranges may, if considered
in isolation, suggest that it adopted an overly rigid approach, I am satisfied
from its reasons as a whole that it correctly stated the law on the criteria
for intervention in this regard. [123]                     
The degree of censure required to express
society’s condemnation of an offence is always subject to the principle that an
offender’s sentence must be equivalent to his or her moral culpability, and not
greater than it. In the instant case, the trial judge placed undue emphasis on
the factors related to the objectives of general deterrence and exemplarity
(i.e. the fact of making an example of an offender). This led him to err,
first, in disregarding this fundamental principle of proportionality and,
second, in imposing a sentence that represented a substantial and marked
departure from the sentences customarily imposed on similar offenders who have
committed similar offences in similar circumstances. By varying the sentence
from 78 to 48 months, the Court of Appeal reduced it by more than a third,
which was certainly a significant reduction. Insofar as the Court of Appeal
correctly stated the law and as its intervention was therefore warranted, this
Court should not interfere with its conclusions as to the sentence it imposed
on the respondent, which is in fact just and appropriate. [124]                     
On the other hand, I agree with my colleague
that the courts below erred in failing to take into account the length of the
respondent’s presentence driving prohibition. Indeed, the appellant conceded
this at the hearing in this Court. The driving prohibition imposed by the Court
of Appeal should therefore be varied accordingly. I would retain the
wording it used with respect to this prohibition, however. [125]                     
Finally, the Court of Appeal held that fresh
evidence of breaches by the accused of two recognizances was not reasonably
capable of tipping the scales in favour of a harsher sentence for the purpose
of protecting society. On this point, too, it correctly applied the law. I see
no error that justifies this Court in interfering with that conclusion. [126]                     
Accordingly, I would have allowed the appeal for
the sole purpose of reducing the respondent’s driving prohibition to one year
and nine months, plus the period of 48 months to which he was sentenced to
imprisonment. II.      
Analysis A.      
Sentence (1)      Sentencing Principles and Objectives                         The
principle of proportionality is rooted in notions of fairness and justice. For
the sentencing court to do justice to the particular offender, the sentence
imposed must reflect the seriousness of the offence, the degree of culpability
of the offender, and the harm occasioned by the offence. The court must have
regard to the aggravating and mitigating factors in the particular case.
Careful adherence to the proportionality principle ensures that this offender
is not unjustly dealt with for the sake of the common good. [Footnote omitted.] Although a court can, in
pursuit of the objective of general deterrence, impose a harsher sentence in
order to send a message with a view to deterring others, the offender must
still deserve that sentence: R. v. Paré, 2011 QCCA 2047; G. Renaud,
The Sentencing Code of Canada: Principles and Objectives (2009), at
para. 3.13. If a judge fails to individualize a sentence and to consider
the relevant mitigating factors while placing undue emphasis on the
circumstances of the offence and the objectives of denunciation and deterrence,
all that is done is to punish the crime: R. v. R. (M.),
2010 QCCA 16, 73 C.R. (6th) 136. Proportionality requires that a sentence
not exceed what is just and appropriate in light of the moral
blameworthiness of the offender and the gravity of the offence. From this
perspective, it serves as a limiting principle: Nasogaluak, at
para. 42. [129]                     
My colleague states that the principle of
proportionality means that the more serious the crime and its consequences, or
the greater the offender’s degree of responsibility, the heavier the sentence
will be (para. 12). I would qualify this statement somewhat. In my view,
an offender’s degree of responsibility does not flow inevitably and solely from
the gravity of the offence. The gravity of the offence and the moral
blameworthiness of the offender are two separate factors, and the principle of
proportionality requires that full consideration be given to each of them: Proulx,
at para. 83. As s. 718.1 Cr. C. provides, “[a] sentence
must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence and the degree of
responsibility of the offender.” [130]                     
Whereas the gravity of the offence concerns the
harm caused by the offender to the victim as well as to society and its values,
the other aspect of the principle of proportionality involves factors that
relate to the offender’s moral culpability:                         The “degree of responsibility of the offender”
as used in s. 718.1 certainly includes the mens rea level of intent,
recklessness or wilful blindness associated with the actus reus of the crime
committed. For this assessment, courts are able to draw extensively on criminal
justice principles. The greater the harm intended or the greater the degree of
recklessness or wilful blindness, the greater the moral culpability. However,
the reference in s. 718.1 is not simply to the “mens rea degree of
responsibility of the offender” at the time of commission of the crime.
Parliament evidently intended “degree of responsibility of the offender” to
include other factors affecting culpability. These might relate, for example,
to the offender’s personal circumstances, mental capacity or motive for
committing the crime. Where else does the Code provide for an offender’s
degree of responsibility generally to be taken into account? Here, too, the
answer takes us to s. 718.2 .                         Section 718.2  directs the sentencing
judge to take into consideration a number of principles. All are either
components of the proportionality principle or properly influence its
interpretation and application. Either way, all are relevant in determining a
just sanction that satisfies the proportionality principle. [Citation omitted.] [132]                     
I would also qualify my colleague’s statement
that the courts have “very few options other than imprisonment” (para. 6) for
meeting the objectives of general or specific deterrence and denunciation in
cases in which they must be emphasized. In my view, the courts should not
automatically assume that imprisonment is always the preferred sanction for the
purpose of meeting these objectives. To do so would be contrary to other
sentencing principles. Rather, a court must consider “all available sanctions, other
than imprisonment”, that are reasonable in the circumstances: s. 718.2 (e)
Cr. C.; Gladue, at para. 36. [133]                     
The common law principle that even where a term
of imprisonment is necessary, it should be the lightest possible sanction in
the circumstances is codified in s. 718.2 (d) Cr. C.:
Ruby, Chan and Hasan, at p. 510. This Court has noted Parliament’s desire
to give increased prominence, for all offenders, to this principle of restraint
in the use of prison as a sanction: Proulx, at para. 17. A court
that emphasizes general deterrence must therefore always be mindful of both the
principle of restraint and that of proportionality: Ruby, Chan and Hasan, at
p. 15, citing R. v. Hawkins, 2011 NSCA 7, 298 N.S.R. (2d) 53, at
paras. 42 and 47; see also R. v. Wismayer (1997),
33 O.R. (3d) 225 (C.A.); R. v. Coffin, 2006 QCCA 471, 210 C.C.C. (3d)
227; F. Dadour, De la détermination de la peine: Principes et
applications (2007), at p. 8. [134]                     
Furthermore, [translation]
“the objective of general and even specific deterrence does not relate
exclusively to the severity of a sentence considered in the abstract.
Deterrence can work through conditions tailored to fit the offender or the
circumstances of the offender, as the . . . Court noted in Proulx”:
Dadour, at p. 8 (footnote omitted). This principle is even more important
in the case of a young person with no criminal record: Priest. As
Twaddle J.A. observed in R. v. Leask (1996), 113 Man. R. (2d) 265
(C.A.), at para. 3, “the transition from statutorily defined young person
to adult should not be marked by an immediate abandonment of rehabilitation as
the primary goal in cases where the prospect of successful rehabilitation is
real”. (2)     
Standard of Intervention Applicable to
Sentencing Decisions [135]                     
My colleague states that this appeal affords the
Court an opportunity to clarify the standard on the basis of which an appellate
court may intervene in sentencing decisions (para. 10). In my opinion,
there is no reason to believe that this is necessary. The applicable standard
is well known, and when all is said and done, the appeal before us concerns
only how it should be applied in the circumstances of this case.                         [translation]  . . . a court
of appeal may intervene only in circumstances indicating an error in
principle, an overemphasis of an appropriate factor, or a failure to consider a
relevant factor, unless the sentence is quite simply demonstrably unfit
or, in other words, clearly unreasonable. Thus, appellate courts retain the
power to ensure that sentences are consistent with those imposed “for similar
offences committed in similar circumstances”; indeed, this is set out in
subsection 718.2 (b) Cr. C. [Emphasis added;
para. 38 (CanLII).] [137]                     
If a party shows that the trial judge made an
error in principle, failed to consider a relevant factor or overemphasized
appropriate factors, I do not think it can be said that the judge acted within
the limits of his or her discretion in sentencing matters. In such cases, the
relevant decisions of this Court do not require that the sentence also be shown
to be demonstrably unfit before an appellate court can intervene. The effect of
such a requirement would be to raise the recognized standard of intervention. [138]                     
In my opinion, the current approach is neither
incongruous nor unfair. The highly deferential standard of appellate review
must be adhered to as long as the trial judge did not err in principle, fail to
consider a relevant factor or overemphasize appropriate factors: R. v. Stone,
[1999] 2 S.C.R. 290, at para. 230. Even if none of these three situations
exists, however, intervention may be necessary if the sentence is demonstrably
unfit. This other ground for intervention has been described in several ways: a
court of appeal can still vary a sentence if it is convinced that the sentence
is “not fit” or “clearly unreasonable” (R. v. Shropshire, [1995] 4
S.C.R. 227, at para. 46), that it is “[u]nreasonabl[e]” or “fall[s]
outside the ‘acceptable range’” (Shropshire, at para. 50), or that
it is “demonstrably unfit” (R. v. McDonnell, [1997] 1 S.C.R. 948, at
para. 17; M. (C.A.), at para. 90). [139]                     
Therefore, where a reviewable error is shown in
the reasoning on which a sentence is based, it is appropriate for an appellate
court to be able to intervene and assess the fitness of the sentence. This does
not necessarily mean that the court will automatically vary the sentence. As
the passage from Paré quoted above indicates, the court’s role in
ensuring consistency in sentencing requires it before intervening to ascertain,
among other things, that the sentence represents a “substantial and marked
departure from the sentences customarily imposed for similar offenders
committing similar crimes”: M. (C.A.), at para. 92;
see also Stone, at para. 230. An error merely opens the door to
intervention and permits an appellate court to reopen the sentencing analysis.
Only by correctly repeating the analytical exercise can the court determine
whether the sanction imposed on the offender is just and appropriate or whether
it should be varied. In other words, the court can then impose the sentence it
considers appropriate without having to show deference: T. Desjardins, L’appel
en droit criminel et pénal (2nd ed. 2012), at p. 217, citing, inter alia,
R. v. Gallon, 2006 NBCA 31, 297 N.B.R. (2d) 317; R. v. Biancofiore
(1997), 35 O.R. (3d) 782 (C.A.), at p. 789; and R. v. Gagnon
(1998), 130 C.C.C. (3d) 194 (Que. C.A.), at p. 199. [140]                     
In this regard, it seems to me that this Court’s
decisions reflect a careful reading of s. 687  Cr. C. What
emerges from the Court’s remarks is that the fitness of a sentence is not
assessed in the abstract. There is no such thing as a uniform sentence for a
particular crime, and sentencing is an inherently individualized process: M. (C.A.),
at para. 92. A sentence must reflect a consideration of all the relevant
factors, and it is in this sense that the “process” of sentencing is important.
In the words of Dickson J. in R. v. Gardiner, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 368,
“[i]f policy considerations are to enter the picture, as they often do, there
would appear to me to be every reason why this Court should remain available to
adjudicate upon difficult and important questions of law in the sentencing
process”: p. 404. The fitness of a sentence is determined on the basis of
several relevant principles, objectives and factors, and a sanction may be
unfit if there is a reviewable error in the thought process or reasoning on
which it is based. However, it is only by assessing that process or reasoning
that an appellate court can determine whether the identified errors make the
sentence unfit. [142]                     
Therefore, although I agree that, as
Hall J.A. stated in R. v. Orr, 2008 BCCA 76, 228 C.C.C. (3d) 432,
at para. 7, an appellate court should not vary a sentence that is fit, I
consider it imperative that that court retain its ability to rule on the trial
court’s analysis and to intervene where there is an error warranting its
intervention. [143]                     
Finally, I agree with my colleague that it is
accepted that the ranges established by appellate courts are in fact only
guidelines, and not hard and fast rules (para. 60). A judge can therefore
order a sentence outside the established range as long as it is in accordance
with the principles and objectives of sentencing. Regard must be had not only
to the circumstances of the offence and the needs of the community in which the
offence occurred, but also to the circumstances of the offender: Nasogaluak,
at para. 44. As a corollary, the mere fact that a sentence falls within the
range applicable to a certain type of crime does not necessarily make it fit,
since the judge may, in determining the sentence, have failed to take account
of the particular circumstances of the offender. It is by analyzing the trial
judge’s reasoning or thought process that an appellate court can determine
whether a sentence that falls within the proper range is tailored to fit the
circumstances of the offender and is therefore individualized and
proportionate. (3)     
Intervention of the Court of Appeal [145]                     
By justifying its intervention as it did, the
Court of Appeal complied with the principles laid down by this Court for such
cases. As it noted, and as I will explain in the next section, the sanction
imposed in this case was not consistent with the principles and objectives of
sentencing. The trial judge considered some aggravating factors that were not
really aggravating factors, rejected or failed to consider some relevant and
important mitigating factors, and placed undue emphasis on the objective of deterrence.
The sentence that resulted from his analysis was thus neither proportionate nor
individualized; it also represented a substantial and marked departure from the
sentences customarily imposed on similar offenders who have committed similar
crimes in similar circumstances. (4)     
Trial Judge’s Errors (a)       Aggravating Factors That Were Not Really Aggravating Factors [146]                     
In his analysis, the trial judge began by
identifying some aggravating factors that were not really aggravating factors:
2013 QCCQ 11960, at para. 32 (CanLII). In principle, s. 718.2  Cr. C.
lists a number of what are considered to be aggravating factors. An element
of the offence cannot in itself constitute such a factor. A judge who
characterizes an element of the offence as an aggravating factor thus makes an
error of law that opens the door to appellate intervention: R. v. Flight,
2014 ABCA 380, 584 A.R. 392, at para. 4; R. v. Stimson, 2011 ABCA
59, 499 A.R. 185, at para. 20; R. v. Dass, 2008 CanLII 13191 (Ont.
S.C.J.), at pp. 59-60; R. v. Dankyi (1993), 86 C.C.C. (3d) 368
(Que. C.A.), at p. 372. [147]                     
In the instant case, the accused being
intoxicated was in itself already an element of the offence. Incidentally, the
record does not indicate what his blood alcohol level was. Similarly, the
consumption of alcohol or drugs before driving was already part of the offence,
so the fact that the accused drank alcohol cannot be an aggravating factor in
the absence of some more blameworthy conduct. Moreover, the parties agreed that
it was the alcohol alone that had impaired the ability of the accused to drive;
his consumption of cannabis had not contributed to the accident, and this is
confirmed by the record. The accused had consumed cannabis (taking three puffs
on a joint) at about 7:00 p.m., and the accident occurred shortly before
4:00 a.m. the next day: trial, at para. 2; R.F., at para. 7.
Finally, the impact on those close to the accused cannot be considered an
aggravating factor that would justify a harsher sentence for the accused:
s. 718.2  Cr. C. (b)      Discounted Mitigating Factors (c)      Failure to Discuss an Important Mitigating Factor                     [translation]  The applicant has strong
support from his family. There is virtually no possibility of him reoffending.
It is likely that, once he has served his sentence, he will be able to find a
job in an autobody repair business owned by his mother. There is no doubt that
he is aware of the extreme seriousness of the consequences of his wrongdoing:
he was and still is tortured by remorse, so much so that the professionals
around him became concerned about possible suicidal tendencies and took
preventive action accordingly. [para. 16] [150]                     
That report and those positive findings
represented a mitigating factor that was relevant to and important for the
determination of the appropriate sentence. Yet the trial judge referred only
very briefly to the rehabilitation of the accused in para. 92, in which he
merely said: [translation] “The
objective of separation implies that the sentence should not be so long as to
hamper the rehabilitation of the accused.” I must agree with the Court of
Appeal that this does not show that he really considered this important factor.
Instead, a review of his reasons as a whole leads to the opposite conclusion,
that is, that he conducted no analysis in respect of the objective of
rehabilitation and its impact on the circumstances of the case. Unlike my
colleague, I find that the trial judge’s reasons do not support a conclusion
that he considered the respondent’s prospects for rehabilitation
(para. 82). As the Court of Appeal found, the trial judge’s failure to
consider this factor constituted a failure to take the offender’s potential for
rehabilitation, which is significant, into account in the individualization of the
sentence. (d)     Disproportionate Emphasis on Exemplarity [151]                     
Finally, as the Court of Appeal noted, the trial
judge’s failure to consider certain mitigating factors that favoured the
potential for rehabilitation of the accused and the emphasis he placed on exemplarity
led him to impose an excessive sentence that departed from the principle of
proportionality. Although the Court of Appeal found that the trial judge had
gone too far in emphasizing exemplarity, it is true that it did not deal
specifically with the local situation factor. I agree with my colleague that it
would have been preferable for the court to do so (para. 87). In the
instant case, the local situation factor clearly magnified the exemplary focus
of the sentence with which the Court of Appeal took issue. I will just make
three comments about what my colleague says in this regard. [152]                     
First, the views expressed by the authors and
the courts do not seem to me to be so uniform on the question whether judges
can rely on their own perceptions of the frequency of particular crimes in
their regions in order to justify imposing harsher sentences. For instance, I
note the following remarks by Ruby, Chan and Hasan, at p. 124:                         Since
the sentencing hearing is merely part of a criminal trial, there is no reason
for thinking that the doctrine of judicial notice would not apply in the
ordinary way. But the distinction between facts that are sufficiently certain
to notice judicially and those that are not is one that must be borne in mind,
as excessive reliance on matters not proved in evidence can be destructive
of the fairness of the sentencing process. The incidence of crime in a
jurisdiction is not a matter that can be the subject matter of judicial notice.
[Emphasis added; footnotes omitted.] [153]                     
When considered in the sentencing context, the
frequency of a crime in a given region does not help paint a portrait of the
accused, but instead reflects external factors: (Ruby, Chan and Hasan, at p. 256) [155]                     
Second, the views expressed by the authors and
the courts also do not seem to me to be so uniform on the question whether it
is appropriate for a judge to take judicial notice of the frequency of a crime
in his or her community during sentencing.                     whether such “fact” would be accepted by
reasonable people who have taken the trouble to inform themselves on the topic
as not being the subject of reasonable dispute for the particular purpose
for which it is to be used, keeping in mind that the need for reliability
and trustworthiness increases directly with the centrality of the “fact” to the
disposition of the controversy. [Emphasis in original.] (Spence, at para. 65) This is why a court may
take judicial notice of a “fact” in one case but decline to do so in another
case in which the issue is dispositive: Spence, at para. 65. [158]                     
In the case at bar, the trial judge referred to
the situation in his district, but he also suggested that impaired driving is
trivialized there more than elsewhere (para. 72). However, the judicial
notice that judges can take of their communities is not without limits. In my
view, caution must be exercised in establishing its scope. According to my
colleague, judicial notice in this regard is not limited to the magnitude of
the problem observed by the judge in his region, but can also be extended to a
comparison of the local situation with situations in other places as well as to
information gathered from the hearing rolls of courts (paras. 95 and 98).
This seems to me to go much farther than judicial notice of the fact that a
city has a francophone majority or of recent unlawful conduct in a particular
community, to which reference was made in the cases cited by my colleague in
support of his remarks (para. 95; R. v. Z.Z., 2013 QCCA 1498, at
para. 68 (CanLII); R. v. Hernandez, 2009 BCCA 546, 277 B.C.A.C.
120, at para. 29). Being familiar with the local situation in one’s region
is one thing, but claiming to compare that situation with what happens
elsewhere in order to draw conclusions or inferences from it is something else. [159]                     
Third, and finally, I agree that the sentencing
process differs considerably from a trial in that it is more informal. As
Dickson J. noted in Gardiner, “the strict rules which govern at
trial do not apply at a sentencing hearing and it would be undesirable to have
the formalities and technicalities characteristic of the normal adversary
proceeding prevail”: p. 414; see also R. v. Lévesque, 2000 SCC 47,
[2000] 2 S.C.R. 487, at para. 30. A court has wide latitude as to the
sources and types of evidence upon which to base the sentence to be imposed. It
can rely on counsel’s submissions and arguments, and mere assertions by counsel
may sometimes suffice to found factual decisions by the court: R. v. Witvoet,
2015 ABCA 152, 600 A.R. 200; see also R. v. Bartlett, 2005 NLCA 75, 252
Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 154; R. v. Joseph, 2012 BCCA 359, 326 B.C.A.C. 312,
at para. 32. [160]                     
Still, despite the latitude judges have in
sentencing hearings, they must never lose sight of the importance of procedural
fairness. Professor Davis explains this as follows: (K. C. Davis,
Administrative Law Text (3rd ed. 1972), at p. 314, quoted in
R. J. Delisle, D. Stuart and D. M. Tanovich, Evidence:
Principles and Problems (9th ed. 2010), at p. 357.) [161]                     
One decision that illustrates this principle is R.
v. Provost, 2006 NLCA 30, 256 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 205, in which the Court
of Appeal stressed that arguments about the prevalence of a crime in a
community must be dealt with in ways that are consistent with the principles of
procedural fairness:                          In para. 15 of his sentencing
decision, the Provincial Court Judge wrote:                         . . .
considering the number of trafficking offences that are coming before the
courts, it is obvious that conditional periods of imprisonment have failed to
have a deterrent effect. Those who are involved in significant criminal
enterprises must be made to understand that their criminal activity will not be
tolerated and that if caught and convicted, they will receive significant
periods of incarceration. [163]                     
In my opinion, there is no indication that the
trial judge in the case at bar was in a position to take judicial notice of the
fact that impaired driving is trivialized in the Beauce region more than
elsewhere. In this regard, knowing the impact on sentencing of that factor,
which he considered to be aggravating, and the particular weight he was going
to attach to it in imposing a more severe sanction, he should, in the interest
of procedural fairness, have informed the respondent of his concerns on this
point and requested submissions from him. But he did not do so, even though the
importance he attached to that aggravating factor ultimately led him to impose
a sentence that favoured exemplarity at the expense of proportionality. (5)     
Just and Appropriate Sentence [170]                     
In R. v. Olsen, 2011 ABCA 308, 515 A.R.
76, the accused pleaded guilty to two counts of impaired driving causing death;
the victims were the parents of five children. He had been 22 years old at
the time of the offence; his blood alcohol level had been
226 mg/100 mL, and he had been driving in excess of the speed limit.
He had a lengthy record of driving offences, including in particular
16 convictions in the five years before the incident, some of them for
speeding. His licence had been suspended four times. He had no criminal
record, and he had expressed remorse in a letter written to the victims’
children and family. He had the support of his family and was employed. The
Alberta Court of Appeal sentenced him to 42 months’ imprisonment. [172]                     
In R. v. Nottebrock, 2014 ABQB 662, 15
Alta. L.R. (6th) 114, the accused was convicted of two counts of criminal
negligence causing death and two counts of impaired driving causing death. She
had had a blood alcohol level between 222 and 227 mg/100 mL and had
been driving at between 135 and 145 km/h in an 80 km/h zone when
she ran a red light without even braking. She was 28 years old at the time
of her sentencing. She was extremely remorseful and took responsibility for her
actions. The risk of her reoffending was low. The court sentenced her to
54 months’ imprisonment. [173]                     
By comparison, the cases of impaired driving
causing death in which sentences of between six and nine years have been
imposed have involved significant aggravating circumstances that are not
present in the case at bar, such as a criminal record for similar offences
(impaired driving or driving with a blood alcohol level over the limit), a
larger number of victims, driving with children in the vehicle, refusal to
listen to other people’s warnings, driving without a licence or while
disqualified from driving or prohibited from consuming alcohol, an extremely
high blood alcohol level, an untreated alcohol dependence, a risk of
reoffending, or a negative presentence report: see, for example, R. v.
Cooper, 2007 NSSC 115, 255 N.S.R. (2d) 18; R. v. Kummer, 2011 ONCA
39, 103 O.R. (3d) 641; R. v. Cote, 2007 SKPC 100, 300 Sask. R. 194; R.
v. York, 2015 ABCA 129, 78 M.V.R. (6th) 4; R. v. Gravel, 2013 QCCQ
10482; R. v. Comeau, 2008 QCCQ 4804, aff’d 2009 QCCA 1175; R. v. Côté, 2002 CanLII 27228 (C.Q.); R. v. Morneau, 2009 QCCA 1496; R. v.
Bois, 2005 CanLII 10575 (C.Q.). [174]                     
In particular, the three cases on which my
colleague relies at para. 70 in support of his conclusion that a term of
imprisonment of six years or more is clearly not excessive all involved
circumstances very different from those of the respondent. In two of the three
cases, there were three victims rather than two; this is a factor that creates
a significant disparity in the sentences in question. In R. v. Wood
(2005), 196 C.C.C. (3d) 155 (Ont. C.A.), for example, the accused, who had a
long criminal record, had killed three people while driving on the wrong side
of the road and without a licence, and while severely intoxicated: his blood
alcohol level had been more than twice the legal limit. In Kummer, too,
the appellant had caused the deaths of three people and bodily harm to
two others, and his blood alcohol level had been more than twice the legal
limit. In Morneau, the third case cited, the accused had three prior
convictions for impaired driving, he had done nothing to obtain treatment for
his drinking problem, his blood alcohol level had been three times the legal
limit and, despite the fact that he had pleaded guilty, he had shown [translation] “great immaturity” and
recklessness: 2009 QCCQ 1271, at para. 15 (CanLII). With respect, I do not
consider these to be proper parallels to justify the sentence the Court of
Appeal found to be excessive in the respondent’s circumstances. [175]                     
In my view, this analysis leads to two
observations. First, the Court of Appeal did not intervene lightly: by varying
the sentence imposed by the trial judge from 78 to 48 months, the court
reduced it by more than a third. This significant reduction supports the Court
of Appeal’s finding that the sentence was excessive. Second, the sentence
imposed by the Court of Appeal does not itself represent a substantial and
marked departure from the sentences imposed on similar offenders who committed
similar crimes in similar circumstances. On the contrary, it is entirely
consistent with the sentences imposed on offenders with characteristics similar
to those of the respondent. Insofar as the Court of Appeal correctly stated the
law before intervening, I am of the opinion that it is not open to this Court
to substitute its view for that of the Court of Appeal on the sentence. The
Court of Appeal considered the relevant sentencing principles and took the
specific features of the case into account. Although sentences imposed by
provincial appellate courts are not entitled to the same level of deference as
is accorded to sentences imposed by trial judges, they are nonetheless entitled
to deference, since those courts hear appeals against sentence more often than
this Court, which rarely hears them: R. v. R.N.S., 2000 SCC 7, [2000] 1
S.C.R. 149, at para. 23; Proulx, at para. 2. B.       Driving Prohibition [176]                     
Turning to the issue of the driving prohibition,
I agree with my colleague that the Court of Appeal and the trial judge both erred
in failing to take into account the length of the presentence driving
prohibition. In their defence, the issue was not raised until the hearing in
this Court, at which the appellant in fact agreed that it was a relevant
consideration. [177]                     
In R. v. Bilodeau, 2013 QCCA 980, I
expressed the opinion that [translation]
“[a]lthough the length of the presentence driving prohibition need not be
subtracted in equal measure, it is nonetheless a factor to be considered in
analyzing the reasonableness and appropriateness of the prohibition to be
imposed under section 259(3.3) (b) Cr. C.”: para. 75
(CanLII). The Ontario Court of Appeal had already expressed a similar view in R.
v. Pellicore, [1997] O.J. No. 226 (QL), at para. 1. The same
reasoning also applies under s. 259(2) (a.1) Cr. C. In
the instant case, I therefore consider it appropriate to reduce the length of
the driving prohibition as my colleague suggests, that is, by the entire period
during which the respondent was subject to a prohibition as part of his release
conditions before being sentenced. [178]                     
Having said this, I believe that the wording
chosen by the Court of Appeal in determining the length of the prohibition is
consistent with that used by Parliament in s. 259(2) (a.1) Cr. C.
I would retain that wording. My colleague refers either to a period “commencing
at the time of the respondent’s release” (para. 110) or to one “commencing
at the end of the respondent’s incarceration” (para. 121). However, the
“time of the offender’s release” or “the end of the offender’s incarceration”
could sometimes be confusing and could also differ from the “period to which
[an] offender [was] sentenced to imprisonment”, which is the one specifically
referred to in the relevant provisions of the Cr. C. In my opinion,
it would be more prudent to stick to the words chosen by Parliament, as the
Court of Appeal did in its judgment. [179]                     
In this case, the Court of Appeal [translation] “[prohibited the
respondent] from operating any motor vehicle in Canada for a period of four
years, plus the period to which he [had been] sentenced to imprisonment”:
para. 24. If the length of the presentence driving prohibition (two years
and three months) is taken into account in recalculating the prohibition, the
result is instead a period of one year and nine months (four years minus
two years and three months). This is what I would retain for this aspect of the
sentence. C.       Fresh Evidence [180]                     
Finally, I am of the view that the Court of
Appeal did not make an error warranting the intervention of this Court when it
declined to admit the fresh evidence of the respondent’s two breaches of his
recognizances. Those breaches were a failure on his part to be at his residence
as required between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on November 26,
2011, and the fact that he contacted the brother of one of the victims despite
being prohibited from doing so: para. 19. [181]                     
The Court of Appeal held that the evidence in
question did not satisfy the fourth condition from Lévesque and Palmer
v. The Queen, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759, since, in the court’s estimation, it was
unlikely to affect the result: para. 19. It was appropriate for the Court
of Appeal to distinguish the circumstances of this case from those of Bilodeau.
In that case, the appellant had been convicted of two counts of dangerous driving
causing death, and the fresh evidence concerned a breach of a recognizance
according to which he was not to operate a motor vehicle. As the Court of
Appeal stated in its analysis, that evidence was capable of shedding light on
the risk of his reoffending. The two breaches identified in the case at bar are
very different. [182]                     
Of course, no breach of a recognizance should be
taken lightly. However, the breaches that the Court of Appeal had to consider
in this case were, all in all, relatively minor, especially when all the
relevant factors are taken into account. It was open to the Court of Appeal to
conclude that the additional evidence was irrelevant in this context. Absent an
error of law or a palpable and overriding error of fact warranting intervention,
this Court should not reconsider the weight attached by the Court of Appeal to
those breaches and substitute its view of what would have been relevant. III.   
Disposition [183]                     
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal for
the sole purpose of reducing the respondent’s driving prohibition to one year
and nine months, plus the period of four years to which he was sentenced
to imprisonment.                     Appeal
allowed, McLachlin C.J. and
Gascon J. dissenting.                     Solicitor for the appellant: Directeur des poursuites
criminelles et pénales du Québec, Québec.                     Solicitors for the respondent: Dumas Gagné Théberge, Québec.                     Solicitor for the
intervener: Attorney General of Alberta, Edmonton.  