  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Gauthier, 2013 SCC 32, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 403 Date: 20130607 Docket: 34444  Between: Cathie
Gauthier Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent -
and - Attorney
General of Ontario Intervener   Official
English Translation:  Reasons of Wagner J.   Coram: LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and
Wagner JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 65)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 66 to 107)  Wagner J. (LeBel, Abella, Rothstein,
  Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)  Fish J.     R. v. Gauthier, 2013 SCC 32, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 403 Cathie Gauthier                                                                                              Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Attorney General of Ontario                                                                        Intervener Indexed as:  R. v. Gauthier 2013 SCC 32 File No.:  34444. 2012:  December 13; 2013:  June 7. Present:  LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and
Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec                     Criminal
law — Defences — Charge to jury — Defences that are incompatible in theory —
Accused charged with being party, together with her spouse, to murder of their
three children — Alternative defence that accused had abandoned common intention
to kill children — Whether it was appropriate to exclude defence of abandonment
from defences put to jury on basis that it was incompatible with defence’s
principal theory, absence of mens rea.                     Criminal law — Defences — Abandonment —
Participation in crime — Accused charged with being party, together with her
spouse, to murder of their three children — Alternative defence that accused
had abandoned common intention to kill children — Essential elements of defence
of abandonment in context of forms of participation in crime provided for in
s. 21(1)  and s. 21(2)  of Criminal Code  — Whether defence of
abandonment raised by accused met air of reality test.                     Held
(Fish J. dissenting):  The appeal should be dismissed.                     Per LeBel, Abella,
Rothstein, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ.: There is no
cardinal rule against putting to a jury an alternative defence that is at first
glance incompatible with the primary defence.  The issue is not whether
such a defence is compatible or incompatible with the primary defence, but
whether it meets the air of reality test.  In any case, the trial judge must
determine whether the alternative defence has a sufficient factual foundation,
that is, whether a properly instructed jury acting reasonably could accept the defence
if it believed the evidence to be true.                     The
defence of abandonment must be submitted to the jury only if there is evidence
in the record that is reasonably capable of supporting the necessary inferences
in respect of each of the elements of this defence.  The defence can be raised
by an accused who is a party to an offence on the basis that he or she did or
omitted to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to commit the
offence, or abetted any person in committing it (s. 21(1)  of the Criminal Code ), or on the basis that he or she had formed with other persons an
intention to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist each other therein and
that an offence was committed in carrying out the common purpose (s. 21(2)  of the Criminal Code ), if the evidence shows (1) that there was an intention to
abandon or withdraw from the unlawful purpose; (2) that there was timely
communication of this abandonment or withdrawal from the person in question to
those who wished to continue; (3) that the communication served
unequivocal notice upon those who wished to continue; and (4) that the
accused took, in a manner proportional to his or her participation in the
commission of the planned offence, reasonable steps in the circumstances either
to neutralize or otherwise cancel out the effects of his or her participation
or to prevent the commission of the offence.  There will be circumstances in
which timely and unequivocal communication by the accused of his or her
intention to abandon the unlawful purpose will be considered sufficient to
neutralize the effects of his or her participation in the crime.  But there
will be other circumstances, primarily where a person has aided in the
commission of the offence, in which it is hard to see how timely communication to
the principal offender of the person’s intention to withdraw from the unlawful
purpose will on its own be considered reasonable and sufficient.                     Per
Fish J. (dissenting):  Canadian courts have for more than 70 years
held that the defence of abandonment comprises only two essential elements:
(i) change of intention; and (ii) where practical and reasonable,
timely and unequivocal notice of withdrawal.  This test has been
repeatedly and consistently applied in prosecutions under s. 21(1)  and
s. 21(2)  of the Criminal Code  alike.  The defence of abandonment
does not require that the accused take steps to neutralize prior participation
in the criminal enterprise or to prevent the commission of the offence.  While
such evidence may strengthen a defence of abandonment, failure to take
neutralizing or preventative steps is not fatal.                     G
is entitled to a fresh trial, where the jury will not be wrongly prevented from
considering on its merits her defence of abandonment, however weak and
unpromising this Court might believe it to be. Cases Cited By Wagner J.                     Considered: 
Wu v. The King, [1934] S.C.R. 609; R. v. Whitehouse (1940), 55
B.C.R. 420; referred to:  R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2
S.C.R. 3; R. v. Caron (1998), 126 C.C.C. (3d) 84; R. v. Graveline,
2006 SCC 16, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 609; R. v. Faid, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 265; Miller
v. The Queen, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 680; Henderson v. The King, [1948]
S.C.R. 226; R. v. Kirkness, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 74; R. v. Bird, 2009
SCC 60, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 638; R. v. Fournier, 2007 QCCA 1822 (CanLII). By Fish J. (dissenting)                     R.
v. Whitehouse (1940), 55 B.C.R. 420; Henderson v. The King, [1948]
S.C.R. 226; R. v. de Tonnancourt (1956), 115 C.C.C. 154; R. v.
Merrifield, 1977 CarswellOnt 1806; Miller v. The Queen, [1977] 2
S.C.R. 680; R. v. Wagner (1978), 8 B.C.L.R. 258; R. v. Joyce
(1978), 42 C.C.C. (2d) 141; R. v. Kirkness, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 74; R. v.
Johanson (1995), 166 A.R. 60; R. v. Fournier, 2002 NBCA 71, 252
N.B.R. (2d) 256; R. v. McKercher, [2002] O.J. No. 5859 (QL); R.
v. Forknall, 2003 BCCA 43, 176 B.C.A.C. 284; R. v. Lacoursière
(2002), 7 C.R. (6th) 117; R. v. P.K., 2006 ABCA 299, 397 A.R. 318; R.
v. S.R.B., 2009 ABCA 45, 448 A.R. 124, rev’d 2009 SCC 60, [2009] 3 S.C.R.
638 (sub nom. R. v. Bird); R. v. Ball, 2011 BCCA 11, 298
B.C.A.C. 166; R. v. Leslie, 2012 BCSC 683 (CanLII); R. v. O’Flaherty,
[2004] EWCA Crim 526, [2004] 2 Cr. App. R. 20 (p. 315); R. v. Otway,
[2011] EWCA Crim 3 (BAILII); R. v. Fournier, 2007 QCCA 1822 (CanLII); R.
v. Edwards, 2001 BCSC 275 (CanLII); R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29,
[2002] 2 S.C.R. 3. Statutes and Regulations Cited Authors Cited Campbell, Mark.  “Turning Back the Clock:  Aiders and the Defence of
Abandonment” (2010), 14 Can. Crim. L.R. 1. Smith, John C.  Commentary on R. v. Mitchell, [1999] Crim.
L.R. 497. Stuart, Don.  Canadian Criminal Law:  A Treatise, 6th ed.  Scarborough,
Ont.:  Carswell, 2011.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal (Rochette, Morin and
Bouchard JJ.A.), 2011 QCCA 1395 (CanLII), SOQUIJ AZ-50774324, [2011] J.Q.
no 9850 (QL), 2011 CarswellQue 7766, upholding the accused’s
convictions for first degree murder.  Appeal dismissed, Fish J.
dissenting.                     René
Duval, for the appellant.                     Sonia Rouleau, Régis Boisvert and
Mélanie Paré, for the respondent.                     English
version of the judgment of LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and
Wagner JJ. delivered by                     Wagner J.
— I.     Overview [2]                             
The appellant, Cathie Gauthier, was charged with
being a party, together with her spouse, to the murder of their three children
at the dawn of the year 2009.  On October 24 of that same year, upon
completion of a trial by judge and jury, she was convicted on all three counts
of first degree murder. [3]                             
She submits that the trial judge erred in
deciding not to put to the jury the defence of abandonment of the common
intention to kill the children.  For reasons that differ from those of the
Court of Appeal, I find that the judge did not err in doing so, and I would
dismiss the appeal. II.    Facts [4]                             
The facts of this case reveal a set of
circumstances, as dramatic as they were tragic, that engendered the despair
that ultimately led to the murder of three young children. [5]                             
Before I discuss the questions of law raised by
this appeal, a brief review of the facts is therefore in order. [8]                             
The holiday season was drawing near.  On
Christmas Eve, despite their bad luck, the couple decided to give the children
the chance to enjoy this “festive” period.  Marc Laliberté refused to pay the
rent for December, and used the money so saved to buy numerous gifts for the
children and for friends. [9]                             
On December 27, 2008, the appellant renewed
her and her spouse’s prescriptions for oxazepam, a soporific drug used to treat
anxiety attacks, giving false reasons for doing so early.  She told the
pharmacist that her spouse was going through a difficult period and that they
were about to go on a trip.  While at the drug store, she also purchased some
children’s Gravol.  That same day, the family went to Normandin to visit
members of Marc Laliberté’s family for a few hours. [11]                         
The evening of December 29, she visited her
friend Kathie Ouellet and told her that she did not know what she would do with
her children if her spouse was not there.  The next day, the appellant gave her
nicest clothes to Ms. Ouellet. [13]                         
The appellant testified that the rest of the day
was uneventful.  That evening, as planned, the family sat down in front of the
television to watch a movie together.  Marc Laliberté prepared some drinks and
popcorn for all the family.  Shortly after that, the appellant noticed that one
of the boys had fallen asleep, and then she too fell asleep.  She said she
had not suspected that their drinks had been poisoned. [15]                         
During the evening of January 1, 2009, the
appellant called the emergency services number, asked for an ambulance and told
the operator that her left wrist was slit, saying that [translation] “it was a pact, my husband killed our three
children”, and adding that “we
told ourselves we wouldn’t start 2009, but . . .”. [16]                         
When first responders arrived on the scene, they
found the appellant with an injured wrist and pronounced her spouse and their
three children dead.  The evidence shows that the children were poisoned with
Gravol and oxazepam.  Traces of oxazepam were also detected in the appellant,
whose left wrist had allegedly been slit by her spouse, Marc Laliberté. III.    Trial by Judge and Jury [17]                         
At her jury trial, the appellant submitted in
her defence that she had not bought the medication to poison her children, that
she was in a dissociative state on December 31, 2008 when she wrote the
incriminating documents, and that this state meant she could not have formed
the specific intent to commit the murders.  In the alternative, should her
argument based on the absence of mens rea be rejected, she claimed to
have abandoned the common purpose of killing the children and to have clearly
communicated her intention to do so to her spouse. [19]                         
In his final instructions, the trial judge told
the jury that three possible verdicts were open to it:  first degree murder,
second degree murder or acquittal.  On whether it was appropriate to put
the defence of abandonment of the common purpose to the jury, the judge pointed
out to counsel, in the jury’s absence, that when the defence of abandonment has
come before Canadian courts, it has been in the context of the form of
participation in a crime provided for in s. 21(2)  of the Criminal Code ,
and he questioned the availability of this defence in the context of
s. 21(1) .  Although he mentioned the defence of abandonment in summarizing
the argument of counsel for the appellant for the jury, the judge did not put
this alternative defence to the jury.  After three days of deliberations, the
jury found the appellant guilty of the first degree murder of her three
children. [20]                         
Cathie Gauthier appealed that decision to the
Court of Appeal, which upheld the guilty verdict.  Bouchard J.A. concluded
that the trial judge had not erred in refusing to put the defence of
abandonment to the jury.  In his view, an alternative defence that is
incompatible with the defence’s principal theory cannot be put to the jury
(2011 QCCA 1395 (CanLII)). IV.    Relevant Provisions [21]                         
Section 21  of the Criminal Code  reads
as follows:            21. (1)
[Parties to offence] Every one is a party to an offence who                               (a)   actually
commits it;                               (b)   does
or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to commit it; or                               (c)   abets
any person in committing it.            (2) [Common intention]
Where two or more persons form an intention in common to carry out an unlawful
purpose and to assist each other therein and any one of them, in carrying out
the common purpose, commits an offence, each of them who knew or ought to have
known that the commission of the offence would be a probable consequence of
carrying out the common purpose is a party to that offence. V.     Issues [22]                         
There are two main issues in this appeal. 
First, was it appropriate to exclude the defence of abandonment from the
defences put to the jury on the basis that it was incompatible with the
defence’s principal theory, the absence of mens rea?  If not, did the
defence of abandonment meet the air of reality test?  For the reasons that
follow, I find that the answer to both these questions is no. VI.  Analysis A.    Was It Appropriate to Exclude
the Alternative Defence of Abandonment From the Defences Put to the Jury Solely
Because It Was Theoretically Incompatible With the Defence’s Principal Theory?                     1.     When It Is
Appropriate to Put a Defence to the Jury [23]                         
It is well established that any defence with an
air of reality should go to the jury (R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002]
2 S.C.R. 3, at para. 51).  This Court has held that a defence meets the
air of reality test if there is “(1) evidence (2) upon which a
properly instructed jury acting reasonably could acquit if it believed the
evidence to be true” (Cinous, at para. 82). [24]                         
The reason why the trial judge is required to
screen the defences that can be put to the jury should be borne in mind.  This
requirement is essentially rooted in a concern not to confuse jurors by putting
to them a defence that lacks an evidential foundation.  This premise gives rise
to two principles:  On the one hand, a trial judge must put to the jury all
defences that arise on the facts, regardless of whether they have been
specifically raised by the accused.  On the other hand, the judge must withhold
from the jury any defences that lack an air of reality. [25]                         
The burden on the accused is merely
evidential.  If the trial judge properly applies the relevant principles,
he or she must identify the evidence that is most favourable to the accused and
assume it to be true, regardless of whether it was adduced or mentioned by the
accused.  The judge must not enquire into whether the witnesses are credible or
assess the probative value of this evidence.  If each element of a defence is
supported by direct evidence or may reasonably be inferred from circumstantial
evidence, the judge must put this defence to the jury.          2.        Alternative
Defences That Are Incompatible With the Defence’s Principal Theory [26]                         
The Court of Appeal concluded, on the basis that
the alternative defence of abandonment was incompatible with the appellant’s
principal theory, that the trial judge did not have to put this defence to the
jury:                            [translation]  In my opinion, the judge
was right not to draw the jury’s attention to this defence.  I note that,
according to the appellant, there was no suicide pact or planning, and she was
in a dissociative state when her spouse told her of his plan for all of them to
leave together.  She could not therefore be allowed, if she were not believed,
to change her story and maintain that she had pulled out of a plan whose
existence she had been denying from the start.  Taking part in a suicide
pact and then pulling out of it is in itself plausible.  However, that is not
what the appellant is arguing.  Rather, she is denying the very existence of
such a pact and then claiming that she can pull out of it if she is not
believed.  The judge did not have to put to the jury this alternative defence
that is incompatible with the appellant’s principal theory . . . . 
[para. 71] [27]                         
The Crown takes a more nuanced position, arguing
that, because the effect of the appellant’s primary defence — which was
essentially based on a total absence of mens rea — was that the defence
of abandonment lacked any factual foundation and could not therefore apply,
this alternative defence did not meet the air of reality test:                            [translation]  Refusing to take part in a
plan and abandoning a plan are defences that are logically incompatible with
one another.  If, throughout the trial, the appellant denies intending to kill
her children, how can she, if she is not believed in this regard, change her
position and say that she withdrew from a plan whose existence she has
previously denied?  The defence of abandonment of a common purpose necessarily
implies a recognition of having been a party to that common purpose, which the
appellant has always denied.  [R.F., at para. 57] [28]                         
In this case, I agree with the Court of Appeal,
although for different reasons, that the defence of abandonment should not have
been put to the jury.  Let me explain this.                     The rule, therefore, that an accused person at
trial is entitled to have the jury pass upon all his alternative defences is
limited to the defences of which a foundation of fact appears in the record. 
Even then the rule, in my opinion, is not without exception, and one exception
is, that it has no application where the accused, by the defence which he sets
up at the trial, has negatived the alternative defence for which he afterwards
seeks a new trial. . . .                          . . .
The defence that the accused was in Victoria at the time of the shooting was
not only inconsistent with, but it negatived the defence now sought to be set
up.  Under these circumstances I fail to see how any duty could rest on
the trial judge to instruct the jury to consider an alternative defence which
the accused, by the defence he did set up, declared had no foundation in fact.
[p. 617] [30]                         
With respect, Wu does not stand for the
proposition that a judge does not have a duty to put to the jury an alternative
defence that is theoretically incompatible with the defence’s principal
theory.  Rather, it reaffirms the cardinal rule that the trial judge need not —
indeed must not — put to the jury a defence in respect of which there is no
evidence in the record that would be sufficient, if it existed and if it were
believed to be true, for a jury acting reasonably to accept the defence.  This
is clear from the comments of Lamont J. on this point, which read in full as
follows: [34]                         
In conclusion, there is no cardinal rule against
putting to a jury an alternative defence that is at first glance incompatible
with the primary defence.  The issue is not whether such a defence is
compatible or incompatible with the primary defence, but whether it meets the
air of reality test.  In any case, the trial judge must determine whether the
alternative defence has a sufficient factual foundation, that is, whether a
properly instructed jury acting reasonably could accept the defence if it
believed the evidence to be true. B.     If the Defence of
Abandonment Was Not Incompatible With the Principal Theory, Did It Meet the Air
of Reality Test?                     1.      Essential
Elements of the Defence of Abandonment [35]                         
The defence of abandonment had to be submitted
to the jury only if there was evidence in the record that was reasonably
capable of supporting the necessary inferences in respect of each of the
elements of this defence.  That being said, it is necessary to begin by
identifying the essential elements of the defence. [36]                         
In Canadian law, the defence of abandonment,
which has rarely been raised, was first referred to in R. v. Whitehouse (1940),
55 B.C.R. 420 (C.A.).  That case concerned the application of the defence in
the specific context of the offence of participation in a crime provided for in
s. 21(2)  of the Criminal Code . [37]                         
In that context, the relevant test — which was
subsequently endorsed in Miller v. The Queen, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 680, Henderson
v. The King, [1948] S.C.R. 226, and R. v. Kirkness, [1990]
3 S.C.R. 74 — was laid down as follows in Whitehouse, at p. 425:                     I
would not attempt to define too closely what must be done in criminal matters
involving participation in a common unlawful purpose to break the chain of
causation and responsibility.  That must depend upon the circumstances of each
case but it seems to me that one essential element ought to be established in a
case of this kind:  where practicable and reasonable there must be timely
communication of the intention to abandon the common purpose from those who
wish to dissociate themselves from the contemplated crime to those who desire
to continue in it.  What is “timely communication” must be determined by the
facts of each case but where practicable and reasonable it ought to be such
communication, verbal or otherwise, that will serve unequivocal notice upon the
other party to the common unlawful cause that if he proceeds upon it he does so
without the further aid and assistance of those who withdraw.  The unlawful
purpose of him who continues alone is then his own and not one in common with
those who are no longer parties to it nor liable to its full and final
consequences. [38]                         
Thus, it was held that a defence of abandonment
has three essential elements:  (1) there must be an intention to abandon
or withdraw from the unlawful purpose, (2) there must be timely
communication of this abandonment or withdrawal from the person in question to
those who wish to continue, and (3) the notice so communicated to those
who continue to participate in the common purpose must be unequivocal. [39]                         
This appeal raises the issue of the application
of the defence of abandonment in the context of the form of participation in a
crime provided for in s. 21(1)  of the Criminal Code . [40]                         
The reasons for recognizing the defence of
abandonment in Canadian law bear repeating.  There are two policy reasons in
criminal law for making this defence available to parties to offences.  First,
there is a need to ensure that only morally culpable persons are punished;
second, there is a benefit to society in encouraging individuals involved in
criminal activities to withdraw from those activities and report them. [41]                         
This Court implicitly acknowledged that the
defence of abandonment applies in the context of s. 21(1)  in R. v. Bird,
2009 SCC 60, [2009] 3 S.C.R.
638, in which it found that this defence did not meet the air of reality test
in the case of an accused who had aided in the commission of a crime (see also R.
v. Fournier, 2007 QCCA 1822 (CanLII)).  However, since the Court found that
the defence did not have an air of reality in that case, it did not on that
occasion rule on the content of the defence in the specific context of the form
of participation in a crime provided for in s. 21(1)  of the Criminal
Code .                         Looking at the defence of abandoned
intention in respect of parties, the key issues relate to the quality of
withdrawal from the original plan and whether more is required to exculpate. 
These questions take on different significance depending on the form of
accomplice liability in issue and the particular circumstances of a given case. [43]                         
Wilson J. also noted that there is a
difference between the forms of participation in a crime provided for in
s. 21(1)  and s. 21(2) , respectively, of the Criminal Code :                     It is my view that since aiders and abettors
have been treated differently from common intenders by Parliament, some
difference between these two subsections must be recognized. (Kirkness,
at p. 116) [44]                         
Section 21(2)  of the Criminal Code 
provides that a person who forms an intention to carry out an unlawful purpose
in common with other persons is a party to an incidental offence committed by
one of those other persons to the same extent as the person who actually
committed it.  This result derives from the first person’s promise to devote
physical and intellectual resources to the achievement of the common unlawful
purpose.  The person’s liability in respect of the incidental offence therefore
stems from his or her decision to participate in carrying out the unlawful
purpose and to contribute resources needed to achieve it. [46]                         
The situation is very different in the context
of the form of participation in a crime provided for in s. 21(1)  of the Criminal
Code .  Aiders and abettors generally do much more than promise their
support in carrying out an unlawful purpose in the future.  They perform
concrete acts to aid the principal offender to commit the offence or to abet
him or her in committing it.  Their criminal liability and their moral culpability
are proportional to these acts and stem from the fact that they have performed
them.  Thus, merely communicating in unequivocal terms their intention to cease
participating in the commission of the offence will not be enough “to break the
chain of causation and responsibility”, to repeat the words of Sloan J.
from Whitehouse. [47]                         
Where a person’s
participation in a crime is more than a simple promise to carry out a common
unlawful purpose — where, for example, the person is a party to the offence
within the meaning of s. 21(1)  of the Criminal Code  — requiring an
unequivocal communication of the intention to cease
participating in the commission of the offence (the Whitehouse test)
means that the accused must show that he or she took reasonable steps to neutralize
the effects of his or her participation.  As one author explains, using a
colourful image to make his point, the intention to withdraw must be
accompanied by acts that are likely to cancel out the effects of the acts that
have already been performed to aid or abet the offender:                     Once the arrow is in the air, it is no use
wishing to have never let it go — “Please God, let it miss!”  The archer is
guilty of homicide when the arrow gets the victim through the heart.  The
withdrawer, it is true, does not merely change his mind:  he withdraws — but
is that relevant if the withdrawal has no more effect on subsequent events
than the archer’s repentance?  [Emphasis added.] (J. C. Smith,
Commentary on R. v. Mitchell, [1999] Crim. L.R. 497) [48]                         
In the Quebec Court of Appeal’s judgment in Fournier,
the accused was convicted of the first degree murder of her husband because she
had hired a contract killer to murder him, had promised and later paid
financial consideration to the killer, and had provided the killer with the
necessary details of time and place and with information needed to identify the
target.  Because of the numerous acts that had been performed to aid in the
commission of the murder, communicating an intention to withdraw by merely leaving the message [translation] “cancel” on the killer’s
answering device was found to be insufficient to exculpate
the accused.  The acts of abandonment were not proportional to the acts
performed in support of the commission of the offence. [49]                         
For all these reasons, I would reformulate as
follows the test already established in Whitehouse and Kirkness
for determining whether the defence of abandonment applies, in order to adapt
it specifically to the various degrees and forms of participation in crimes. [50]                         
One who is a party to an offence on the basis that
he or she did or omitted to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to
commit the offence, or abetted any person in committing it (s. 21(1)  of the Criminal Code ), or on the basis that he or she had formed with other persons an
intention to carry out an unlawful purpose and to assist each other therein and
that an offence was committed in carrying out the common purpose (s. 21(2)  of the Criminal Code ), may raise the defence of abandonment if the evidence shows (1)     that there
was an intention to abandon or withdraw from the unlawful purpose; (2)     that
there was timely communication of this abandonment or withdrawal from the
person in question to those who wished to continue; (3)     that
the communication served unequivocal notice upon those who wished to continue;
and (4)     that the accused took, in a manner proportional to his or
her participation in the commission of the planned offence, reasonable steps in
the circumstances either to neutralize or otherwise cancel out the effects of
his or her participation or to prevent the commission of the offence. [51]                         
I recognize that there will be circumstances,
even where the accused is a party within the meaning of s. 21(1)  of the Criminal
Code , in which timely and unequivocal communication by the accused of his
or her intention to abandon the unlawful purpose will be considered sufficient
to neutralize the effects of his or her participation in the crime.  But there
will be other circumstances, primarily where a person has aided in the commission
of the offence, in which it is hard to see how timely communication to the principal offender of the
person’s intention to withdraw from the unlawful purpose will on its own be
considered reasonable, and sufficient to meet the test set out in the preceding
paragraph. [52]                         
In conclusion, and more specifically in the
context of s. 21(1)  of the Criminal Code , the defence of
abandonment should be put to the jury only if there is evidence in the record
that is capable of supporting a finding that a person who was initially a party
to the carrying out of an unlawful purpose subsequently took reasonable steps
in the circumstances either to neutralize the effects of his or her
participation or to prevent the commission of the offence.                     2.     Application
to the Case at Bar [53]                         
In the case at bar, the defence of abandonment
did not have an air of reality. [54]                         
The evidence showed that the appellant had
written several documents, including some incriminating letters that were
evidence of the couple’s intention to end their and their children’s lives. 
The couple explained in the letters how they planned to kill the children and
take their own lives:  by intoxication using a soporific drug.  It was the
appellant who purchased the medication that caused the children’s deaths. [55]                         
What evidence could therefore have justified the
trial judge’s putting the defence of abandonment to the jury? [56]                         
The evidence is incomplete, to say the least. [57]                         
The only evidence comes from the appellant’s
testimony that, in the afternoon of December 31, 2008, she had notified
her spouse that she had changed her mind and no longer intended to participate
in the common purpose:                     [translation]  I noticed some papers he’d
left lying around.  I, I realized what was happening.  I didn’t want that. 
When Marc came back, I, I told him it was crazy, what he was telling me.  I
ripped up the papers.  [A.R., at p. 834]                     [translation] 
When I saw the papers and looked at what was written on them, I said
that’s crazy.  And I told Marc we couldn’t . . . . . .                     I
told Marc he couldn’t do that, that I didn’t want to be part of it.  [Emphasis
added; A.R., at p. 910.] [58]                         
The appellant also testified that the expression
on her spouse’s face had convinced her that he too had abandoned the sinister
plan:                     [translation]  But I gathered from his
face that he was getting the message, too, and that it was all right.  [A.R.,
at p. 913] [59]                         
Counsel for the appellant argues that, in light
of this evidence, the trial judge had sufficient reasons to put the defence of
abandonment to the jury.  I find this argument wanting. [62]                         
Nevertheless, even if it were assumed that the
evidence the appellant relies upon would be sufficient for a jury to reasonably
conclude that she had communicated her intention to withdraw from the plan and
that her communication was timely and unequivocal, that communication would not
on its own have sufficed, in the circumstances of this case, for the judge to
put the defence of abandonment to the jury. [64]                         
I conclude that the record did not contain
evidence upon which a properly instructed jury acting reasonably could have
found that the appellant had abandoned the common unlawful purpose, and could
accordingly have acquitted her, if it believed the evidence to be true.  The
defence of abandonment therefore did not meet the air of reality test, and the
trial judge was not required to put the defence to the jury. VII.  Disposition [65]                         
For these reasons, I would dismiss the
appeal.                     The following
are the reasons delivered by                     Fish J. (dissenting) — I [66]                         
Justice Wagner has set out with care and sensitivity the tragic and
desperate circumstances that culminated in the murder by the appellant’s
husband of their three children and his own virtually contemporaneous suicide. [67]                         
In the wake of that tragedy and despair, the appellant, Cathie Gauthier,
now stands convicted of first degree murder.  And she has been sentenced to
imprisonment for life without eligibility for parole for 25 years. [68]                         
The Crown’s case against Ms. Gauthier is that she and her husband
entered a murder-suicide pact that was executed with her help.  She testified
at trial that she had demonstrated her disapproval of the pact before the
children were murdered and had notified her husband of this unwillingness to go
through with the plan. [69]                         
Defence counsel urged the trial judge to leave open for the
jury’s consideration Ms. Gauthier’s defence of abandonment.  The trial judge
declined to do so.  The Court of Appeal upheld the trial judge on the ground
that it was an [translation] “incompatible
. . . defence”: 2011 QCCA 1395 (CanLII).  Both
courts below erred in law in this regard. [72]                         
This Court has repeatedly held that the defence of abandonment includes no
other essential elements.  And our attention has not been drawn to a single
Canadian decision to the contrary, at any level. [73]                         
In my view, there was evidence at Ms. Gauthier’s trial upon which
a properly instructed jury might well have found that she had abandoned the
suicide pact in respect of which she was charged and convicted of murder.  Or
at least have been left with a reasonable doubt on this issue, which would of
course have sufficed to warrant Ms. Gauthier’s acquittal. [74]                         
As a matter of law, the appellant is entitled, in my respectful view, to
a fresh trial, where the jury will not be wrongly prevented from considering on
its merits Ms. Gauthier’s defence of abandonment, however weak and unpromising
we might believe it to be.  I am aware of no legal principle that permits us to
deprive her of that right. [75]                         
In his thorough and thoughtful reasons, Justice Wagner proposes that we
now adopt additional requirements for a valid defence of abandonment where the
accused, as in this case, has done something to aid or abet the commission of
the offence before satisfying the two established elements of abandonment.  As
we shall see, there are strong reasons of policy and precedent for resisting
the proposed changes. [77]                         
With respect for those who are of a different view, I would therefore
allow the appeal, set aside the appellant’s convictions and order a new trial. II [78]                         
Canadian courts have for more than 70 years held that the defence of
abandonment comprises only two essential elements: (i) change of intention; and
(ii) where practical and reasonable, timely and unequivocal notice of
withdrawal. [79]                         
These requirements emanate from R. v. Whitehouse (1940),
55 B.C.R. 420 (C.A.), a decision that has been repeatedly approved and followed
by this Court, as I mentioned earlier, and has long been firmly entrenched in
Canadian law:  see Henderson v. The King, [1948] S.C.R. 226, at pp.
236-37; R. v. de Tonnancourt (1956), 115 C.C.C. 154 (Man. C.A.), at pp.
176 and 201-3; R. v. Merrifield, 1977 CarswellOnt 1806 (C.A.), at para.
3; Miller v. The Queen, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 680, at p. 708; R. v. Wagner
(1978), 8 B.C.L.R. 258 (C.A.), at pp. 260-61; R. v. Joyce (1978), 42
C.C.C. (2d) 141 (B.C.C.A.), at p. 150; R. v. Kirkness, [1990] 3 S.C.R.
74, at p. 89; R. v. Johanson (1995), 166 A.R. 60 (Prov. Ct.), at para.
23; R. v. Fournier, 2002 NBCA 71, 252 N.B.R. (2d) 256, at para. 22; R.
v. McKercher, [2002] O.J. No. 5859 (QL) (Ct. J.), at para. 77; R. v.
Forknall, 2003 BCCA 43, 176 B.C.A.C. 284, at paras. 51-53;
R. v. Lacoursière (2002), 7 C.R. (6th) 117 (Que. C.A.), at paras. 25-29;
R. v. P.K., 2006 ABCA 299, 397 A.R. 318, at para. 12; R. v. S.R.B.,
2009 ABCA 45, 448 A.R. 124, at paras. 10, 19-20 and 24-30, rev’d R. v. Bird,
2009 SCC 60, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 638, at para. 1; R. v. Ball, 2011 BCCA 11,
298 B.C.A.C. 166, at paras. 44-47; and R. v. Leslie,
2012 BCSC 683 (CanLII), at paras. 552-58. [80]                         
Justice Wagner does not suggest that the defence of abandonment,
as it stood at the time of Ms. Gauthier’s trial, required anything more than a
change of intention, accompanied by timely and unequivocal notice of
withdrawal.  Rather, my colleague proposes a new and different
test. [81]                         
To this end, my colleague distinguishes for present purposes between s.
21(1)  and s. 21(2)  of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 .  The
former deals with liability for aiding or abetting another in the commission of
a specific offence; the latter, with liability for an offence committed by
another in carrying out a common unlawful purpose. [82]                         
Justice Wagner would impose additional requirements on the defence of
abandonment, particularly with respect to liability under s. 21(1) , where the
accused would need to adduce evidence that he or she took steps to neutralize
any prior contribution to the commission of the offence or, in the alternative,
to prevent the commission of the offence. [83]                         
With respect, this approach overlooks the fact that both s. 21(1)  and
s. 21(2)  can involve active participation by the accused: see for example Henderson
and Miller. [84]                         
Moreover, the Whitehouse test has been repeatedly and
consistently applied in prosecutions under s. 21(1)  and s. 21(2)  alike. [85]                         
The application of the Whitehouse criteria to an aiding
and abetting case was endorsed very recently by this Court in 2009, and even
more recently by other Canadian courts: Bird (affirming Costigan J.A.’s
dissent); Ball, at paras. 44-47; and Leslie, at
paras. 552-58. [86]                         
Indeed, Whitehouse itself involved parties to an offence who had
“aided and abetted in the commission of the crime”: p. 424.  They had
“performed part, at least, of the tasks assigned to them”: again, at p. 424. [88]                         
As the language of this oft-cited passage
makes clear, the Whitehouse test for abandonment expressly
contemplates prior aid and assistance. [89]                         
Moreover, to suggest that an accused under either subsection of
s. 21  must neutralize prior involvement disregards an important rationale
of the defence of abandonment, namely, giving the principal offender the
opportunity to abandon the criminal objective.  As Allan Manson explains in
“Re-codifying Attempts, Parties, and Abandoned Intentions” (1989), 14 Queen’s
L.J. 85, at p. 101: . . . the premise upon which Whitehouse
is based:  “Let it be known, if you go then you go alone.”  Unequivocal
withdrawal and the element of timeliness are sufficiently expansive to
accommodate abettors and aiders alike because, as in Becerra and Gundy,
the aim is to compel the principal to reconsider the objective in time to
abandon it.  This, after all, is the preventative rationale for party
responsibility.  Thus the defence of abandonment as structured in Whitehouse
can apply with equal fairness and effect to all parties including aiders by
interpreting timeliness in relation to the offence and the goal of ultimate
abandonment. [90]                         
Even the most ardent proponents of a more stringent abandonment
defence recognize that to require neutralizing or preventative steps would
necessitate a change to Canadian law: see M. Campbell, “Turning Back the Clock:
Aiders and the Defence of Abandonment” (2010), 14 Can. Crim. L.R. 1, at pp. 16-17. [91]                         
Courts in the United Kingdom, approving Whitehouse, have
concluded that neutralizing or preventative steps are not required to establish
abandonment.  In R. v. O’Flaherty, [2004] EWCA Crim 526, [2004] 2 Cr.
App. R. 20 (p. 315), at para. 60, the Court of Appeal acknowledged that whether
an accused has done enough “to demonstrate that he or she is withdrawing from
the joint enterprise . . . is ultimately a question of fact and degree for the jury”. 
The jury should account for “the nature of the assistance and encouragement
already given and how imminent the infliction of the fatal injury or injuries
is, as well as the nature of the action said to constitute withdrawal”.  And,
the court explicitly rejected the proposition that effective withdrawal
requires reasonable steps to prevent the crime: In cases of assistance it has sometimes been suggested
that, for there to be an effective withdrawal, reasonable steps must have been
taken to prevent the crime.  It is clear, however, this is not necessary. [Para.
60; see also para. 61.] See also R. v. Otway, [2011]
EWCA Crim 3 (BAILII), at para. 32, where the court held that efforts to prevent
the crime were relevant but not required for withdrawal. [92]                         
Justice Wagner relies on R. v.
Fournier, 2007 QCCA 1822 (CanLII), to support his position that mere
communication of changed intention should henceforth be insufficient for
abandonment in s. 21(1)  cases (para. 48 of Justice Wagner’s reasons).  However,
in Fournier, unlike this case, the defence of abandonment was not
kept from the jury.  Indeed, the Court of Appeal held that the trial judge
properly instructed the jury that abandonment required timely and unequivocal
notice of withdrawal: Fournier, at paras. 18-20. [93]                         
I agree with my colleague that the
internally repentant archer cannot, having let the arrow fly, seek refuge in
the defence of abandonment (para. 47 of Justice Wagner’s reasons).  The defence
fails in Sir John Smith’s illustration not because preventative or neutralizing
steps are required, but rather because notice of withdrawal comes too late, or
not at all. [96]                         
But on any view of the matter, in light of the state of the law universally
accepted in Canada at the time of the appellant’s trial, it would be
fundamentally unfair at this stage to fault the appellant for failing to
demonstrate anything more than a change of intention, plus timely and
unequivocal notice of withdrawal from the murder-suicide pact.  Since the
appellant’s testimony provided some evidence on these two essential elements,
there was an air of reality to the defence.  The trial judge therefore erred by
withholding the defence of abandonment from the jury. III [97]                         
I agree with Justice Wagner that the “incompatibility” between Ms.
Gauthier’s defence of abandonment and her primary defence did not justify the
trial judge’s decision to prevent the jury from considering them both.  And I
am therefore content to add only these brief comments on the issue of
incompatibility. [99]                         
As Kellock J. stated in Henderson: “It is a paramount principle
of law that when a defence, however weak it may be, is raised by a person
charged, it should be fairly put before the jury”: p. 241.  Taschereau J.
likewise emphasized the accused’s “fundamental right . . . to have all the
features of [the] defence adequately put to the jury”: Henderson, at p.
237. IV [100]                     
For abandonment to be left for the jury, there must be some evidence
upon which a properly instructed jury could form a reasonable doubt on the two
essential elements of the defence: R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2
S.C.R. 3, at paras. 2, 49, 52-54 and 83.  In my view, the appellant’s testimony
satisfied this modest evidentiary threshold. [102]                     
The appellant testified that she told Marc Laliberté his plan did not make
sense and he [translation] “could
not do it” (“pouvait pas faire ça”).  She also told him that she did not
want to be a part of it.  She demonstrated her disapproval of the
murder-suicide pact by tearing up two documents: a last will and testament written
by the appellant and a story of Marc Laliberté’s life containing references to
the pact.  She was convinced by his facial expression that the murder-suicide
pact was off: A.R., at pp. 834-35 and 910-11. [103]                     
This testimony provides some evidence that the appellant
no longer intended to participate in the murder-suicide pact and that she
provided timely and unequivocal notice of this change of intention to the
principal offender.  That the evidence could have left the jury with a
reasonable doubt as to the appellant’s guilt is all that was required. [104]                     
Whether the appellant ultimately “did enough” to communicate
timely and unequivocal withdrawal was a question of fact that should have been
left for the jury to decide: P.K., at para. 11; O’Flaherty,
at para. 60; Cinous, at paras. 52 and 54. [105]                     
In short, it was for the jury to determine whether the appellant’s words
and conduct were believable and sufficient to demonstrate timely and
unequivocal notice of withdrawal.  As Taschereau J. stated, again in Henderson,
at p. 237:  “The question whether the agreement has been put to an end, must be
judged in view of all the circumstances revealed by the evidence, and I have no
doubt that it is a question for the jury.” [106]                     
With respect, I feel bound to conclude that the trial judge, by
declining to instruct on the defence of abandonment, encroached “on the jury’s
traditional function as arbiter of fact”: Cinous, at para. 56. V [107]                     
For the foregoing reasons, I would allow the appeal, set aside the
appellant’s convictions, and order a new trial.                     Appeal
dismissed, Fish J.
dissenting.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Directeur des poursuites criminelles et pénales du
Québec, Chicoutimi.                     Solicitor for the intervener:  Attorney General of
Ontario, Toronto.   