  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. TELUS Communications Co., 2013 SCC 16, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 3 Date: 20130327 Docket: 34252  Between: TELUS
Communications Company Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent - and - Attorney
General of Ontario, Canadian Civil Liberties Association and Samuelson-Glushko
Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver and
Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 46)  Reasons
  Concurring in Part and in Result: (paras. 47 to 108)  Dissenting
  Reasons: (paras. 109 to 196)   Abella J. (LeBel and Fish JJ. concurring)   Moldaver J. (Karakatsanis J. concurring)    Cromwell J. (McLachlin C.J. concurring)    R.
v. TELUS Communications Co., 2013 SCC 16, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 3 TELUS Communications Company                                                             Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Attorney General of Ontario, Canadian
Civil Canadian
Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic                                Interveners Indexed as:  R. v. TELUS
Communications Co. 2013 SCC 16 File No.:  34252. 2012:  October 15; 2013:  March 27. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Cromwell,
Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the ontario superior court of justice                     Held
(McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J.
dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed and the general warrant and related
assistance order should be quashed.                     Per
LeBel, Fish and Abella JJ.:  Part VI of the Criminal Code  provides
a comprehensive scheme for “wiretap authorizations” for the interception of
private communications.  The purpose of Part VI is to restrict the ability
of the police to obtain and disclose private communications.                     Telus
employs a unique process for transmitting text messages that results in the
messages being stored on their computer database for a brief period of time. 
In considering whether the prospective, daily production of future text
messages stored in Telus’ computer falls within Part VI, we must take the
overall objective of Part VI into account.                     Text
messaging is, in essence, an electronic conversation.  Technical
differences inherent in new technology should not determine the scope of
protection afforded to private communications.  The only practical difference
between text messaging and traditional voice communications is the transmission
process.  This distinction should not take text messages outside the protection
to which private communications are entitled under Part VI.                     The
interpretation of “intercept a private communication” must, therefore, focus on
the acquisition of informational content and the individual’s expectation of
privacy at the time the communication was made.  To the extent that there may
be any temporal element inherent in the technical meaning of intercept, it
should not trump Parliament’s intention in Part VI to protect an
individual’s right to privacy in his or her communications.  The use of the
word “intercept” implies that the private communication is acquired in the
course of the communication process.  The process encompasses all activities of
the service provider which are required for, or incidental to, the provision of
the communications service.  Acquiring the substance of a private communication
from a computer maintained by a telecommunications service provider would, as a
result, be included in that process.                     Text
messages are private communications and, even if they are stored on a service
provider’s computer, their prospective production requires authorization under Part VI
of the Code.  If Telus did not maintain its computer database, there is
no doubt that the police would be required to obtain an authorization under Part VI
to secure the prospective, and in this case continuous, production of text
messages.  Most service providers do not routinely copy text messages to a
computer database as part of their transmission service.  Accordingly, if the
police wanted to target an individual who used a different service provider,
they would have no option but to obtain wiretap authorizations under Part VI
to compel the prospective and continuous production of their text messages. 
This creates a manifest unfairness to individuals who are unlikely to realize
that their choice of telecommunications service provider can dramatically
affect their privacy.  The technical differences inherent in Telus’
transmission of text messages should not deprive Telus subscribers of the
protection of the Code that every other Canadian is entitled to.                     The
general warrant in this case was invalid because the police had failed to
satisfy the requirement under s. 487.01(1)(c) of the Code that
a general warrant could not be issued if another provision in the Code is
available to authorize the technique used by police.  Since the warrant
purports to authorize the interception of private communications, and since Part VI
is the scheme that authorizes the interception of private communications, a
general warrant was not available.                     The
result is driven by the failure of the authorities to establish the requirement
in s. 487.01(1)(c) that there be “no other provision” that would
provide for the search.  This provision ensures that the general warrant is
used sparingly as a warrant of limited resort.  In creating the general
warrant, Parliament did not erase every other search authorization from the Code
and leave it to judges to devise general warrants on an ad hoc basis as
they deem fit.  Courts must therefore be careful to fill a legislative lacuna
only where Parliament has actually failed to anticipate a particular search
authorization.  The “no other provision” requirement must be interpreted so as
to afford the police the flexibility Parliament contemplated in creating the
general warrant, while safeguarding against its misuse.  There is a need for
heightened judicial scrutiny where Parliament has provided an authorization for
an investigative technique that is substantively equivalent to what the police
seek but requires more onerous preconditions.  Thus, the test under s. 487.01(1)(c)
must consider the investigative technique that the police seek to utilize with
an eye to its actual substance and not merely its formal trappings.                     The
approach to the “no other provision” requirement accepts a measure of
uncertainty by tasking judges with the job of inquiring into the substance of
purportedly “new” investigative techniques.  When uncertainty exists, the
police would do well to err on the side of caution.  General warrants may not
be used as a means to circumvent other authorization provisions that are
available but contain more onerous preconditions.  Judges faced with an
application where the investigative technique, though not identical, comes
close in substance to an investigative technique covered by another provision
for which more rigorous standards apply should therefore proceed with extra
caution.  Where careful scrutiny establishes that a proposed investigative
technique, although similar, has substantive differences from an existing
technique, judges may grant the general warrant, mindful of their obligation
under s. 487.01(3) to impose terms and conditions that reflect the nature
of the privacy interest at stake.                     A
literal construction of s. 487.01(1)(c) must be rejected.  Such an
approach strips the provision of any meaning and renders it all but valueless. 
Legislative history confirms that general warrants were to play a modest role,
affording the police a constitutionally sound path for investigative techniques
that Parliament has not addressed.  Ensuring that general warrants are confined
to their limited role is the true purpose of s. 487.01(1)(c). 
While the “best interest” requirement in s. 487.01(1)(b) serves to
prevent misuse of the general warrant, this provision should not be interpreted
as swallowing the distinct analytical question that the “no other provision”
test asks.  A purposive approach to s. 487.01(1)(c) has nothing to
do with investigative necessity.  Under the “no other provision” test, the
police are not asked to show why an alternative authorization would not work on
the facts of a particular case, but rather why it is substantively different
from what Parliament has already provided.                     In
this case, the general warrant is invalid because the investigative technique
it authorized was substantively equivalent to an intercept.  What the police
did — securing prospective authorization for the delivery of future private
communications on a continual, if not continuous, basis over a sustained period
of time — was substantively equivalent to what they would have done pursuant to
a Part VI authorization.  It was thus, at a minimum, tantamount to an
intercept.  Though there is no evidence to suggest that the police acted
other than in good faith, the police failed to meet their burden to show that
the impugned technique was substantively different from an intercept.  On the facts here, the general warrant served only to provide a
means to avoid the rigours of Part VI.  The police could and should have
sought a Part VI authorization.                     Per McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J. (dissenting):  The
question of whether what the police did under this general warrant is an interception
of a private communication is one of statutory interpretation.  When the text
of the statutory provisions is read in its full context, it is clear that the
general warrant does not authorize an interception that requires a Part VI
authorization.  While there is no doubt that the text message is a private
communication and that text messages here were intercepted by Telus by means of
an electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, the police in this
case, did not intercept those messages when Telus turned over to them copies of
sent and received messages previously intercepted by Telus and stored in its
databases.  Therefore, the investigative technique authorized by the general
warrant in this case was not an interception of private communication.                     Fundamental
to both the purpose and to the scheme of the wiretap provisions is the
distinction between the interception of private communications and the
disclosure, use or retention of private communications that have been
intercepted. The purpose, text and scheme of Part VI show that the
disclosure, use or retention of intercepted private communications is distinct
from the act of interception itself.  That is, if disclosure or use of a
private communication were an interception of it, there would be no need to
create the distinct disclosure or use offence.  Similarly, the exemptions from
criminal liability show that Parliament distinguished between interception on
one hand and retention, use and disclosure on the other.                     In
this case, it is not disputed that Telus was intercepting text messages when it
copied them for its own systems administration purposes.  However, it is also
agreed that Telus lawfully intercepted private communications.  Under the
general warrant, the police sought disclosure from Telus of information that it
had already lawfully intercepted.  The general warrant did not require Telus to
intercept communications, but to provide copies of communications that it had
previously intercepted for its own lawful purposes.  As the scheme of the
legislation makes clear, disclosure or use of a lawfully intercepted
communication is not an interception.  It is inconsistent with the fundamental
distinction made by the legislation to conclude that the police were
intercepting private communications when Telus provided them with copies of
previously intercepted and stored text messages.  The distinction in the
statute between interception and disclosure cannot be dismissed as a mere
“technical difference”.  The distinction is fundamental to the scheme of the
provisions.  When Telus turns over to the police the copies of the
communications that it has previously intercepted, Telus is disclosing the
communications, not intercepting them again.  This disclosure by Telus from its
databases cannot be an interception by the police.                     Acquiring
the content of a previously intercepted and stored communication cannot be an
interception because that broad reading is inconsistent with the clear
distinction between interception and disclosure in the provisions.  Applied
broadly, this interpretation of “acquire” would extend the scope of
investigative techniques which require wiretap authorizations far beyond
anything ever previously contemplated.  Further, introducing a temporal aspect
of interception would confuse the act of interception with the nature of its
authorization.  Interception is a technique, a way of acquiring the substance
of a private communication.  It could not be that exactly the same technique,
which acquires information in exactly the same form, may be either a seizure of
stored material or an interception, depending on the point in time at which the
technique is authorized.                     The
general warrant is not one of limited resort that should be used sparingly.  On
the contrary, as numerous authorities have acknowledged, the provision is cast
in wide terms.  Therefore, it is not accepted as an imperative that s. 487.01 
must be interpreted with a view to heavily restricting its use.  The focus of
the inquiry is on two matters (in addition of course to reasonable grounds to
believe that an offence has been committed and that information concerning the
offence will be obtained): Is authorization for the “technique, procedure or
device to be used or the thing to be done” provided for in any other federal
statute, and is it in the best interests of the administration of justice to
authorize it to be done?  Section 487.01(1)(c) provides that a
general warrant may issue if “there is no other provision . . . that
would provide for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique,
procedure or device to be used or the thing to be done”.  The words
“technique”, “procedure”, “device to be used” and “thing to be done” all are
concerned with what the police want to do, not why they want to
do it.  This paragraph does not require issuing judges to consider whether
other techniques are similar or allow access to the same evidence; it simply
asks if the same technique can be authorized by another provision.  This
is not simply a narrow, literal interpretation of s. 487.01 .  Rather, it
is an interpretation that reflects its purpose of conferring a broad judicial
discretion to authorize the police to “use any device or investigative
technique or procedure or do any thing”, provided of course that the
judge is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration of
justice to do so, having due regard to the importance of the constitutional
right to be free of unreasonable searches and seizures.  However, courts should
not authorize anything the police seek to do simply because it is not
authorized elsewhere.  The judicial discretion to issue the warrant must give
full effect to the protection of reasonable expectations of privacy as set out
under s. 8 of the Charter.                     There
is no support in the text or the purpose of s. 487.01(1)(c), or in
the jurisprudence, for building into it a “substantive equivalency” test.  The
paragraph asks a simple question:  Does federal legislation provide for “a
warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique, procedure or device
to be used or the thing to be done”?  Where this threshold is met, the judge is
entitled to consider granting the requested authorization.  The further
question of whether the authorization ought to be granted is not the
focus of this paragraph of the section. Rather, whether a general warrant ought
to issue is properly considered under s. 487.01(1)(b), which asks
whether authorizing the warrant would be in the best interests of the administration
of justice.  This approach is not only supported by the text, purpose and
jurisprudence, but by the application of a “substantive equivalency” test
creates unnecessary uncertainty and distracts the issuing judge from the
question of whether the technique sought to be authorized is inconsistent with
the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.  Predictability
and clarity in the law are particularly important in the area of judicial
pre-authorization of searches.  The primary objective of pre-authorization is
not to identify unreasonable searches after the fact, but to ensure that
unreasonable searches are not conducted.  The requirements for
pre-authorization should be as clear as possible to ensure that Charter
rights are fully protected.                     The
technique sought to be authorized here is not the substantive equivalent of a
wiretap authorization.  On the facts of this case, a wiretap authorization
alone would not allow the police to obtain the information that Telus was
required to provide under the general warrant.  Three separate authorizations
would be required in order to provide the police with the means to access the
information provided to them under the general warrant.  Therefore, even if one
were to accept reading into s. 487.01(1)(c) a “substantive
equivalency” test, neither the facts nor the law would support its application
in this case.                     The
police did not seek a general warrant in this case as a way to avoid the
rigours of Part VI.  The general warrant achieved the legitimate aims of
the police investigation in a much more convenient and cost-effective manner
than any other provision would have allowed.  There is no evidence of “misuse”
of s. 487.01 .  The effective and practical police investigation by a
relatively small municipal police force was fully respectful of the privacy
interests of the targets of the investigation and other Telus subscribers. Cases Cited By Abella J.                     Referred
to:  R. v. Ha, 2009 ONCA 340, 96 O.R. (3d) 751; R. v. Brand,
2008 BCCA 94, 229 C.C.C. (3d) 443 (sub nom. R. v. Ford); R. v. Welsh
and Iannuzzi (No. 6) (1977), 32 C.C.C. (2d) 363; Lyons v. The Queen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 633; R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 992; R.
v. Tse, 2012 SCC 16, [2012] 1 S.C.R. 531; R. v.
Wong, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 36; Society of Composers, Authors and Music Publishers of Canada v.
Canadian Assn. of Internet Providers, 2004 SCC 45,
[2004] 2 S.C.R. 427. By Moldaver J.                     Referred
to:  R. v. Wong,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 36; R. v. Ha, 2009 ONCA 340, 96 O.R. (3d) 751; Lyons v. The Queen, [1984]
2 S.C.R. 633; R. v. Brand, 2008 BCCA 94, 229 C.C.C. (3d) 443 (sub nom. R. v. Ford); Schreiber
v. Canada (Attorney General), [1997] 2 F.C. 176, rev’d [1998] 1 S.C.R. 841;
R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 992. By Cromwell J. (dissenting) Statutes and Regulations Cited Act
to amend the Criminal Code, the Crown Liability and Proceedings Act  and the Radiocommunication
Act, S.C. 1993, c. 40 (Bill C-109). Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 8 , 24(2) . Authors Cited Coughlan, Steve.  “R. v. Ha:  Upholding General Warrants
without Asking the Right Questions” (2009), 65 C.R. (6th) 41. Fontana, James A., and David Keeshan.  The Law of Search and
Seizure in Canada, 8th ed.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2010. Sullivan,
Ruth.  Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes, 5th ed.  Markham,
Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2008. Watt,
David.  Law of Electronic Surveillance in Canada.  Toronto:  Carswell,
1979.                     APPEAL
from a decision of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Sproat J.), 2011 ONSC 1143, 105 O.R. (3d) 411, [2011]
O.J. No. 974 (QL), 2011 CarswellOnt 1331, upholding the validity of a
general warrant and related assistance order.  Appeal allowed,
McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J. dissenting.                     Scott C. Hutchison, Michael Sobkin and Fredrick Schumann, for the appellant.                     Croft Michaelson and Lisa Matthews, for the respondent.                     Michal Fairburn, for the intervener the
Attorney General of Ontario.                     Wendy Matheson and Rebecca Wise, for the intervener the Canadian
Civil Liberties Association.                     The
judgment of LeBel, Fish and Abella JJ. was delivered by [1]                             
Abella J. — For many Canadians, text messaging has
become an increasingly popular form of communication.  Despite technological
differences, text messaging bears several hallmarks of traditional voice
communication: it is intended to be conversational, transmission is generally
instantaneous, and there is an expectation of privacy in the communication. 
The issue in this appeal is the proper procedure under the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , for authorizing the prospective daily production of these
messages from a computer database maintained by a telecommunications service
provider. [2]                             
The service provider in this case is TELUS
Communications Company.  It urges this Court to find that the prospective,
daily acquisition of text messages from their computer database constitutes an
interception of private communications and therefore requires authorization
under Part VI of the Code, a comprehensive scheme for “wiretap
authorizations” for the interception of private communications.  The
Crown, on the other hand, contends that the retrieval of messages from a
computer maintained by a service provider does not fall within the scope of
Part VI because the production of messages in computer storage does not amount
to an “interception”, and that the police are therefore permitted to use the
general warrant power in s. 487.01 of the Code to get copies of the text
messages. [3]                             
Part VI of the Code provides a scheme to
protect private communications.  Telus employs a unique process for
transmitting text messages that results in the messages being stored on their
computer database for a brief period of time.  The question in this appeal is
whether the technical differences inherent in Telus’ transmission of text
messages should deprive Telus subscribers of the protection of the Code that
every other Canadian is entitled to. [4]                             
The focus of this appeal therefore turns on the
interpretation of “intercept” within Part VI.  “Intercept” is used throughout
Part VI with reference to the intercept of private communications.  This
means that in interpreting “intercept a private communication”, we must
consider the broad scope of Part VI and its application across a number of
technological platforms, as well as its objective of protecting individual
privacy interests in communications by imposing particularly rigorous
safeguards.  The interpretation should not be dictated by the technology used
to transmit such communications, like the computer used in this case, but by
what was intended to be protected under Part VI. [5]                             
Text messaging is, in essence, an electronic
conversation.  The only practical difference between
text messaging and the traditional voice communications is the transmission
process.  This distinction should not take text messages outside the protection
of private communications to which they are entitled in Part VI.  Technical
differences inherent in new technology should not determine the scope of
protection afforded to private communications. Background [6]                             
When Telus subscribers send a text message, the
transmission of that message takes place in the following sequence.  It is
first transmitted to the nearest cell tower, then to Telus’ transmission
infrastructure, then to the cell tower nearest to the recipient, and finally to
the recipient’s phone.  If the recipient’s phone is turned off or is out of
range of a cell tower, the text message will temporarily pause in Telus’
transmission infrastructure for up to five days.  After five days, Telus stops
trying to deliver the message and deletes it without notifying the sender. [7]                             
Unlike most telecommunications service
providers, Telus routinely makes electronic copies of all the text messages
sent or received by its subscribers and stores them on a computer database for
a period of 30 days.  Text messages that are sent by a Telus subscriber are
copied to the computer database during the transmission process at the point in
time when the text message enters Telus’ transmission infrastructure.  Text
messages received by a Telus subscriber are copied to the computer database
when the Telus subscriber’s phone receives the message.  In many instances,
this system results in text messages being copied to the computer database
before the recipient’s phone has received the text message and/or before the
intended recipient has read the text message. [8]                             
On March 27, 2010, the Owen Sound Police Service
obtained a general warrant under s. 487.01  and related assistance order under
s. 487.02 of the Code.  The warrant named two Telus wireless subscribers
and required Telus to provide the police with copies of any text messages sent
or received by these subscribers which were stored on Telus’ computer
database.  In addition, the warrant required the production of subscriber
information identifying any individuals who sent text messages to, or received
text messages from the two individuals who were the target of the warrant. [9]                             
The warrant covered a subsequent two-week period
between March 30, 2010 and April 16, 2010.  During this time, the warrant
required Telus to abide by a specific production schedule.  On March 30, 2010,
Telus was required to produce the information for March 18, 2010 to March 30,
2010.  On each of the following 13 days, Telus was required to produce, on a
daily basis, the text messages sent or received within the last 24 hours, as
well as any related subscriber information. [10]                         
Telus argued that the warrant was invalid
because the police had failed to satisfy the requirement under s. 487.01(1)(c)
of the Code that a general warrant could not be issued if another
provision in the Code is available to authorize the technique used by
police.  Since the warrant purports to authorize the interception of private
communications, and since Part VI is the scheme that authorizes the
interception of private communications, a general warrant was not available.  The
Crown’s position, on the other hand, was that the retrieval of messages from
Telus’ computer database does not fall within the scope of Part VI since the
copies on Telus’ computer database are not real-time communications and the
police are therefore permitted to use the general warrant power to authorize
the prospective production of text messages stored on a service provider’s
computer. [11]                         
The application judge dismissed Telus’
application (2011 ONSC 1143, 105 O.R. (3d) 411).  The part of the warrant that
required production of historical messages predating the issuance of the
warrant was rescinded since both the Crown and Telus conceded that a production
order was available to obtain those messages. [12]                         
 In my view, text messages are private
communications and, even if they are stored on a service provider’s computer,
their prospective production requires authorization under Part VI of the Code. [13]                         
If Telus did not maintain its computer database,
there is no doubt that the police would be required to obtain an authorization
under Part VI to secure the prospective, and in this case continuous,
production of text messages.  In fact, most service providers do not routinely
copy text messages to a computer database as part of their transmission
service.  Accordingly, if the police wanted to target an individual who used a
different service provider, they would have no option but to obtain wiretap
authorizations under Part VI to compel the prospective and continuous
production of their text messages.  This creates a manifest unfairness to
individuals who are unlikely to realize that their choice of telecommunications
service provider can dramatically affect their privacy. [14]                         
I would therefore allow the appeal and quash the
general warrant and related assistance order. Analysis [15]                         
We have not been asked to determine whether a
general warrant is available to authorize the production of historical text
messages, or to consider the operation and validity of the production order
provision with respect to private communications.  Rather, the focus of this
appeal is on whether the general warrant power in s. 487.01 of the Code can
authorize the prospective production of future text messages from
a service provider’s computer.  That means that we need not address whether the
seizure of the text messages would constitute an interception if it were
authorized after the messages were stored. [16]                         
 Section 487.01  was enacted in 1993 as part of a
series of amendments to the Code in Bill C-109, S.C. 1993, c. 40.  The
Bill introduced a number of new judicial authorization provisions.  Section
487.01  was meant to make search warrants available for techniques or procedures
not specified in the Code.  It authorizes a judge to issue a
general warrant permitting a peace officer to “use any device or investigative
technique or procedure or do any thing described in the warrant that would, if
not authorized, constitute an unreasonable search or seizure”:            487.01 (1) A
provincial court judge, a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or
a judge as defined in section 552 may issue a warrant in writing authorizing a
peace officer to, subject to this section, use any device or investigative
technique or procedure or do any thing described in the warrant that would, if
not authorized, constitute an unreasonable search or seizure in respect of a
person or a person’s property if  (a)
the judge is satisfied by information on oath in writing that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament
has been or will be committed and that information concerning the offence will
be obtained through the use of the technique, procedure or device or the doing
of the thing;  (b)
the judge is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration
of justice to issue the warrant; and  (c)
there is no other provision in this or any other Act of Parliament that
would provide for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique,
procedure or device to be used or the thing to be done.  [17]                         
The key to this case lies in whether s.
487.01(1)(c) applies, namely, whether another provision would provide
for the authorization sought in this case.  In R. v. Ha, 2009 ONCA 340,
96 O.R. (3d) 751, MacPherson J.A. observed that the focus of the s. 487.01(1)(c)
analysis is “on the particular investigative technique or procedure that the
police seek to utilize and whether it can properly be authorized by another
provision in the Code or any other federal statute” (at para. 43; see also R.
v. Brand, 2008 BCCA 94, 229 C.C.C. (3d) 443 (sub nom. R. v. Ford),
at para. 50). [18]                         
Viewed contextually, therefore, s. 487.01(1)(c)
stipulates that the general warrant power is residual and resort to it
is precluded where judicial approval for the proposed technique,
procedure or device or the “doing of the thing” is available under the Code or
another federal statute. [19]                         
In other words, s. 487.01(1)(c)  should
be broadly construed to ensure that the general warrant is not used
presumptively. This is to prevent the circumvention of more specific or
rigorous pre-authorization requirements for warrants (S. C. Hutchison et al., Search
and Seizure Law in Canada (loose-leaf), at p. 16-40.3). [20]                         
 This means that the Crown is only entitled to a
general warrant where it can show that no other provision would provide for a
warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique, including, as
Moldaver J. observes, provisions that authorize techniques which are
substantively equivalent to the technique proposed by the police in a given
case.  The investigative technique authorized by the general warrant in this
case allowed the police to obtain prospective production of future text
messages on a daily basis for a two-week period directly from a service
provider.  The essence of the Crown’s argument was that no other provision was
available because the retrieval of stored messages was not an interception.  If
the Crown is right, they are entitled to a general warrant.  If they are wrong,
the general warrant must be quashed.  Either way, it is impossible to avoid an
examination of whether the technique the police sought to employ was something
that required a Part VI authorization. [21]                         
The Crown never conceded that these were
circumstances in which a choice was available under either a general warrant or
a Part VI authorization.  Instead, it argued that the requirement in s.
487.01(1)(c) was satisfied because no other provision was available to
authorize the prospective production of future text messages stored on a
service provider’s computer, maintaining that Part VI did not apply because the
retrieval of messages from computer storage is not an “intercept”.  That is the
central issue that is engaged in this case. [22]                         
This requires us to determine whether Part VI
applies to the prospective, and in this case continuous, production of text
messages sought by the police, or whether the fact that the messages are stored
in Telus’ computer means that their retrieval by the police is not an
“intercept”.  If Part VI does apply, then in accordance with s. 487.01(1)(c),
a general warrant is not available. [23]                         
Section 184(1) makes it an indictable offence to
“wilfully intercep[t] a private communication” by use of a device.  Part VI provides
a comprehensive scheme for the authorization of these interceptions.  It was
enacted in 1974 through the Protection of Privacy Act, S.C. 1973-74, c.
50, which amended the Code to add Part IV.1 (now Part VI) entitled
“Invasion of Privacy”.  The goal of the legislation was explained by Zuber J.A.
in R. v. Welsh an Iannuzzi (No. 6) (1977), 32 C.C.C. (2d) 363 (Ont.
C.A.) as follows: It is apparent that in enacting the Protection
of Privacy Act, 1973-74 (Can.), c. 50, . . . Parliament had two
objectives.  The first was to protect private communications by prohibiting
interception and to render inadmissible evidence obtained in violation of the
statute.  The second objective, which balances the first, was to recognize the
need to allow the appropriate authorities, subject to specific controls, to
intercept private communications in the investigation of serious crime, and to
adduce the evidence thus obtained. [p. 369] [24]                         
Because the purpose of Part VI is to restrict
the ability of the police to obtain and disclose private communications, it is
drafted broadly to ensure the necessary protection.  In Lyons v. The Queen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 633, this Court explained this breadth as follows: This is broad legislation embracing in
these extensive provisions the use of a wide range of
radio, telephone, optical and acoustical devices for listening to and recording
private communications as broadly defined. It is not “wiretapping” legislation,
nor eavesdropping legislation, nor radio regulation.  It is the regulation of
all these things and “any other device” that may be used to intercept
intelligence reasonably expected by the originator not to be intercepted by
anyone other than the intended recipient. [p. 664] [25]                         
The definition of “intercept” in s. 183 includes
“listen to, record or acquire a communication or acquire the substance, meaning
or purport thereof”.  Consistent with the broad scope of Part VI, this
definition is not exhaustive and focuses on the state acquisition of
informational content — the substance, meaning, or purport — of the private
communication.  It is not just the communication itself that is protected, but
any derivative of that communication that would convey its substance or
meaning. “[P]rivate communication” is defined in s. 183 as follows: . . . any oral
communication, or any telecommunication, that is made by an originator who is
in Canada or is intended by the originator to be received by a person who is in
Canada and that is made under circumstances in which it is reasonable for the
originator to expect that it will not be intercepted by any person other than
the person intended by the originator to receive it,
and includes any radio-based telephone communication that is treated
electronically or otherwise for the purpose of preventing intelligible
reception by any person other than the person intended by the originator to
receive it;  [26]                         
This definition focuses on the individual’s
reasonable expectation of privacy in the communication. The word
“telecommunication” used in this definition is in turn defined in the Interpretation
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21, s. 35 , amended in 1993 (S.C. 1993, c. 38, s. 87 )
as “the emission, transmission or reception of signs, signals, writing, images,
sounds or intelligence of any nature by any wire, cable, radio, optical or
other electromagnetic system, or by any similar technical system”. [27]                         
Sections 185 and 186 of the Code set out
the general requirements governing the application for an authorization under
Part VI.  Compared with other search and seizure and warrant provisions in the Code,
the provisions in Part VI contain more stringent requirements to safeguard
privacy interests.  Before granting an authorization under Part VI, a judge
must be satisfied that the authorization is in the best interests of the
administration of justice. [28]                         
A judge must also be satisfied, in accordance
with s. 186(1)(b), “that other investigative procedures have been tried
and have failed, other investigative procedures are unlikely to succeed or the
urgency of the matter is such that it would be impractical to carry out the
investigation of the offence using only other investigative procedures”.  In R.
v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 992, this Court clarified
that this criterion required the police to show that there was “no other
reasonable alternative method of investigation in the circumstances of the
particular criminal inquiry” (para. 29). [29]                         
 Part VI authorizations must also state the
identity of persons whose private communications will be intercepted, the place
at which they are intercepted, and the manner of the interception.  They are
required to contain such conditions as the judge considers advisable and will
only be valid for a limited period of time not to exceed 60 days.  Finally, a
written application by the Attorney General, Minister of Public Safety or a
designated agent is required. [30]                         
In addition to these prerequisites for
authorization, Part VI contains a number of notice requirements.  Section 196
requires that notice be given to targets of interceptions authorized under s.
186 within a certain timeframe.  Under s. 189, an accused must be given notice
of any interception intended to be produced in evidence.  In addition, s. 195
requires the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness or the
Attorney General for each province to produce an annual report with respect to
the use of Part VI authorizations.  In R. v. Tse, 2012 SCC
16, [2012] 1 S.C.R. 531, this Court found that a notice requirement provides
transparency and serves as a further check on the power of police to perform
highly intrusive interceptions of private communications.  The Court therefore
concluded that a notice provision was necessary to meet the minimal
constitutional standards of s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms . [31]                         
These safeguards illuminate Parliament’s
intention that a higher degree of protection be available for private
communications.  Part VI has broad application to a number of technologies and
includes more rigorous safeguards than other warrant provisions in the Code. 
In considering whether the prospective, daily production of future text
messages stored in Telus’ computer falls within Part VI, therefore, we must
take this overall objective into account. [32]                         
As all parties acknowledged, it is clear that
text messages qualify as telecommunications under the definition in the Interpretation
Act .  They also acknowledged that these messages, like voice
communications, are made under circumstances that attract a reasonable
expectation of privacy and therefore constitute “private communication” within
the meaning of s. 183 .  Similarly, there is no question that the computer used
by Telus would qualify as “any device” under the definitions in s. 183 . [33]                         
The issue then is how to define “intercept” in
Part VI.  The interpretation should be informed not only by the purposes of
Part VI, but also by the rights enshrined in s. 8  of the Charter , which
in turn must remain aligned with technological developments.  In R. v. Wong,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 36, this Court found that “the broad and general right to
be secure from unreasonable search and seizure guaranteed by s. 8  [of the Charter ]
is meant to keep pace with technological development, and, accordingly, to
ensure that we are ever protected against unauthorized intrusions upon our
privacy by the agents of the state, whatever technical form the means of
invasion may take” (p. 44).  A technical approach to “intercept” would
essentially render Part VI irrelevant to the protection of the right to privacy
in new, electronic and text-based communications technologies, which generate
and store copies of private communications as part of the transmission process. [34]                         
 It is true that unlike traditional voice
communication, a text message may or may not be delivered to its intended
recipient at the time it is created.  Receipt of the text message depends on
whether the phone is turned on, whether it is in range of a cell tower, and
whether the user has accessed the message.  If Telus is unable to deliver the
message, it remains in the transmission infrastructure for five days, at which
point Telus stops trying to complete delivery.  Furthermore, unlike voice
communications, text communications, by their nature, generate a record of the
communication which may easily be copied and stored.  A narrow or technical
definition of “intercept” that requires the act of interception to occur
simultaneously with the making of the communication itself is therefore
unhelpful in addressing new, text-based electronic communications. [35]                         
A narrow definition is also inconsistent with
the broad language and purpose of Part VI.  The statutory definition of
“intercept” in s. 183 includes three distinct parts — “listen to”, “record” or
“acquire”.  In French, the definition includes “de prendre . . .
connaissance”.  Rather than limit the definition of “intercept” to its
narrow, technical definition, the statutory definition broadens the concept of
interception.  There is no requirement in the Code definition of
“intercept” that the interception of a private communication be simultaneous or
contemporaneous with the making of the communication itself.  If Parliament
intended to include such a requirement, it would have included it in the
definition of “intercept”.  Instead, it chose to adopt a wider definition,
consistent with Part VI’s purpose to offer broad protection for private
communications from unauthorized interference by the state. [36]                         
The interpretation of “intercept a private
communication” must, therefore, focus on the acquisition of informational
content and the individual’s expectation of privacy at the time the
communication was made. In my view, to the extent that there may be any
temporal element inherent in the technical meaning of intercept, it should not
trump Parliament’s intention in Part VI to protect an individual’s right to
privacy in his or her communications. [37]                         
The use of the word “intercept” implies that the
private communication is acquired in the course of the communication process. 
In my view, the process encompasses all activities of the service provider
which are required for, or incidental to, the provision of the communications
service.  Acquiring the substance of a private communication from a computer
maintained by a telecommunications service provider would, as a result, be
included in that process. [38]                         
Focusing on the fact that the Code draws
a distinction between the interception of private communications and the
disclosure of those communications, fails to provide the intended protection
under Part VI.   On the contrary, it allows technological differences in Telus’
transmission process to defeat Parliament’s intended protection of private
communications from state interference. [39]                         
The reality of modern communication technologies
is that electronic private communications, such as text messages, are often
simultaneously in transit and in some form of computer storage by the
service provider.  As a result, the same private communication exists in more
than one place and may therefore be acquired by the state from the transmission
stream and from computer storage.  In other words, the same private
communication may be “intercepted” by police more than once from different
sources. [40]                         
When Telus copies messages to its computer
database, several steps in the transmission process have yet to occur.  The
production schedule required by the general warrant in this case means that the
police likely obtained stored copies of some text messages before they were
even received by the intended recipient.  Had the police acquired the same
private communications directly from the transmission stream, instead of from
the stored copies, the Crown concedes that a Part VI authorization would be
required.  The level of protection should not depend on whether the state
acquires a copy of the private communication that is being transmitted or a
copy that is in storage by a service provider as part of the communications
process.  Parliament drafted Part VI broadly to ensure that private
communications were protected across a number of technological platforms (see Lyons). [41]                         
The communication process used by a third-party
service provider should not defeat Parliament’s intended protection for private
communications.  As the interveners Canadian Civil Liberties Association and
Samuelson-Glushko Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic point out
in their factums, this Court has recognized in other contexts that
telecommunications service providers act merely as a third-party “conduit” for
the transmission of private communications and ought to be able to provide
services without having a legal effect on the nature (or, in this case, the
protection) of these communications (Society of Composers, Authors and Music
Publishers of Canada v. Canadian Assn. of Internet Providers, 2004
SCC 45, [2004] 2 S.C.R. 427, at paras. 100-101). [42]                         
Part VI recognizes the dangers inherent in
permitting access to the future private communications of a potentially unlimited
number of people over a lengthy period of time.  Those are the very risks
inherent in the investigative technique in this case.  An authorization that
permits police to obtain the prospective production of future
text messages over a two-week period directly from the communications process
used by the service provider is precisely what Part VI was intended to
protect.  In my view, the investigative technique in this case therefore
qualifies as “intercepting private communications” under Part VI. [43]                         
An interpretation of “intercept a private
communication” that includes the investigative technique used by police in this
case finds support in the statutory definition of “intercept” in s. 183.  The
definition includes the simple acquisition of a communication.  It does not
require the acquisition of the communication itself; rather, the acquisition of
the “substance, meaning or purport” of the communication is sufficient. 
Moreover, this interpretation is harmonious with the scheme and objectives of
Part VI, which is drafted broadly in order to regulate and control a wide
variety of technological invasions of privacy.  Finally, it strikes the
appropriate balance between the serious invasion of privacy that results from
the surreptitious acquisition of private communications and the evolving needs
of effective law enforcement. [44]                         
The police gained a substantial advantage by
proceeding with a general warrant.  They did not need the Attorney General’s
request for an authorization; they did not need to show that other
investigative procedures had been tried and failed; they did not need to
provide any notice to the target individuals; and they did not need to identify
which other individuals’ private communications may be acquired in the course
of the search. [45]                         
The general warrant in this case purported to
authorize an investigative technique contemplated by a wiretap authorization
under Part VI, namely, it allowed the police to obtain prospective production
of future private communications from a computer maintained by a service
provider as part of its communications process.  Because Part VI applied, a
general warrant under s. 487.01  was unavailable. [46]                         
Accordingly, I would allow the appeal and quash
the general warrant and related assistance order.                     The
reasons of Moldaver and Karakatsanis were delivered by                     Moldaver J. — I.       Introduction [47]                         
Where a police investigative technique intrudes
on an individual’s reasonable expectation of privacy, it falls to Parliament to
provide for specific legislative authorization of the technique.  That is the
general rule.  The so-called “general warrant” provision of the Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , operates as an exception to the rule,
allowing the police to seek judicial authorization of a proposed investigative
technique that is not specifically authorized by statute.  Although several
issues have been raised in this appeal, the dispositive one, in my view, is
whether a general warrant may properly issue where the substance of an
investigative technique, if not its precise form, is addressed by an existing
legislative provision. [48]                         
I have had the benefit of reading the reasons of
my colleague Abella J. and, although we approach the matter differently, I
share her conclusion that the general warrant in this case is invalid.  My
colleague’s reasons focus on the definition of “intercept” in s. 183 of the Code
and whether the search in this case fell within that definition for purposes of
Part VI.  I do not think it necessary to answer those questions because in my
view the result in this case is driven by the failure of the authorities to
establish one of the prerequisites needed to obtain a general warrant. [49]                         
On the facts of this case, when one cuts through
form and looks at the substance of the search that the police sought to conduct,
what we are left with is the equivalent of a Part VI intercept.  As such, the
police could and, for reasons I will explain, should have sought an
authorization under Part VI, which thereby precludes the issuance of a general
warrant.  I would accordingly join my colleague Abella J. in allowing the
appeal and quashing the general warrant, as well as the related assistance
order. II.     Overview of Issues on Appeal [50]                         
The parties in this appeal framed their
principal arguments around the question of whether the investigative technique
authorized by the general warrant falls within the definition of “intercept” in
s. 183 of the Code.  The parties agree that if what occurred here was an
intercept, the general warrant could not issue, as it would fail the “no other
provision” requirement in s. 487.01(1)(c) of the Code.  They, of
course, disagree as to whether this technique was an intercept. [51]                         
My colleague Abella J. and I agree that the
Crown is entitled to a general warrant only where it can show that “no other provision” would provide for
the technique, including a substantively equivalent technique, proposed by the
police in a given case.  We also agree on the result in this case.  We
part company, however, on the path to that result. [52]                         
My colleague takes the position that the investigative technique
here was an intercept within the meaning of s. 183, and would thereby
hold the general warrant invalid.  I prefer, instead, to resolve this case on
the basis that the investigative technique here was substantively equivalent
to an intercept and, in light of that conclusion, would hold the general
warrant invalid. [53]                         
I choose a different path because I am reluctant to use this case
as a vehicle to undertake an analysis of what constitutes an intercept for
purposes of Part VI.  In approaching the matter as I have, I am not unmindful
of the need to address the risks to privacy posed by the digital age.  The task
of adapting laws that were a product of the 1970s to a world of smartphones and
social networks is a challenging and profoundly important one.  But the
resolution of whether what occurred here was or was not, strictly speaking, an
intercept is unnecessary, in my view, because there is a narrower basis for
decision that guards against unforeseen and potentially far-reaching
consequences in this complex area of the law. III.    Analysis A.     The General Warrant Provision [54]                         
Parliament enacted the general warrant provision
in 1993 together with several new search powers as part of its response to a
series of decisions of this Court concerning electronic surveillance.  Section
487.01  was a specific response to R. v. Wong,
[1990] 3 S.C.R. 36.  That decision held that police video monitoring of
activities in a hotel room intruded on an individual’s reasonable expectation
of privacy and thus required prior judicial authorization pursuant to a valid
legislative provision.  Parliament’s response, in the form of s. 487.01 , went
beyond the authorization of video monitoring.  The provision states in relevant
part:            487.01
(1) [Information for general warrant] A provincial
court judge, a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as
defined in section 552 may issue a warrant in writing authorizing a peace
officer to, subject to this section, use any device or investigative technique or
procedure or do any thing described in the warrant that would, if not
authorized, constitute an unreasonable search or seizure in respect of a person
or a person’s property if  (a)
the judge is satisfied by information on oath in writing that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that an offence against this or any other Act of
Parliament has been or will be committed and that information concerning the
offence will be obtained through the use of the technique, procedure or device
or the doing of the thing;  (b)
the judge is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration
of justice to issue the warrant; and  (c)
there is no other provision in this or any other Act of Parliament that would
provide for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique,
procedure or device to be used or the thing to be done.             (2)
[Limitation] Nothing in subsection (1) shall be construed as to permit
interference with the bodily integrity of any person.             (3)
[Search or seizure to be reasonable] A warrant issued under subsection
(1) shall contain such terms and conditions as the judge considers advisable to
ensure that any search or seizure authorized by the warrant is reasonable in
the circumstances. [55]                         
The breadth of the general warrant — judicial
sanction to “use any device or investigative technique or procedure or do any
thing” that if not authorized would constitute an unreasonable search or
seizure — is kept in check by several prerequisites to its availability and
conditions on its operation.  Chief among them and what, in my view, lies at
the heart of this appeal is the requirement in s. 487.01(1)(c) that
“there is no other provision in this or any other Act of Parliament that
would provide for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique,
procedure or device to be used or the thing to be done”. [56]                         
The requirement that there be “no other
provision” that would provide for the search ensures that the general warrant
is used sparingly as a warrant of limited resort.  It guards against the
general warrant becoming “an easy back door for other techniques that have more
demanding pre-authorization requirements”: S. C. Hutchison et al., Search
and Seizure Law in Canada (loose-leaf), at p. 16-40.3.  Without ascribing
any improper motive to the police, that, I believe, is what occurred in this
case. B.     The General Warrant in This Case [57]                         
In a typical scenario where TELUS Communications
Company (“Telus”), the telecommunications service provider here, is served with
an authorization under Part VI, the company installs a device that
automatically copies all activity for the identified phone number, including
all text messages, and automatically delivers such data to a police “wire
room”.  The Crown does not dispute that the acquisition of an individual’s text
messages in this manner constitutes a Part VI intercept, nor is there any
dispute that a text message can constitute a “private communication” within the
meaning of Part VI. [58]                         
As a matter of corporate practice, however,
Telus routinely stores a copy of a subscriber’s incoming and outgoing text
messages on its databases for at least 30 days.  Though Telus is unique among
major telecommunications service providers in making such copies, it is legally
entitled to do so pursuant to an exception in s. 184(2) of the Code.  The
company says it intercepts its subscribers’ messages in this manner to aid in
troubleshooting customer problems. [59]                         
The fact that Telus stores its subscribers’ text
messages in this manner is significant — indeed, it is the reason this appeal
exists — because it creates an investigative resource for the authorities.  As
Det. Sgt. Prosser of the Ontario Provincial Police said in his affidavit filed
with this Court, Telus’s practice “provides investigators with another option
by which to access the content of these messages” (A.R., at p. 115).  Relying
on conventional search warrants (s. 487) or production orders (s. 487.012), the
police have obtained copies of the messages stored in Telus’s databases. [60]                         
In sum, prior to this case, with only a handful
of exceptions, all police searches that sought copies of Telus subscribers’
text messages were authorized either under Part VI or by a conventional search
warrant or production order.  The Crown in its factum puts the matter
succinctly: police practice with respect to Telus subscribers has been to seek
either “search warrants or production orders (for historic messages) or
wiretap authorizations (for future messages)” (R.F., at para. 10
(emphasis added)). [61]                         
The general warrant in this case thus represents
a third option.  In form, it resembles a production order because it authorizes
police access to text messages already stored in Telus’s database.  And
yet, in substance, it resembles a Part VI authorization, because it prospectively
authorizes police access to future private communications on a continual
basis over a sustained period of time. [62]                         
The inherent hybridity of the general warrant in
this case underscores the need for an inquiry into whether the “no other
provision” test is satisfied to assess the substance of the police
investigative technique, not merely its formal trappings.  But that is not what
happened here. C.     Was the General Warrant Validly Issued? [63]                         
The reviewing judge looked to binding authority
from the Ontario Court of Appeal for guidance.  In R. v. Ha, 2009 ONCA
340, 96 O.R. (3d) 751, MacPherson J.A. observed: The focus in the s. 487.01(1)(c)
analysis is not on whether there are other investigative techniques that might
accomplish the purported investigative purposes or goals of the police; rather,
the focus is on the particular investigative technique or procedure that the
police seek to utilize and whether it can properly be authorized by another
provision in the Code or any other federal statute.  [Emphasis added; para.
43.] [64]                         
On the strength of Ha, the reviewing
judge concluded that there was no other provision in the Code or any
other statute that would authorize the investigative technique in this case —
namely the “prospective and daily production of text messages” (2011 ONSC 1143,
105 O.R. (3d) 411, at para. 75).  Though the police “could have gone to a
justice of the peace every day for the 14 days covered by the General Warrant
and obtained the same records using conventional warrants”, the general warrant
could issue precisely because it provided a single, comprehensive authorization
for the search that was otherwise unanticipated by Parliament (para. 70).[1] [65]                         
The analysis is, in my respectful view,
incomplete.  It is self-evident that the police could have sought a Part
VI authorization and achieved their investigative objective.  Crown counsel
recognized this during the hearing of this appeal: I’m not sure that they really thought this through at
the end of the day because if what the police are doing here is Part VI, well,
you know, presumably, the police could go back to the issuing justice who was a
Superior Court judge and say:  Okay.  Just issue this as a Part VI
authorization.  [Emphasis added; transcript, at p. 81.] On the record before us,
the police have offered no explanation as to why they could not have sought a
Part VI authorization.  We do know that but for Telus’s practice of routinely
storing subscribers’ messages, the police would have had no option other than
to obtain such an authorization since what they were seeking was prospective
authorization for the daily production of future text messages.  Indeed, that is
what they do — ostensibly without any trouble — with the other major
telecommunications service providers, such as Rogers and Bell, who do not store
text messages as Telus does. [66]                         
Nonetheless, the question remains whether the
law requires that the police should have sought such an authorization. 
At the hearing of this appeal, Crown counsel argued that Ha conclusively
resolves the issue in the negative:            . . . as
the Ontario Court of Appeal pointed out in Ha, the test for determining
whether a general warrant can be issued focuses on the nature of the
investigative technique in question, not the nature of the investigative
objective.             The
search of the Telus database for future records is a technique that’s quite
distinct from the seizure of a telecommunication.   I mean, mechanically . . .
the police were doing different things. . . . [I]t was a completely different
process.  [Emphasis added; transcript, at pp. 94-95.] [67]                         
With respect, I cannot agree.  To adopt Ha in
this way is to turn a blind eye to the substance of the search — and to common
sense.  What the police did in this case — securing prospective authorization
for the delivery of future private communications on a continual,
if not continuous, basis over a sustained period of time — was substantively
equivalent to what they would have done pursuant to a Part VI authorization. 
It was thus, at a minimum, tantamount to an intercept. [68]                         
I accept the Crown’s contention that, as a
technical matter, what occurred here was different from what would occur
pursuant to a Part VI authorization.  I do not accept, however, that that fact
is determinative in light of the identical privacy interests at stake.  But for
the 24-hour time delay, the investigative techniques were the same.  Indeed, if
the Crown’s logic is to be accepted, a general warrant could still issue had
the delay been 24 minutes or, for that matter, 24 seconds.[2]  To draw a line between
what was authorized here and a Part VI intercept on the basis of such a theory
is to draw “an artificial and unrealistic distinction”: Lyons v. The Queen,
[1984] 2 S.C.R. 633, at p. 643. [69]                         
As a result, the facts of the case at hand are
distinguishable from Ha.  Both Ha and R. v. Brand,
2008 BCCA 94, 229 C.C.C. (3d) 443 (sub nom. R. v. Ford), the other
appellate authority interpreting s. 487.01 , concerned unsuccessful attempts by
the target of a search to invalidate a general warrant on the basis that the
police could have sought multiple conventional warrants.  In Ha, the
police were investigating a suspected drug lab.  They sought the flexibility to
enter the property covertly at any time within a two-month period and to engage
in a broad range of evidence gathering activities therein, including
photographing, taking chemical samples, and fingerprinting items.  Likewise, in
Brand, the police were investigating a large marihuana grow operation
and needed covert access to multiple properties in order to verify the presence
of drugs without compromising other aspects of their investigation.  Fundamentally,
in each instance, the request for covert access and temporal flexibility made
clear that the substance of the investigative techniques for which
authorization was sought differed from what could be authorized under a
conventional warrant. [70]                         
Explaining why the search sanctioned by the
general warrant in Ha was thus substantively different from one
involving multiple conventional warrants, MacPherson J.A. said: In this case, the police sought to
obtain authorization to conduct an unlimited number of covert entries and
searches on private property over a two-month period.  Except
for s. 487.01 of the Code, there is “no other provision in . . . any other Act
of Parliament” that could potentially accomplish this goal.  [para. 43] Those are not our facts. 
Here, the police sought, in the reviewing judge’s words, authorization for “the
investigative technique or procedure of prospective and daily production of
text messages” (para. 75). The simple fact is that there is a provision
that substantively provides for this technique.  It is known as Part VI. [71]                         
In emphasizing the importance of looking beyond
the form of a search technique to uncover its true substance, a further point
bears noting.  In both Ha and Brand, if the police wanted the
evidence, they had a choice between a series of conventional warrants or a
general warrant.  If the police sought a general warrant, they would have to
meet the requirements of s. 487.01  which are deliberately stricter than those
for a conventional warrant.  For example, the requirements that a general
warrant can only be issued by a judge, not a justice of the peace, and that
issuance must be in the best interests of justice themselves serve to ensure
that the general warrant remains a rearguard warrant of limited resort. [72]                         
In other words, by dint of its more stringent
requirements, the general warrant contains a disincentive to its everyday use. 
In Ha and Brand, where the only alternative was a series of
conventional warrants, reliance on a general warrant did not provide the police
with an easy way out from the rigours of a more demanding legislative
authorization — the general warrant was the more demanding legislative
authorization.  Thus, in these cases, it is harder to see how the general
warrant provision might be misused. [73]                         
In this case, by contrast, the police actually
had a choice between a Part VI authorization and a general warrant.[3]  The incentives before
the police were thus markedly different than they were in Ha.  Though
both the general warrant and the Part VI provisions require that the issuing
judge be satisfied that the order is in the best interests of justice, Part VI
alone imposes several further requirements in the interest of protecting the
right to privacy: 1.                 
An authorization under Part VI is available only
for certain offences (s. 183). 2.                 
Only individuals designated by the Minister of
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness or Attorney General may seek a Part VI
authorization (ss. 185(1) and 186(6)). 3.                 
A Part VI authorization is available only where
“other investigative procedures have been tried and have failed, other
investigative procedures are unlikely to succeed or the urgency of the matter
is such that it would be impractical to carry out the investigation of the
offence using only other investigative procedures” (s. 186(1)(b)). 4.                 
A Part VI authorization must state the identity
of persons whose private communications will be intercepted, the place at which
they are intercepted, and the manner of the interception (s. 186(4)(c)). 5.                 
The Attorney General or Minister is required to
provide notice to the target of the authorization within a certain timeframe
(s. 196). 6.                 
The Minister is required to make an annual
report to Parliament concerning the number of applications made for
authorizations under Part VI and the details thereof (s. 195). [74]                         
Consequently, in this case, a narrow focus on
the mechanics of the search is to miss the forest for the trees.  The general
warrant must be analogized to a Part VI authorization if one is to appreciate
the actual incentives before the police.  A mechanistic interpretation of the
“no other provision” requirement cannot hold because, put bluntly, a general
warrant can prove easier to obtain than a Part VI authorization.  For that
reason, one can hardly fault the police for seeking a general warrant instead
of a Part VI authorization.  There was little to be lost (a delay in the
receipt of the data sought, which may well have had little consequence) and
much to be gained (no requirement to meet the onerous burdens Parliament has
chosen to impose under Part VI). [75]                         
 The facts suggest that this is precisely what
has happened as a consequence of Telus’s unsuccessful challenge of the warrant
in this case.  The affidavit of Det. Sgt. Prosser states that the police seek
general warrants only in those “rare circumstances” requiring access to text
messages “under a more immediate timeline” (A.R., at p. 116).  And yet, though
Telus received only six general warrants prior to 2010, counsel for the company
informed us at the hearing of this appeal that the number has since grown to
“several hundred” in light of the decision below (transcript, at p. 42). [76]                         
The logic that led to this predictable result
effectively nullifies the “no other provision” safeguard by inviting the police
to distinguish an investigative technique in some manner — any manner, even if
substantively immaterial — so as to avoid the rigours of a more demanding
legislative authorization such as Part VI.  Faced with the choice of having to
seek an authorization under Part VI and being able to proceed down a less
demanding path, it should be expected that the police will elect the latter —
and understandably so.  It follows, in my view, that the “no other provision”
test must be given interpretive teeth if it is to serve its purpose of ensuring
that general warrants do not become a means to avoid more onerous search
authorizations. D.     The Summary of the Approach to the “No Other Provision”
Requirement [77]                         
The test under s. 487.01(1)(c) must
consider the investigative technique that the police seek to utilize with an
eye to its actual substance and not merely its formal trappings.  The provision
must be interpreted so as to afford the police the flexibility Parliament
contemplated in creating the general warrant, while safeguarding against its misuse. 
As the facts of this case illustrate, there is a need for heightened judicial
scrutiny where Parliament has provided an authorization for an investigative
technique that is substantively equivalent to what the police seek but requires
more onerous pre-conditions. [78]                         
In so concluding, I note that in creating the
general warrant, Parliament did not erase every other search authorization from
the Code and leave it to judges to devise general warrants on an ad
hoc basis as they deem fit.  Courts must therefore be careful to fill a
legislative lacuna only where Parliament has actually failed to anticipate a
particular search authorization.  To do otherwise would chip away at the
foundation that shapes the respective roles of the courts and Parliament in our
system of criminal justice when individual rights and freedoms are at stake. [79]                         
That said, I recognize, as I must, that this
approach accepts a measure of uncertainty by tasking judges with the job of
inquiring into the substance of purportedly “new” investigative techniques.  In
my view, an interpretation that is faithful to the purpose of the “no other
provision” requirement in s. 487.01(1)(c) necessarily demands as much. 
Two practical guidelines, however, should serve to mitigate concerns that may
arise. [80]                         
First, it is important for the police to
appreciate that general warrants are not warrants of general application.  On
the contrary, they are to be used sparingly, when the investigative technique
they wish to employ is truly different in substance from an investigative
technique accounted for by another legislative provision.  Where uncertainty
exists, the police would do well to err on the side of caution.  They must know
— with certainty — that general warrants may not be used as a means to circumvent
other authorization provisions that are available but contain more onerous preconditions. [81]                         
Second, when judges are faced with an
application for a general warrant where the investigative technique, though not
identical, comes close in substance to an investigative technique covered by
another provision for which more rigorous standards apply, they should proceed
with extra caution.  At a minimum, judges should look closely at the material
filed and satisfy themselves that the request for a general warrant is genuine
and not merely a device to escape the rigours of another authorization
provision.  Where careful scrutiny establishes that a proposed investigative
technique, although similar, has substantive differences from an
existing technique — not simply that it is similar in substance but different
in form — judges may grant the general warrant, but they should be mindful of
their obligation under s. 487.01(3) to impose terms and conditions that reflect
the nature of the privacy interest at stake.  In doing so, they may borrow as
appropriate from the conditions that Parliament has chosen to impose on the
substantively similar existing authorization. [82]                         
With these twin considerations in mind, and
despite Justice Cromwell’s concerns about certainty, to which I shall turn
momentarily, if the police proceed in good faith and the authorizing judge
proceeds with caution, it is unlikely that a general warrant issued in such
circumstances will be found to be defective at trial — and even less so that
evidence obtained pursuant to it will be excluded under s. 24(2)  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms . E.      The Competing Approach to the “No Other Provision”
Requirement [83]                         
I have had the opportunity to read the reasons
of Cromwell J., who is of the view that the “no other provision” test was
satisfied in this case because the investigative technique does not meet the
definition of “intercept” for purposes of Part VI.  He would accordingly
dismiss the appeal.  Insofar as the definition of an intercept is concerned, my
colleague’s analysis hinges on distinguishing between the interception of a
private communication (s. 184) and the subsequent disclosure of such
intercepted communications (s. 193).  As I have explained, I do not find it
necessary to reach that question in this appeal and, for that reason, do not
comment on this aspect of his reasons. [84]                         
My colleague does, however, take issue with my
interpretation of s. 487.01(1)(c) and its application to the case at
hand.  It is clear that my colleague and I have fundamentally different
understandings not only of the “no other provision” requirement, but of the
proper role of general warrants more broadly.  He has offered a careful
analysis that warrants a response. [85]                         
Justice Cromwell maintains that s. 487.01(1)(c)
should be construed literally and he rejects the purposive approach I have
taken, asserting that it “creates unnecessary uncertainty and distracts the
issuing judge from the question of whether the technique sought to be
authorized is inconsistent with the right to be free from unreasonable searches
and seizures” (para. 171).  According to my colleague, “predictability and
clarity in the law are particularly important in the area of judicial
pre-authorization of searches” (para. 172). [86]                         
Justice Cromwell further challenges my
construction of s. 487.01(1)(c) on the basis that it impermissibly adds
“investigative necessity” as a further precondition to the issuance of a
general warrant — that is, to obtain a general warrant, the police must be able
to show that there are no other ways by which they can achieve their
investigative objective.  My colleague maintains that Parliament did not see
fit to add such a requirement and it is impermissible for the Court to do so. [87]                         
I propose to address each of Justice Cromwell’s
concerns. [88]                         
First, for reasons that should be clear from the
above, I cannot accept my colleague’s literal construction of s. 487.01(1)(c). 
With respect, such an interpretation strips the provision of any meaning and
renders it all but valueless.  Writing in 1996, soon after the general warrant
was introduced, the authors of a leading treatise on this subject predicted: Of the four preconditions [to a general
warrant] the most difficult for investigators will be [the “no other
provision” requirement], a novel provision intended to prevent this
residual warrant power from becoming an easy back door for other techniques
that have more demanding pre-authorization requirements. [Emphasis added;
Hutchison et al., at p. 16-40.3.] My colleague’s approach,
however, would reduce that provision to a paper tiger. [89]                         
On my colleague’s literal interpretation of s.
487.01(1)(c), any deviation — no matter how slight or insignificant —
that takes an investigative technique outside the four corners of another
authorization provision in the Code or an Act of Parliament is
sufficient to satisfy the “no other provision” requirement.  Thus, in this
case, had the police sought a general warrant requiring Telus to provide copies
of all stored text messages using a 24-second delay (as opposed to a 24-hour
delay), I gather that my colleague would hold that the “no other provision”
requirement had been met.  Likewise, on my colleague’s construction, had the
police sought a general warrant requiring both the contemporaneous
interception of text messages and a dial number recorder warrant, it
would appear that this too would suffice to satisfy the “no other provision”
requirement. [90]                         
If, as my colleague reasons, Parliament truly
intended that the police could satisfy the “no other provision” requirement by
coming up with a hook — any hook — that would take the investigative technique
outside the four corners of an existing authorization, then we are left to
conclude that Parliament chose to enact an absurdity.  I cannot accept any such
conclusion. [91]                         
Moreover, my colleague’s focus on the breadth of
the general warrant provision — breadth that I readily accept — conflates the
distinct questions of what the power can do, assuming it is available,
with when it arises.  As I have already observed, the general warrant
provision was not meant to erase every other authorization provision from the Code
and leave it to individual judges to fashion general warrants on an ad hoc
basis.  On the contrary, general warrants were created “to fill any
potential ‘gap’” (Schreiber v. Canada (Attorney General), [1997] 2
F.C. 176 (C.A.), at para. 86 (emphasis added), rev’d on other grounds, [1998] 1
S.C.R. 841), to provide a “legislative ‘failsafe’” that “supplement[s]
rather than supplant[s]” (S. C. Hutchison, Hutchison’s Canadian Search
Warrant Manual 2005 (2nd ed. 2004), at pp. 143 and 163 (emphasis added)),
to “fill an investigatory hiatus” (J. A. Fontana and D. Keeshan, The
Law of Search and Seizure in Canada (8th ed. 2010), at p. 459 (emphasis
added)), and to serve as a “residual power” (Hutchison et al., at p.
16-36 (emphasis added)). [92]                         
Though little was said of general warrants in
debates or committee hearings in 1993, we do know that Parliament did not get
out of the warrant business after enacting s. 487.01 .  Multiple new authorizations
have been created since then, including production orders in 2004. 
Existing authorizations have been amended to reflect evolving investigatory
needs and privacy concerns, including the provisions of Part VI.  And even
today Parliament continues to consider warrant proposals introduced — and
sometimes withdrawn — by the government.  See, e.g., Bill C-30, Protecting
Children from Internet Predators Act, 1st Sess., 41st Parl. (First Reading,
February 14, 2012); Bill C-55, Response to the Supreme Court of Canada
Decision in R. v. Tse Act , 1st Sess., 41st Parl. (First Reading, February
11, 2013). [93]                         
This history confirms that general warrants were
to play a modest role, affording the police a constitutionally sound path for
investigative techniques that Parliament had not addressed.  They were thus
rearguard warrants of limited resort, not frontline warrants of general
application.  They were meant to fill gaps, not create them. [94]                         
In sum, ensuring that general warrants are
confined to their limited role, in my view, is the true purpose of s.
487.01(1)(c).  Justice Cromwell’s literal construction of the provision
turns that purpose on its head by inviting the police to seek judicial sanction
of purportedly “new” investigative techniques on the basis of substantively
meaningless distinctions.  Manifestly, this approach puts a premium on form
over substance. [95]                         
My colleague takes comfort in the “best
interests” clause in s. 487.01(1)(b) as an adequate safeguard against
misuse of the general warrant.  Parliament, he contends, enacted para. (1)(b)
to deal alone with “potential abuses of the general warrant” (para. 190).  But
if that is so, one might ask why Parliament enacted s. 487.01(1)(c) in
the first place. [96]                         
No doubt, the “best interests” requirement
serves to prevent misuse of the general warrant.  But this provision should not
be interpreted as swallowing the distinct analytical question that the “no
other provision” test asks.  The role of each provision must be respected. 
First, under s. 487.01(1)(c), the question is whether there is any other
provision in the Code or other Act of Parliament that actually or
substantively provides for the investigative technique for which the police
seek authorization.  Second, under s. 487.01(1)(b), only if the first
question is answered in the negative does the inquiry shift to whether issuance
of the warrant is in the best interests of the administration of justice. [97]                         
The two hypotheticals I mentioned earlier
illustrate the point.  I would hope that a 24-second delay and a dial number
recorder warrant piggy-backed on an authorization for the contemporaneous
interception of text messages would meet my colleague’s definition of abuse. 
Why?  Because both investigative techniques would presumably be seen for what
they are — the substantive equivalent of a Part VI authorization. In the end,
all roads lead to Rome.  But the interpretation of s. 487.01(1)(c) that
I endorse gives some meaning and purpose to the provision; my colleague’s
interpretation strips it of both. [98]                         
Insofar as s. 487.01(1)(b) is concerned,
take, as just one example, the fact that the availability of a Part VI
authorization is limited to certain offences included under the definition of
“offence” in s. 183.  Should the police seek authorization for a search concerning
an offence not included within that definition, though the “no other provision”
test would be satisfied, it would fall to an analysis under para. (1)(b)
to guard against the issuance of a warrant that Parliament obviously
anticipated and deliberately excluded: S. Coughlan, “R. v. Ha:
Upholding General Warrants without Asking the Right Questions” (2009), 65 C.R.
(6th) 41, at pp. 41-43. [99]                         
Leaving that aside, my colleague provides no
guidance as to the type of conduct that he would classify as abusive, even as
he stresses that “judges asked to issue general warrants must be vigilant to
ensure that the right to be free against unreasonable searches and seizures is
fully given effect” (para. 189).  Presumably, he would leave it to individual
judges to decide the matter on a case-by-case basis under s. 487.01(1)(b),
thereby accepting his own form of uncertainty in the process.  As I have
acknowledged, the substantive approach to which I ascribe is not airtight — but
it is no more porous than the total reliance on the “best interests” test that
my colleague endorses. [100]                     
I turn then to my colleague’s second concern —
that I have impermissibly read investigative necessity, a concept peculiar to
Part VI, into s. 487.01 .  With respect, my approach to s. 487.01(1)(c)
has nothing to do with investigative necessity. [101]                     
The requirement under s. 186(1)(b) that a
Part VI authorization be necessary is concerned with a factual question. 
In requiring that other procedures “have been tried and have failed”, or that
they were “unlikely to succeed”, or that the “urgency of the matter is such
that it would be impractical” to use them, it is apparent that s. 186(1)(b)
is concerned with whether the factual circumstances of a particular case
necessitate the use of the powers granted under Part VI.  LeBel J. explained as
much for the Court in R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 992: Parliament and the courts have indeed
recognized that the interception of private communications is a serious matter,
to be considered only for the investigation of serious offences, in the
presence of probable grounds, and with a serious testing of the need for
electronic interception in the context of the particular investigation and its
objects . . . . There must be, practically speaking, no other reasonable
alternative method of investigation, in the circumstances of the particular
criminal inquiry. [Emphasis added; emphasis in original deleted; para. 29.] [102]                     
By contrast, the “no other provision” test asks
a legal question.  The inquiry is not whether alternative search
techniques have been exhausted, or whether they are unlikely to work, or
whether there is urgency in the circumstances.  Rather, the question is whether
the purportedly “new” investigative technique is actually or
substantively equivalent to a technique that is already authorized by law.  In
other words, under the “no other provision” test, the police are not asked to
show why an alternative authorization would not work on the facts of a
particular case, but rather why it is substantively different from what
Parliament has already provided.  Though the fact that an alternative
authorization will satisfy the investigative objective of the police may be
helpful as a factor in demonstrating its substantive equivalence, the inquiry
under the “no other provision” test remains focused on the latter point, not
the former.  If the police successfully make this showing, the inquiry under s.
487.01(1)(c) ends. [103]                     
Two final matters raised by Justice Cromwell’s
reasons warrant clarification. [104]                     
First, I do not conclude — nor should I be taken as suggesting —
that the police acted duplicitously or in bad faith in seeking the general
warrant in the case at hand.  There is no evidence to that effect and I have no
reason to believe that the police acted other than in good faith.  Put simply,
we do not know what motivated the police, nor is that the real issue. 
Ultimately, whether the police could or could not obtain a Part VI
authorization in this case is irrelevant insofar as the “no other provision”
requirement is concerned.  What does matter is that we have been provided with
nothing that would assist the police in meeting their burden to show that the
impugned technique was substantively different from an intercept. [105]                     
Second, the approach I endorse does not take investigative
flexibility off the table.  As Ha and Brand make clear, it is a
factor that a judge may consider in deciding whether an investigative technique
is substantively different such that a general warrant should issue.  But it is
not the only factor, and it must be approached with caution, particularly in
cases like the present one, where the issuance of a general warrant may be a
convenient way for the police to avoid the rigours of another search provision
that is substantively equivalent. IV.    Conclusion [106]                     
For these reasons, I am of the view that the
approach taken by the police in this case cannot be sanctioned.  The general
warrant is invalid because the investigative technique it authorized was
substantively equivalent to an intercept.  On the facts here, the general
warrant served only to provide a means to avoid the rigours of Part VI.  As the
Crown recognized, the police could have sought a Part VI authorization.  It is
enough to decide this appeal to conclude that they should have. [107]                     
That said, though we are not presented with such
a scenario, I would not go so far as to conclude that a general warrant can never
prospectively authorize the delivery of future private communications to the
police on a continual basis over a sustained period of time.  If an issuing
judge is satisfied that a particular investigative technique is substantively
different such that the provisions of Part VI, or of any other statute, do not
provide for the search, it would be open to the judge to issue the warrant,
assuming other requirements are satisfied.  The judge must, of course, conclude
that the warrant is in the “best interests of the administration of justice”
(s. 487.01(1)(b)) and the judge “shall” impose such terms and conditions
as necessary to ensure that the search is reasonable in the circumstances (s.
487.01(3)). [108]                     
I would allow the appeal and quash the general
warrant and related assistance order.                     The
reasons of McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J. were delivered by                     Cromwell J. (dissenting) — I.       Overview [109]                     
TELUS Communications Company (“Telus”) stores in
its databases a copy of all text messages sent by or to its subscribers. The
main question on this appeal is whether, when the police wished to obtain
copies of these stored messages, they required a wiretap authorization.  My
colleagues Abella J. and Moldaver J. would hold that they did, although for
markedly different reasons. I respectfully disagree. Like the Ontario Superior
Court judge whose decision is under appeal, my view is that a wiretap
authorization was not required. I would therefore dismiss the appeal. II.     Facts, Proceedings and Issues [110]                     
We are concerned in this case with particular investigative techniques
that may be authorized under the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , in
the context of the police wishing to have lawful access to the content of text
messages. Before turning to an analysis of the specific legal issues we
confront, I will set out some technical background about text messaging and the
range of investigative techniques that may be open to the police to gain access
to them.  I will then set out a brief account of the proceedings which bring
the case to us and the specific issues that we must resolve. A.     Telus’s
Text Messaging Service [111]                     
Text messaging, technically known as Short Message Service (“SMS”), is a
communication service using standardized communications protocols and mobile
telephone service networks to allow for the exchange of short text messages
from one mobile phone to another. [112]                     
Telus’s system of text message delivery is the same as that of other
telecommunications service providers. When a message is sent by a Telus
subscriber, it is transmitted to a Telus cell tower and then routed to a Mobile
Switching Centre (“MSC”) which is the computerized mainframe to the Telus
network. Within the MSC is Telus’s Short Message Service Centre (“SMSC”), which
uses routing engines to attempt to deliver the message to its destination. If
the recipient is also a Telus subscriber, the message will then be sent from
Telus’s SMSC to a cell tower which will forward the message to the recipient’s
phone. If the recipient is not a Telus subscriber, the message will pass from
Telus’s SMSC to the SMSC of the recipient’s provider and then through a cell
tower to the recipient’s phone. Where the destination phone is not available
(for example, because it is turned off or does not have service reception), the
text message remains in the Telus SMSC for up to five days. If the recipient
phone does not become available within that timeframe, the message is deleted.
The sender is not informed if a message is not delivered. [113]                     
Telus differs from most other providers in that it makes electronic
copies of the text messages that pass through its system and stores those
copies in one of four computer databases for at least 30 days. There are three
PSMS databases (namely, PSMS 1 (primary database), PSMS 2 (secondary database),
and PSMS 3 (tertiary database)) which receive messages within up to
approximately 15 minutes of the time they are sent. Which PSMS a message goes
to depends on the capacity of each database. All text messages received by a
Telus customer are copied, and the copy is forwarded to the databases when the
Telus subscriber’s phone receives the message from the Telus SMSC. When a Telus
subscriber sends a text message, it is copied when it arrives at the Telus SMSC
and the copy is stored in a database. Telus also maintains a fourth database,
named PECSMS, which receives messages between two to eight hours after they are
sent. At the time this case was heard at first instance, Telus expected that by
April 2011, PECSMS would be the sole repository for all text message content;
it would cease to use the PSMS databases. [114]                     
Telus copies text messages in order to facilitate troubleshooting and
dealing with customer complaints. As I will explain, Telus in doing this is
intercepting the messages and it has legal authority under the Code to
do so without a wiretap authorization. In my view, Telus’s stated purpose,
coupled with the fact that most other service providers in Ontario transmit
text messages without storing copies of them in this manner, makes it clear
that this additional step is not part of the communications process.   Unlike
e-mail messages, which must go through transient storage as they are
transmitted, storage of the type in issue here is not inherent to the
communication of text messages. B.     Text
Messages and Investigative Techniques [115]                     
The Code provides at least three potential ways for the police to
obtain authorization to acquire the content of stored text messages from Telus:
a production order, a general warrant and a so-called “wiretap” interception
authorization. The police in this case sought and obtained a general warrant as
a sort of enhanced production order, but Telus’s contention is that they were
required to seek a wiretap authorization. It will be helpful to describe these
three investigative techniques briefly, because the requirements of each are
somewhat interrelated.                     1.     Production Order [116]                     
The police may obtain the contents of stored text messages by means of a
production order under s. 487.012.  This provision allows a judge or justice to
order a person “to produce documents, or copies of them . . . or to prepare a document
based on documents or data already in existence and produce it” (s. 487.012(1)(a)
and (b)). The conditions for issuing a production order are similar to
those for a search warrant.  The issuing justice or judge must be satisfied by
information on oath that an offence has been or is suspected to have been
committed, that the documents or data will afford evidence respecting the
commission of the offence and that the person to whom the order is directed has
possession or control of the documents or data (s. 487.012(3)). In addition,
the person to whom the order is directed cannot be a person under investigation
(s. 487.012(1)). [117]                     
When presented with a production order, Telus is required to produce to
police, documents or data, or copies thereof, which it already has. In this
way, police obtain copies of text messages that have already been sent or
received by the subscribers and stored in Telus’s databases.   It has been
assumed and I will accept for the purposes of this case that a production order
cannot issue for documents or data not yet in existence (see ss. 487.012(1)(b)
and 487.012(3)(c)). [118]                     
I would add that s. 487.012, on its face, allows a judge or justice to
order production of text messages from a provider’s databases through a series
of daily authorizations. Section 487.012 sets relatively few limits on the
issuance of production orders. Unlike the other authorizations that concern us
here, it does not require a finding by the judge that the order is necessary to
the police investigation, nor does it require that a production order be in the
best interests of the administration of justice. Like the reviewing judge, I
accept that the police could have accessed the text messages stored in Telus’s
databases pursuant to such a series of orders.                     2.     General Warrant [119]                     
A judge may issue a general warrant, provided for in s. 487.01 , to
authorize a peace officer to “use any device or investigative technique or
procedure or do any thing described in the warrant that would, if not
authorized, constitute an unreasonable search or seizure”. The issuing judge
must be satisfied on the basis of information on oath that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that an offence has been or will be committed and that
information concerning the offence will be obtained through the use of the
technique for which the police seek authorization. [120]                     
Given the wide array of techniques that may be authorized under a
general warrant, Parliament has imposed additional, stringent conditions. 
First, unlike search warrants and production orders that may be issued by
judges or justices of the peace, general warrants may only be issued by judges
(s. 487.01(1)). Second, “the judge [must be] satisfied that it is in the best
interests of the administration of justice to issue the warrant” (s. 487.01(1)(b)).
Third, a general warrant must “contain such terms and conditions as the judge
considers advisable to ensure that the search or seizure authorized by the
warrant is reasonable in the circumstances” (s. 487.01(3)). Fourth, a general
warrant may be issued only if “there is no other provision . . . that would
provide for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique,
procedure or device to be used or the thing to be done” (s. 487.01(1)(c)).
In other words, a general warrant may not be used to authorize a “technique,
procedure or device to be used or . . . thing to be done” if there are other
provisions in the Code (or elsewhere) that could authorize it. (I will
refer to this as the “no other provision” requirement.)  Telus’s position is
that this requirement was not met because the wiretap provisions of the Code
provide for authorization of the technique which the police wished to use.                     3.     Wiretap Authorization [121]                     
An authorization to intercept private communications under Part VI of
the Code allows police to receive messages as they are being sent or
received by subscribers. These sorts of authorizations are subject to even more
strict conditions than those which apply to general warrants.  They may only be
issued by a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction or a judge as
defined in s. 552 of the Code.  The Attorney General, the Minister of
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness or a specially designated agent must
bring the application (s. 185(1)). There are specific and detailed provisions
relating to what must be placed before the judge.  The issuing judge must be
satisfied not only that it would be in the best interests of the administration
of justice to issue the authorization but also that the so-called
“investigative necessity” test has been met (s. 186(1)).  This means that the
judge must be satisfied that “other investigative procedures have been tried
and have failed, other investigative procedures are unlikely to succeed or the
urgency of the matter is such that it would be impractical to carry out the
investigation of the offence using only other investigative procedures” (s.
186(1)). The authorization may generally not be valid for more than 60 days (s.
186(4)(e)) and there are notice and reporting requirements (s. 196). [122]                     
Where a wiretap authorization has issued in relation to text messages,
Telus installs a device which automatically re-routes a copy of each text
message to a police wire room or listening post. When a text message is sent by
a Telus subscriber, the device re-routes a copy of the message when it arrives
at the Telus SMSC. When a text message is received by a Telus subscriber, the
wiretap device re-routes the copy when the subscriber’s phone receives the
message. With an intercept authorization, then, police have access to messages
“in real time” as they are being sent and received. C.     Proceedings [123]                     
The police sought and obtained a general warrant in this case. It
directed Telus to provide them with copies of the stored text messages to and
from two of its subscribers. The warrant required production of messages sent
and received before it was issued and, as well, of messages sent and received
roughly two weeks into the future.  Only the authorization in relation to the
future production is in issue here. For those future messages, Telus was
required by 2:00 p.m. each day Tuesday to Friday, to provide copies of all
messages that had been sent or received between 11:00 a.m. on the previous day
and 11:00 a.m. that same morning. On Mondays, Telus had to provide by 2:00 p.m.
copies of all messages that had been sent or received between 11:00 a.m. Friday
and 11:00 a.m. Monday. In addition, the general warrant required Telus to
provide the police with subscriber information for all of the telephone numbers
which exchanged texts with the two subscribers in question. Thus, this general
warrant was similar to a production order in that it required the production of
copies of stored messages and related subscriber information.  But it was
different from a production order in that it prospectively authorized the
production of these copies. [124]                     
Telus applied to quash the general warrant and its application was
mainly dismissed by Sproat J. (2011 ONSC 1143, 105 O.R. (3d) 411). Telus’s
principal ground for its challenge to the general warrant was that it
authorized an interception, a technique that could be authorized under Part VI
of the Code. It followed that a general warrant could not issue because
the “no other provision” requirement for a general warrant was not met. [125]                     
The reviewing judge rejected this contention.  He did not think that
what the police were authorized to do under the general warrant was an
interception. The police were asking for copies of the messages already stored
in Telus’s databases; they were not asking permission to “intercept private
communications”. In his view, the word “intercept” requires a real time capture
of otherwise transient communications, and this does not cover obtaining copies
of messages stored in a database. The wiretap provisions could only be used to
authorize interceptions and therefore would not apply to the investigative
technique used by the police in this case.  It followed, in the reviewing
judge’s opinion, that a general warrant could issue. [126]                     
Telus also advanced a number of other arguments which were rejected by
the reviewing judge. Telus submitted that police should have waited until the
end of the 14-day period covered by the general warrant and applied for a
single production order. The judge rejected Telus’s submission that police had
to wait so long to obtain the messages. He also found that while police could
have gone to the Justice of the Peace to obtain 14 separate production orders,
that would have been an impractical solution in the circumstances (para. 76).
He identified various drawbacks of requiring police to seek 14 authorizations
including the need to make repeated, daily applications potentially involving
different judicial officers and the inconvenience to Telus resulting from
having to deal with daily warrants requiring prompt response (para. 70). Sproat
J. concluded that a single general warrant that authorized police to receive
deliveries of messages by e-mail over roughly two weeks was appropriate because
“it would have been impractical for the police to obtain a daily warrant to
achieve the investigative objective of obtaining stored text messages for daily
review” (para. 76). [127]                     
The reviewing judge also dismissed Telus’s submission that issuing a
general warrant was not in the best interests of the administration of justice
(s. 487.01(1)(b)).  He held that the technique sought to be authorized
was not an interception. The judge concluded that “it is not open to the court
to decide on public policy grounds that the legislative scheme is inappropriate
and, under the guise of what is in the best interests of the administration of
justice, effectively expand the ambit of Part VI of the Criminal Code ”
(para. 80). The reviewing judge similarly rejected Telus’s submissions that the
general warrant was unwieldy and unworkable and imposed an undue burden. The
judge noted that similar concerns had been dismissed by this Court in Tele-Mobile
Co. v. Ontario, 2008 SCC 12, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 305, at para. 60. D.     Issues [128]                     
The principal point advanced by Telus on appeal is that the
investigative technique authorized by the general warrant was, in fact, an
interception of a private communication and therefore, by virtue of the “no
other provision” requirement in s. 487.01(1)(c), could only be
authorized under Part VI of the Code. My colleague Abella J. agrees with
this position while I, respectfully, do not.  My colleague Moldaver J., on the
other hand, does not find it necessary to address Telus’s principal submission. 
Instead, he would hold that even if the general warrant is not, strictly
speaking, an interception, it authorizes a technique that is substantively the
same as an interception and therefore should be excluded from authorization by
a general warrant by virtue of the “no other provision” requirement in s.
487.01(1)(c). Thus there are two issues: 1.      Is the
investigative technique authorized by the general warrant in this case an
interception which requires an authorization under Part VI of the Code? 2.      If the
seizure of the stored text messages is not an interception, is the issuance of
a general warrant nevertheless barred by the “no other provision” requirement
in s. 487.01(1)(c) because the technique sought to be authorized was
substantively the equivalent of a wiretap? III. 
  Analysis A.     First Issue: Is the Investigative Technique
Authorized by the General Warrant in This Case an Interception Which Requires an
Authorization Under Part VI of the Code? [129]                     
Telus submits that a general warrant could not issue in this case
because the technique for which police were seeking authorization was the
interception of private communications. The investigative technique of
interception of private communications can be authorized by a judge under s.
186 in Part VI of the Code.  Therefore, goes the argument, a general
warrant should not have been issued because the police did not meet the “no
other provision” requirement for a general warrant (s. 487.01(1)(c)). [130]                     
My colleague Abella J. substantially accepts this position. She would
hold that the general warrant purported to authorize an interception because it
allowed for “the prospective production of future text messages from a
service provider’s computer” (para. 15 (emphasis in original)). I understand
“the prospective production of future text messages” to mean that at the
time the warrant issues, at least some of the messages that are required to be
disclosed have not yet come into existence. In my respectful view, this general
warrant did not authorize an interception. [131]                     
 The investigative technique authorized by the general warrant in this
case was not an interception of private communications that could be authorized
by s. 186. The general warrant provides the police with copies from Telus of
stored messages which it had previously intercepted; police only obtain
disclosure of the messages when Telus compiles them from its databases and
sends them by e-mail.  Far from being a “technical” difference, the distinction
between disclosure of an intercepted communication and interception of a
communication is fundamental to both the purpose and the scheme of the wiretap
provisions.                     1.     The
Text, Context and Scheme of Part VI [132]                     
The question of whether what the police did under this general warrant
is an interception of a private communication is one of statutory
interpretation.  In my view, when we read the text of the statutory provisions
in its full context, it is clear that the general warrant does not authorize an
interception that requires a Part VI authorization. [133]                     
As a general rule, the police require an authorization to intercept
private communications by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical
or other device. The key words are thus “intercept” and “private communication”. [134]                     
The word “intercept” is given a non-exhaustive definition: it includes
“listen to, record or acquire a communication or acquire the substance, meaning
or purport thereof” (s. 183).  The definition of the term “private
communication” is linked to the concept of interception. Stripping the
definition of “private communication” down to its essentials, a private
communication is a communication made “under circumstances in which it is
reasonable for the originator to expect that it will not be intercepted by any
person other than the person intended by the originator to receive it” (s.
183). [135]                     
There is no doubt that the text message is a private communication. As
we shall see, there is also no doubt that text messages were intercepted by
Telus by means of an electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device.
The question is whether the police also intercepted those messages when Telus
turned over to them copies of sent and received messages previously intercepted
by Telus and stored in its databases. [136]                     
This brings me to a fuller examination of the purpose, text and scheme
of the wiretap provisions.  In my view, this analysis sheds the most light on
Parliament’s intent as to whether the technique adopted by the police in this
case constitutes an interception. The relevant provisions are set out in the
Appendix. [137]                     
Fundamental to both the purpose and to the scheme of the provisions is
the distinction between the interception of private communications and the
disclosure, use or retention of private communications that have been
intercepted. The purpose, text and scheme of Part VI show that the disclosure,
use or retention of intercepted private communications is distinct from the act
of interception itself. [138]                     
When the original wiretap provisions were introduced in 1973, the
explanatory note to the Bill outlined that one of its purposes was to create
three distinct types of offences. Two are relevant to this case. The first
offence relates to the interception of private communications by the use
of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device. The second
relates to the disclosure of private communications intercepted by the
use of any such device (Explanatory Note, Bill C-176, Protection of Privacy
Act, 1st Sess., 29th Parl. (S.C. 1973-74, c. 50)). While explanatory notes
are less authoritative than legislated statements of purpose, they nonetheless
provide some insight to legislative purpose: R. Sullivan, Sullivan on the
Construction of Statutes (5th ed. 2008), at p. 272. The explanatory note thus
shows that from its inception, one of the purposes of the legislation was to
distinguish between interceptions of private communications and the subsequent
and separate acts of disclosure or use of intercepted private communications.
This shows that Parliament understood interception and disclosure of
intercepted communications to be different things and therefore did not intend
to include disclosure or use of intercepted communications as part of the
concept of interception. [139]                     
An early commentator on the legislation noticed that this distinction
was fundamental to the statutory scheme.  David Watt (now Watt J.A. at the
Ontario Court of Appeal) considered whether or not replaying, rehearing, or
re-recording a previously recorded conversation constituted an “interception”
and concluded: Each replaying or rehearing of the original
interception may well constitute [a] use or disclosure of the intercepted
communication within the relevant prohibition but, use or disclosure is not,
perforce, interception, and to equate the two is to ignore the fundamental
statutory distinction between them. [Emphasis added.]  (Law of Electronic
Surveillance in Canada (1979), at p. 44) [140]                     
This distinction between interception and disclosure is reflected in the
structure of the offence-creating provisions in Part VI. In other words, the
text of the legislation precisely reflects the purpose set out in the
Explanatory Note. Part VI creates distinct offences reflecting the purpose set
out in the Explanatory Note. [141]                     
One offence, as noted, prohibits the interception of a private
communication. Section 184 of the Code provides that “[e]very one
who, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device,
willfully intercepts a private communication is guilty of an indictable
offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years”.  There
are a number of exceptions which I will review shortly. The other offence is
concerned with disclosure or use of intercepted information. Section 193
of the Code provides that it is an indictable offence to use or disclose
the content or existence of an intercepted communication without the consent of
the originator or the person intended to receive it.  Once again, there are
several exceptions which I will return to in a moment. The enactment of these
two distinct offences underlines that the act of interception and the act of
disclosure or use of intercepted communications are distinct acts which receive
distinct treatment under the statutory scheme. [142]                     
Turning to the first offence which deals with interceptions, there are
several “saving provisions” that exclude certain acts that would otherwise
constitute illegal interceptions.  These exclusions from liability are relevant
to understanding the statutory scheme because they distinguish interception
of communications from use or retention of intercepted communications.
It is not necessary to go into all of the details, but the exemptions from
criminal liability fall into three categories. It is not an offence to
intercept a private communication by means of an electro-magnetic, acoustic,
mechanical or other device if (i) the interception occurs with consent (s.
184(2)(a)); (ii) the interception is authorized in accordance with the
authorization provisions (s. 184(2)(b)); or (iii) the interception is
done for the purposes of providing a communications service or by a servant of
Her Majesty engaged in radio frequency spectrum management, or for the purposes
of managing or protecting a computer system (s. 184(2)(c), (d) and
(e)). [143]                     
The important point is that the third of these saving provisions — the
one in relation to computer system interceptions — makes a distinction between interception
on the one hand and use or retention of the intercepted
communications on the other.  Section 184(2)(e) excludes from the
offence the interception of a private communication passing through a computer
system by a person in control of it, provided that the interception is
reasonably necessary for managing the quality of service or protecting the
computer system.  This exception is qualified by s. 184(3), which relies on the
distinction between interception and use or retention. Under s.
184(3), a private communication intercepted by a person in control of a
computer system may only be used or retained if it is essential to
prevent harm to the system or if it is disclosed as provided for elsewhere in
the legislation. [144]                     
Thus, within the interception offence provisions, there is a distinction
made between interceptions and the use or retention of intercepted
communications. This suggests that Parliament viewed those acts as different
and distinct. [145]                     
That brings us to the second offence in the scheme, the offence
prohibiting the use or disclosure of previously intercepted private
communications. Under s. 193(1), it is an offence to use or disclose
the content or existence of a private communication that has been intercepted
without consent. Note that the use and disclosure offence relates to a “private
communication or any part thereof or the substance, meaning or purport
thereof”.  The existence of this offence as something distinct from the
interception offence shows that Parliament treated interception and disclosure
or use as distinct concepts. [146]                     
A comparison of the exemptions in ss. 184 and 193 reinforces my
position. The exemptions in s. 193 are far more permissive than those in s.
184, especially with respect to criminal investigations. Under s. 184, police
can only intercept communications if they are authorized to do so (s. 184(2)(b))
or in certain exceptional circumstances (s. 184.4). By contrast, s. 193
includes broad exemptions that permit disclosure of intercepted communications
in a range of circumstances including in the course of civil or criminal
proceedings (s. 193(2)(a)), and “in the course of or for the purpose of
any criminal investigation” (s. 193(2)(b)). Had Parliament understood
disclosure of intercepted private communications to be a form of interception,
one would expect substantial correspondence between the exemptions relating to
interception and those relating to disclosure. This is plainly not the case. [147]                     
This point is even further supported by a comparison of the particular
exemptions that apply to communication service providers, set out in ss. 193(2)
and 184(2).  Recall that providers of communication services are exempt from
the interception offence when they intercept communications for the purposes of
service delivery (s. 184(2)(c)). There is a comparable exemption for
service providers in relation to the disclosure offence. Section 193(2)(d)
exempts from criminal liability disclosures in the course of the operation of a
communications or computer system, provided that the disclosure is necessarily
incidental to the purposes which provide such operators with an exemption from
the interception offence. Thus, operators of communications systems such as
Telus are exempted in certain circumstances from both the interception offence
and the disclosure offence. This further underlines that Parliament viewed
these activities as distinct. [148]                     
To sum up, the legislative scheme creates two distinct offences, one
which deals with interception and the other with use or disclosure of a
communication. Fundamental to the scheme is the distinction between these
activities:  if disclosure or use of a private communication were an
interception of it, there would be no need to create the distinct disclosure or
use offence.  Similarly, the exemptions from criminal liability show that
Parliament distinguished between interception on one hand and retention, use
and disclosure on the other.                     2.     Did the General Warrant
Authorize an Interception of a Private Communication? [149]                     
How does this relate to what Telus and the police were doing under the
general warrant in this case?  To begin with Telus, no one disputes that it was
intercepting text messages when it copied them for its own systems
administration purposes. Similarly, it is agreed (and I will accept for the
purposes of this appeal) that Telus did not commit the offence of unlawful
interception. It performed interceptions for a permitted purpose which was
exempted from criminal liability. Section 184(2)(c) makes it clear that
it is not an offence for communication service providers such as Telus to
intercept private communications where that is necessary for, among other
things, quality control purposes.  Under s. 193(2)(d), they also, for
the same purposes, can disclose the intercepted communications without
incurring criminal liability. There is, therefore, no question for the purposes
of this appeal that Telus lawfully intercepted private communications. [150]                     
What about the actions of the police under the general warrant?  They
sought disclosure from Telus of information that it had already lawfully
intercepted. The general warrant did not require Telus to intercept
communications, but to provide copies of communications that it had previously
intercepted for its own lawful purposes. There is no suggestion that Telus was
carrying out these interceptions at the bidding of the police; interceptions
carried out for police purposes would clearly require authorizations as they
would not fall within the exempt purposes under s. 184(2)(c). However,
as the scheme of the legislation makes clear, disclosure or use of a lawfully
intercepted communication is not an interception.  As discussed in detail
earlier, Part VI of the Code makes a fundamental distinction between, on
one hand, intercepting — i.e. listening to, recording or acquiring a
communication or the substance, meaning or purport thereof — and, on the other,
using or disclosing a private communication or the substance, meaning or
purport thereof or disclosing the existence of the communication. This
distinction is recognized by the purposes of the provisions, by the creation of
distinct offences for unlawful interception and unlawful use or disclosure and
by the saving provisions which apply to the interception and disclosure
offences. [151]                     
In my view, it is inconsistent with the fundamental distinction made by
the legislation to conclude that the police were intercepting private
communications when Telus provided them with copies of previously intercepted
and stored text messages.                     3.      Abella J.’s Reasons [152]                     
That brings me to Abella J.’s reasons. She would hold that the general
warrant purported to authorize an interception because it allowed for  “the prospective
production of future text messages from a service provider’s computer” (para.
15 (emphasis in original)); the fact that the messages were stored in a
database is simply a “technical” difference in Telus’s service delivery system
that should not “deprive Telus subscribers of the protection of the Code”
(para. 3). Therefore, a wiretap authorization, not a general warrant, was
required. This interpretation relies on the fact that the word “intercept” is
defined to include “acquire a communication or . . . the substance, meaning or
purport thereof” (s. 183) and the fact that wiretap authorizations are
prospective in nature.  I do not find this approach convincing for three
reasons. [153]                     
My first difficulty is that Abella J.’s approach does not give effect to
the clear distinction in the statute between interception and disclosure.  For
reasons I set out earlier, this distinction cannot in my view be dismissed as a
mere “technical difference”. The distinction is fundamental to the scheme of
the provisions. Parliament treated “interception” and “disclosure” as separate
acts, giving rise to different offences and different exemptions, even though
they may relate to the same private communications. When Telus turns over to the
police the copies of the communications that it has previously intercepted,
Telus is disclosing the communications, not intercepting them again.  I do not
understand how this disclosure by Telus from its databases can be an
interception by the police. [154]                     
 The second difficulty with my colleague’s position relates to her
reliance on the definition of “intercept” in s. 183 and particularly on the
fact that “intercept” includes “acquire the substance, meaning or purport” of a
private communication. Read broadly, this definition of “intercept” means that
any time the police acquire the content of a private communication by means of
any electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, they have engaged
in an interception.   In my view, the context and purpose of Part VI require
the phrase “acquire the substance, meaning or purport” of a private
communication to be read more narrowly. [155]                     
To begin, “acquire” must be understood in the context of the text
surrounding it; it is found in a list that includes “listen to” and “record”,
both activities that occur simultaneously with the communication being
intercepted.  It is also used to explain the word “intercept” and I think it is
clear that there are many ways to acquire the content of a communication that
could not be thought of as an interception. Moreover, if, as my colleague
Abella J. maintains (at para. 37), “[a]cquiring the substance of a private
communication from a computer maintained by a telecommunications service
provider” constitutes an interception, then wiretap authorizations may well be
required for a host of searches that are clearly not contemplated by Part VI of
the Code.  Police may well have to obtain a Part VI authorization any
time they want access to the content of private communications, no matter when
the message has been sent or whether it has been received or stored on the
recipient’s device.  For example, on a broad reading of “acquire” police
seizing e-mails on a BlackBerry device would be engaged in an interception
because they are acquiring the content of private communications. Similarly, a
person authorized to search a computer system as contemplated under s. 487(2.1)
would need a wiretap authorization to seize copies of personal communications
stored on those computers (including, for example, e-mail messages and stored
copies of Internet chats). This approach would run counter to a line of cases
in which Canadian courts have found that search warrants are sufficient to
allow police to access documents and data stored on a computer: see, e.g., R.
v. Cole, 2012 SCC 53, [2012] 3 S.C.R. 34, at para. 73; R. v. Jones,
2011 ONCA 632, 107 O.R. (3d) 241, at para. 33; R. v. Bahr, 2006 ABPC
360, 434 A.R. 1; R. v. Cross, 2007 Can LII 64141 (Ont. S.C.J.), at
paras. 25-27; R. v. Little, 2009 CanLII 41212 (Ont. S.C.J.), at
para. 154; R. v. Tse, 2008 BCSC 906 (CanLII), at para. 198; R. v.
Weir, 2001 ABCA 181, 281 A.R. 333, at para. 19. If the phrase
“acquire a communication or . . . the substance, meaning or purport thereof” is
given a broad meaning, stored private communications that have long been
accessible to police under ordinary search warrants or production orders would
fall under Part VI. [156]                     
As I see it, such a broad reading of “acquire” is inappropriate, given
the scheme and purpose of the wiretap provisions. I will not repeat the
analysis set out above.  It flows from that analysis, however, that acquiring
the content of a previously intercepted and stored communication cannot be an
interception because that broad reading is inconsistent with the clear
distinction between interception and disclosure in the provisions. Applied
broadly, this interpretation of “acquire” would extend the scope of
investigative techniques which require wiretap authorizations far beyond
anything ever previously contemplated. [157]                     
That brings me to the temporal aspect of interception that Abella J.
introduces, which is the third difficulty I see with her approach.  As I
understand it, the acquisition of the content of a private communication is an
interception if the acquisition is authorized prospectively.  It follows that
whether or not an act constitutes an interception depends not on the nature or
timing of the act itself, but on when the act is authorized.  It necessarily
follows that the seizure of previously intercepted and stored text messages
would not be an interception as long as it was authorized after the
messages were stored.  The police could obtain a production order at the end of
every day during the period covered by the general warrant and there would be
no interception. However, under this prospective authorization test, if the
police were to seize the exact same information, in the same form and by the
same means pursuant to an authorization issued before the messages were
stored, they would be engaging in an interception. This approach seems to me to
confuse the act of interception with the nature of its authorization. [158]                     
Interception is a technique, a way of acquiring the substance of a
private communication.  I do not understand how it could be that exactly the
same technique, which acquires information in exactly the same form, may be
either a seizure of stored material or an interception, depending on the point
in time at which the technique is authorized. But that is the result of my
colleague Abella J.’s analysis. I cannot accept this conclusion.                     4.      The Conclusion on the
First Issue [159]                     
In my view, the investigative technique which the police were authorized
to use by the general warrant was not an interception within the meaning of the
wiretap provisions of the Code. B.     Second
Issue:  If the Seizure of the Stored Text Messages Is Not an Interception, Is
the Issuance of a General Warrant Nevertheless Barred by the “No Other Provision”
Requirement in Section 487.01(1)(c) Because the Technique Sought to Be
Authorized Was Substantively the Equivalent of a Wiretap? [160]                     
My colleague Moldaver J., like Abella J., would set aside the general
warrant because the police did not meet the “no other provision” requirement in
s. 487.01(1)(c).  However, Moldaver J. reaches this conclusion by a
different route which, as I understand it, relies on three main points. First,
the general warrant is one of limited resort that should be used sparingly
(para. 56).  I respectfully do not accept this general proposition or the
result to which its adoption leads in this case. Second, the technique proposed
by police in this case is “substantively” the same as an interception and
therefore cannot be authorized under s. 487.01(1) because of the “no other
provision” requirement in para. (c). Respectfully, as I see it, the
“substantive equivalency” test is not part of the analysis under s. 487.01(1)(c)
and would not apply to the facts of this case even if it were. Third, given
this “substantive” similarity, police resort to the general warrant amounts to
a “misuse” of s. 487.01 , a “convenient way” for police to avoid the rigours of
wiretap authorizations. While I share my colleague’s view that the courts
should be vigilant for undue extension and abuse of the general warrant
provisions, my respectful view is that this is an inappropriate case in which
to give effect to those concerns.                     1.      The Purpose of the
General Warrant Provision [161]                     
Moldaver J. counsels against literal interpretation of the provisions
and espouses a purposive one.  Of course, I agree that all legislation must be
interpreted purposively.  I respectfully part company about what results from a
purposive interpretation of this provision. [162]                     
I begin with the purposes of the general warrant provision. I do not
accept that the purpose of s. 487.01(1) is to provide authorizations only in
very limited circumstances and that it therefore must only be used “sparingly”.
On the contrary, as numerous authorities have acknowledged, the provision is
cast in wide terms.  As one leading commentator put it:                              Through
s. 487.01 (and s. 487.02 ), Parliament has provided a broad, plenary
warrant-granting power intended to ensure that judicial authorization is
legally available for virtually any investigative technique that can be brought
within the Hunter conditions for judicial pre-authorization.  (S. C. Hutchison,
Hutchison’s Canadian Search Warrant Manual 2005 (2nd ed. 2004), at p. 143) When the Ontario Court of Appeal
considered this issue in R. v. Ha, 2009 ONCA 340, 96 O.R. (3d) 751, at
para. 35, leave to appeal refused, [2009] 3 S.C.R. vii, it rejected a
restrictive interpretation of s. 487.01. Rather, the court affirmed the remedial
character of s. 487.01 and cited its previous holding in R. v. Lauda
(1998), 37 O.R. (3d) 513, at pp. 522-23, aff’d [1998] 2 S.C.R. 683, to the
effect that the general warrant provides for a flexible range of investigative
procedures; see also R. v. Noseworthy (1997), 33 O.R. (3d) 641,
at p. 644. [163]                     
Taking into account this understanding of the purpose of s. 487.01, I
approach the interpretation of the provision differently than my colleague. In
particular, I do not accept as an imperative that s. 487.01 must be interpreted
with a view to heavily restricting its use. The focus of the inquiry is on two
matters (in addition of course to reasonable grounds to believe that an offence
has been committed and that information concerning the offence will be obtained): 
Is authorization for the “technique, procedure or device to be used or the
thing to be done” provided for in any other federal statute and is it in the
best interests of the administration of justice to authorize it to be done? [164]                     
Turning from the purpose of s. 487.01 to the text and purpose of s.
487.01(1)(c) specifically, its focus is on the means by which an
investigation is carried out, not its objective.  Section 487.01(1)(c)
provides that a general warrant may issue if “there is no other provision . . .
that would provide for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the
technique, procedure or device to be used or the thing to be done”. The
words “technique”, “procedure”, “device to be used” and “thing to be done” all
are concerned with what the police want to do, not why they want
to do it. This paragraph does not require issuing judges to consider whether
other techniques are similar or allow access to the same evidence; it simply
asks if the same technique can be authorized by another provision. [165]                     
The jurisprudence under this provision has consistently taken this
approach.  MacPherson J.A. made this point in Ha when he observed, at
para. 43, that [t]he focus in the s. 487.01(1)(c) analysis is
not on whether there are other investigative techniques that might accomplish
the purported investigative purposes or goals of the police; rather the
focus is on the particular investigative technique or procedure that the police
seek to utilize and whether it can properly be authorized by another provision.
[Emphasis added.] This is not simply a narrow, literal interpretation
of s. 487.01. Rather, it is an interpretation that reflects its purpose of
conferring a broad judicial discretion to authorize the police to “use any
device or investigative technique or procedure or do any thing”,
provided of course that the judge is satisfied that it is in the best interests
of the administration of justice to do so, having due regard to the importance
of the constitutional right to be free of unreasonable searches and seizures. 
I completely agree with MacPherson J.A., writing for the Ontario Court of
Appeal in Ha, when he said that he saw “no policy reason for struggling
to constrain the scope of s. 487.01 by adding words that were not expressly
included by Parliament in the provision” (para. 37). [166]                     
I note that Moldaver J. relies on this same paragraph in Ha to
support the view that investigative goals are to be taken into account in the
s. 487.01(1)(c) analysis, suggesting that in this passage MacPherson
J.A. adopted an approach which considered “substantive” differences between
various techniques (para. 70). Read in full, however, MacPherson J.A.’s reasons
do not support that proposition. As I see it, MacPherson J.A. was not
“[e]xplaining why the search sanctioned . . . in Ha was . . .
substantively different from one involving multiple conventional warrants”
(Moldaver J., at para. 70). This is clear not only in the portions of the
paragraph which I cite above, but also from the way MacPherson J.A. summarizes
his conclusion, at para. 41: “The simple fact is that there is no provision . .
. that would authorize an unlimited number of covert entries and searches on
private property over a two-month period.”  In performing the s. 487.01(1)(c)
analysis, MacPherson J.A. simply compared the search for which the police
sought authorization under a general warrant with other search provisions and
concluded that none of them would permit authorization of what the police
sought to do. [167]                     
Similarly, in R. v. Brand, 2008 BCCA 94, 229 C.C.C. (3d) 443 (sub
nom. R. v. Ford), at para. 50, Frankel J.A. for the court stated that
“[r]esort to a general warrant is only precluded when judicial approval for the
proposed ‘technique, procedure or device or the doing of the thing’ is
available under some other federal statutory provision.” There is no hint in
his reasons that there is any substantive equivalency or investigative
necessity analysis required. [168]                     
I am reinforced in my reading of s. 487.01(1)(c) by a comparison
of that paragraph with s. 186(1)(b) which sets out the investigative
necessity requirement that must be met before a wiretap can be issued. According
to s. 186(1)(b) an authorization under that section cannot be given
unless the judge is satisfied that other investigative procedures have been tried and
have failed, other investigative procedures are unlikely to succeed or the
urgency of the matter is such that it would be impractical to carry out the
investigation of the offence using only other investigative procedures. In R. v. Araujo, 2000 SCC 65, [2000] 2 S.C.R.
992, the Court established that, under s. 186(1)(b), a judge cannot
issue an intercept authorization unless she is satisfied that “practically
speaking” there is “no other reasonable alternative method of investigation, in
the circumstances of the particular criminal inquiry” (para. 29 (emphasis
deleted)). The standard set by Parliament here is high; it is not enough that
an interception would be “more efficacious” than some other available
technique, it must be necessary to the investigation (Araujo, at
para. 39). [169]                     
By contrast, under s. 487.01(1)(c), a judge only needs to be
satisfied that the proposed technique cannot be authorized by provisions in the
Code or some other Act of Parliament. The judge does not, in addition,
need to be satisfied that the novel technique is necessary to the investigation
or that it is not the substantive equivalent of something that can be
authorized elsewhere. Parliament knew how to direct an issuing judge or justice
to consider whether other investigative techniques would achieve the
investigative objective.  It did so in s. 186(1)(b).  It did not do so
in s. 487.01(1)(c). [170]                     
Of course, this does not mean that the court should authorize anything
the police seek to do simply because it is not authorized elsewhere.  The
judicial discretion to issue the warrant must give full effect to the
protection of reasonable expectations of privacy as set out in the abundant
jurisprudence under s. 8  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms . Judges should not exercise their discretion so as to permit the
police to use the general warrant to evade the pre-authorization requirements
that Parliament has imposed on certain investigative techniques. However, as I
will explain, my view is that those concerns should be addressed directly and
specifically under s. 487.01(1) (b) when they arise, not by reading in a
limitation in s. 487.01(1) (c) that is not there. [171]                     
To sum up on this point, there is no support in the text or the
purpose   of s. 487.01(1)(c), or in the jurisprudence, for building into
it a “substantive equivalency” test.  The paragraph asks a simple question:
Does federal legislation provide for “a warrant, authorization or order
permitting the technique, procedure or device to be used or the thing to be
done”?  Where this threshold is met, the judge is entitled to consider granting
the requested authorization.  The further question of whether the authorization
ought to be granted is not the focus of this paragraph of the section.
Rather, as I will explain, whether a general warrant ought to issue
is properly considered under s. 487.01(1)(b), which asks whether
authorizing the warrant would be in the best interests of the administration of
justice. Not only, in my view, is this approach supported by the text, purpose
and jurisprudence.  The alternative proposed by Moldaver J. also creates
unnecessary uncertainty and distracts the issuing judge from the question of
whether the technique sought to be authorized is inconsistent with the right to
be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. [172]                     
I turn first to my concern about uncertainty. In my view, predictability
and clarity in the law are particularly important in the area of judicial
pre-authorization of searches. Judicial pre-authorization is a cornerstone of
the Charter ’s protection against unreasonable searches and seizures. 
The primary objective of pre-authorization is not to identify unreasonable
searches after the fact, but to ensure that unreasonable searches are not
conducted. The requirements for pre-authorization should be as clear as
possible to ensure that Charter  rights are fully protected. [173]                     
Clarity also serves an important practical objective. Generally, and
unlike in this case, challenges to judicial pre-authorization of searches are
made after the fact at trial. If successful, the admissibility of the evidence
obtained under the authorized search is put at risk. The police cannot undo,
after the fact, that during their investigation, they relied on what is
ultimately found to be a defective authorization. This makes it of great
practical importance for the law to be clear to judges and justices who are
asked to authorize searches and to police officers who seek authorization. [174]                     
The approach adopted by my colleague Moldaver J. in my view is seriously
deficient in this regard. No guidance is provided as to when one investigative
technique should be found to be substantively the same as another and when the
differences are merely technical.  As I will discuss in the next section of my
reasons, this uncertainty is apparent from my colleague’s application of the
“substantive equivalency” test in this case. [175]                     
Moreover, my view is that adopting this approach to s. 487.01(1)(c)
will not assist issuing judges in giving effect to the constitutional guarantee
of freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures.  That issue should be
addressed directly under s. 487.01(1)(b), not through a vague,
unnecessary and largely semantic exercise of comparing how much one technique
may be like another.  As I shall discuss, even when that question is addressed
directly in this case, the arguments against issuing the general warrant are,
in my respectful view, unconvincing.                     2.      The “Substantive
Equivalency” of the Proposed Technique and an Interception [176]                     
Even if I were to accept (which I do not) that s. 487.01(1)(c) is
concerned with the substantive equivalency of various investigative techniques,
I would not find the technique sought to be authorized here to be the
substantive equivalent of a wiretap authorization. According to my colleague
Moldaver J., the general warrant in this case authorized a technique that was
in substance an interception “because it prospectively authorizes police
access to future private communications on a continual basis over
a sustained period of time. . . .  But for the 24-hour time delay, the
investigative techniques were the same” (paras. 61 and 68 (emphasis in
original)). [177]                     
Respectfully, this assertion is not borne out by the facts nor
consistent with the law. [178]                     
Turning first to the facts, a wiretap authorization alone would not
allow the police to obtain the information that Telus was required to provide
under the general warrant. In fact, as the evidence from Telus shows, three
separate authorizations would be required in order to provide the police with
the means to access the information provided to them under the general warrant.
As I explained above, when Telus responds to a wiretap authorization, it
installs a device which re-routes in real time a copy of each text message sent
to and from a particular number to the police. The general warrant in this case
requires Telus to do more: it has to sort through its databases to deliver
stored text messages and it also has to provide the relevant subscriber
information relating to them. [179]                     
In her affidavit filed before the reviewing judge, Corinne McNish, a
Telus Security Analyst, indicated that three different authorizations would be
necessary to obtain the information required under the general warrant: an
authorization under s. 492.2(1) for a dial number recorder; an authorization
under s. 492.2(2) to obtain telephone records; and a Part VI authorization. I
would add that, in order to make use of a Part VI authorization, police would
have to secure a wire room or listening post to receive the messages as well as
officers to process the incoming information, to deal with the information
obtained from the dial number recorder and to sort through the telephone
records. [180]                     
In light of Telus’s own evidence, then, it seems to me to be quite a
stretch to assert that the investigative techniques were substantively the
same. [181]                     
Notwithstanding these clear and significant differences between the two
techniques, my colleague relies heavily on two facts in concluding that the
techniques were substantively the same:  the fact that there was only a 24-hour
time delay in the police gaining access to the information under the general
warrant and that the general warrant authorized the turning over of the stored
messages “prospectively”. As I see it, the first fact is not correct and the
second does not support the conclusion drawn from it. [182]                     
 Turning first to the time delay, my colleague finds that the time delay
between when the messages were sent and when they were to be received by police
was short enough that their production would constitute the substantive
equivalent of an interception. While Moldaver J. declines to identify the point
at which the period of delay would render the proposed technique substantively
different from an interception, he concludes that “the 24-hour gap here fell
short of the mark” (footnote 2).  Respectfully, I cannot agree for two reasons. [183]                     
First, as the general warrant itself makes clear, some of the messages
that police were to receive would be delayed by 72 hours, not 24. The productions
ordered under the general warrant were to begin on March 30, 2010, and end on
April 16, 2010. On Tuesday March 30, Telus was to produce information from
March 18 to March 30, and the Crown concedes that this could have been obtained
by a production order and therefore could not be the subject of a general
warrant. Applied over the next two and a half weeks, the general warrant
created two different time gaps, as I described earlier. On Tuesday through
Friday, Telus was required to provide by 2:00 p.m. each day the messages sent
and received between 11:00 a.m. the previous day and 11:00 a.m. that day.  
However, on weekends, there was a longer “gap”.  By 2:00 p.m. on Mondays, Telus
was required to provide the messages stored between 11:00 a.m. the previous
Friday and 11:00 a.m. on Monday.  Thus, for twelve days, production was daily.
However, on weekends, or for six days covered by the general warrant, there was
a longer “gap” of   72 hours. The question therefore arises whether that
72-hour delay also “fell short of the mark” and if not, whether police would
need different authorizations for the messages they received on Mondays than
they would for the messages they received on the other days of the week. [184]                     
Second, because I agree with the reviewing judge that police could
have obtained a series of daily production orders, I have difficulty
accepting that the 24-hour “gap” on which Moldaver J. relies makes the general
warrant substantively equivalent to an interception. A series of daily
production orders would have provided police with copies of the text messages
within 24 hours of the time that they were sent. On my colleague’s
understanding of what is substantively an interception, then, some production orders
could also be the equivalent of interceptions.  This, as I see it, underlines
the confusion and uncertainty inherent in the substantive equivalency approach
to s. 487.01(1)(c). [185]                     
The second fact advanced in support of the finding of substantive equivalency
is that the authorization is “prospective”.  As I pointed out earlier, however,
it is hard to understand how exactly the same technique either is or is not
equivalent to an interception, depending on the point in time that it is
authorized. If we accept for the purposes of this appeal, which I do, that the
police could lawfully obtain daily production orders, I simply cannot
understand how authorizing that technique two weeks earlier converts the
production order into a wiretap authorization. [186]                     
Finally, the conclusion of substantive equivalency is inconsistent with
the text and scheme of the wiretap provisions themselves. As I have explained
at length earlier, the act of disclosure of previously intercepted private
communication has been identified and treated in the Code as a separate
and distinct act from that of interception itself. With respect, I cannot
accept that what Parliament has made a legally significant distinction is
merely a technical difference. [187]                     
To sum up, even if one were to accept reading into s. 487.01(1)(c)
a “substantive equivalency” test, neither the facts nor the law would support
its application in this case, in my respectful view. [188]                     
This also underlines, as I see it, the confusion and uncertainty that
would flow from adopting such a test.  My colleague provides no meaningful
guidance on this point aside from a 24-hour “gap” guideline.  The latter is
problematic, however, because it conflicts with the availability of daily
production orders under s. 487.012.  In my view, issuing judges and police
investigators should not be left to draw the line on their own and then to
hope, with little reason for optimism, that they will be found to have been
right after a voir dire at a future trial.                     3.      Dealing
With Abuses of General Warrants [189]                     
This brings us to the real heart of the matter: whether the general
warrant should not have been issued because it represents, as my colleague
would have it, a “misuse” of s. 487.01, an “easy way out”, or a “convenient
way”, “device” or “hook”, that allows the police to  “escape the rigours” of
Part VI (paras. 72, 81, 90 and 105). As I read Moldaver J.’s reasons, the
proposed interpretation of s. 487.01(1)(c) is driven by a need to
preclude abuses of the general warrant power. I accept that judges asked to
issue general warrants must be vigilant to ensure that the right to be free
against unreasonable searches and seizures is fully given effect by any
investigative technique that is authorized. However, my view is that this
analysis should be undertaken directly under s. 487.01(1)(b), not
through the lens of asking the question of whether two techniques are
substantively equivalent. [190]                     
As MacPherson J.A. wisely pointed out in Ha, the “no other
provision” requirement in s. 487.01(1)(c)  is not the only requirement
that must be met before a general warrant may be issued (para. 44).  The
section should not be approached on the assumption that Parliament intended
that every investigative technique not authorized elsewhere could be authorized
under s. 487.01(1): see, e.g., S. Coughlan, “R. v. Ha: Upholding General
Warrants without Asking the Right Questions” (2009), 65 C.R. (6th) 41. Rather,
the judge asked to issue the warrant must also be satisfied that it is in the
best interests of the administration of justice to authorize the particular
technique (s. 487.01(1)(b)).  This is the provision under which
potential abuses of the general warrant should be addressed, in my view. Of
course, even where the requirements in s. 487.01(1)(b) and (c)
are met, s. 487.01(3) requires that a general warrant contain “such terms and
conditions as the judge considers advisable to ensure that any search or
seizure authorized by the warrant is reasonable in the circumstances”. [191]                     
Section 487.01(1)(b) was not raised in this appeal and I do not
want to say much about it beyond my view that it is the place in s. 487.01 that
addresses concerns about whether a new investigative technique is one that
should be authorized. That said, I do not find Moldaver J.’s concerns raised
under the rubric of the proposed “substantive equivalency” test at all
compelling. [192]                     
First, I would not conclude that police sought a general warrant in this
case as a “convenient way” to avoid the rigours of Part VI.  Of course, there
is no evidence of that.  Second, I do not agree with the claim that the privacy
interests at stake in this case are exactly the same as those in issue where a
wiretap authorization is sought.  The reviewing judge accepted, and I agree,
that warrants could issue daily to provide the police with copies of the stored
messages.  I fail to see how the affected privacy interests are different if
permission to do that is granted two weeks in advance.  Third, for all of the
reasons identified by the reviewing judge, the general warrant was a more
practical approach than a series of production orders. Fourth, the general
warrant authorized a technique that was not only different from an interception
but was also more responsive to the needs of police. In particular, it
significantly reduced the burden on the police in terms of resources to staff a
wire room, and to extract information from subscriber records and dial number
recorders.  As I see it, the general warrant achieved the legitimate aims of
the police investigation in a much more convenient and cost-effective manner
than any other provision would have allowed. [193]                     
Of course, the general warrant had the effect of shifting costs to
Telus. But that has nothing to do with the privacy interests of the
subscribers. Moreover, Telus advanced evidence and argument in relation to the
burden the general warrant placed on it, but those submissions were flatly
rejected by the reviewing judge and not renewed in this Court. [194]                     
On the record before us, I do not see evidence of “misuse” of s. 487.01
or an attempt by police to “escape the rigours” of Part VI.  What I see is effective
and practical police investigation by a relatively small municipal police force
which is fully respectful of the privacy interests of the targets of the
investigation and other Telus subscribers. C.     Conclusion [195]                     
For these reasons, I find that the general warrant did not authorize an
interception requiring a Part VI wiretap authorization and that the “no other
provision” requirement of s. 487.01(1)(c) was met. IV.    Disposition [196]                     
I would dismiss the appeal. APPENDIX Criminal
Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 PART
VI INVASION
OF PRIVACY         183. In this Part, . . . “intercept” includes listen to, record or acquire a communication or
acquire the substance, meaning or purport thereof; . . . “private communication” means any oral communication, or any
telecommunication, that is made by an originator who is in Canada or is
intended by the originator to be received by a person who is in Canada and that
is made under circumstances in which it is reasonable for the originator to
expect that it will not be intercepted by any person other than the person
intended by the originator to receive it, and includes any radio-based
telephone communication that is treated electronically or otherwise for the purpose
of preventing intelligible reception by any person other than the person
intended by the originator to receive it; . . .         184. (1) Every one who, by means of any electro-magnetic, acoustic,
mechanical or other device, wilfully intercepts a private communication is
guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years.         (2)
Subsection (1) does not apply to (a) a
person who has the consent to intercept, express or implied, of the originator
of the private communication or of the person intended by the originator
thereof to receive it; (b) a
person who intercepts a private communication in accordance with an
authorization or pursuant to section 184.4 or any person who in good faith aids
in any way another person who the aiding person believes on reasonable grounds
is acting with an authorization or pursuant to section 184.4; (c) a
person engaged in providing a telephone, telegraph or other communication
service to the public who intercepts a private communication, (i) if the
interception is necessary for the purpose of providing the service, (ii) in the
course of service observing or random monitoring necessary for the purpose of
mechanical or service quality control checks, or (iii) if
the interception is necessary to protect the person’s rights or property
directly related to providing the service; (d) an
officer or servant of Her Majesty in right of Canada who engages in radio
frequency spectrum management, in respect of a private communication
intercepted by that officer or servant for the purpose of identifying,
isolating or preventing an unauthorized or interfering use of a frequency or of
a transmission; or (e) a
person, or any person acting on their behalf, in possession or control of a
computer system, as defined in subsection 342.1(2), who intercepts a private
communication originating from, directed to or transmitting through that
computer system, if the interception is reasonably necessary for (i) managing
the quality of service of the computer system as it relates to performance
factors such as the responsiveness and capacity of the system as well as the
integrity and availability of the system and data, or (ii) protecting
the computer system against any act that would be an offence under subsection 342.1(1)
or 430(1.1).         (3) A
private communication intercepted by a person referred to in paragraph (2)(e)
can be used or retained only if (a) it
is essential to identify, isolate or prevent harm to the computer system; or (b) it
is to be disclosed in circumstances referred to in subsection 193(2). . . .         185. (1)
An application for an authorization to be given under section 186 shall be made
ex parte and in writing to a judge of a superior court of criminal
jurisdiction or a judge as defined in section 552 and shall be signed by the
Attorney General of the province in which the application is made or the
Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness or an agent specially
designated in writing for the purposes of this section by (a) the
Minister personally or the Deputy Minister of Public Safety and Emergency
Preparedness personally, if the offence under investigation is one in respect
of which proceedings, if any, may be instituted at the instance of the
Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of the Attorney General of
Canada, or (b) the
Attorney General of a province personally or the Deputy Attorney General of a
province personally, in any other case, and
shall be accompanied by an affidavit, which may be sworn on the information and
belief of a peace officer or public officer deposing to the following matters: (c) the
facts relied on to justify the belief that an authorization should be given
together with particulars of the offence, (d) the
type of private communication proposed to be intercepted, (e) the
names, addresses and occupations, if known, of all persons, the interception of
whose private communications there are reasonable grounds to believe may assist
the investigation of the offence, a general description of the nature and location
of the place, if known, at which private communications are proposed to be
intercepted and a general description of the manner of interception proposed to
be used, . . . (h)
whether other investigative procedures have been tried and have failed or why
it appears they are unlikely to succeed or that the urgency of the matter is
such that it would be impractical to carry out the investigation of the offence
using only other investigative procedures. . . .         186. (1)
An authorization under this section may be given if the judge to whom the
application is made is satisfied (a) that
it would be in the best interests of the administration of justice to do so;
and (b) that
other investigative procedures have been tried and have failed, other
investigative procedures are unlikely to succeed or the urgency of the matter
is such that it would be impractical to carry out the investigation of the
offence using only other investigative procedures. . . .         (4) An
authorization shall (a) state
the offence in respect of which private communications may be intercepted; (b) state
the type of private communication that may be intercepted; (c) state
the identity of the persons, if known, whose private communications are to be
intercepted, generally describe the place at which private communications may
be intercepted, if a general description of that place can be given, and
generally describe the manner of interception that may be used; (d)
contain such terms and conditions as the judge considers advisable in the
public interest; and (e) be
valid for the period, not exceeding sixty days, set out therein. . . .         193. (1) Where
a private communication has been intercepted by means of an electro-magnetic,
acoustic, mechanical or other device without the consent, express or implied,
of the originator thereof or of the person intended by the originator thereof
to receive it, every one who, without the express consent of the originator
thereof or of the person intended by the originator thereof to receive it,
wilfully (a) uses
or discloses the private communication or any part thereof or the substance,
meaning or purport thereof or of any part thereof, or (b) discloses
the existence thereof, is guilty of an
indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years.         (2) Subsection
(1) does not apply to a person who discloses a private communication or any
part thereof or the substance, meaning or purport thereof or of any part
thereof or who discloses the existence of a private communication (a) in
the course of or for the purpose of giving evidence in any civil or criminal
proceedings or in any other proceedings in which the person may be required to
give evidence on oath; (b) in
the course of or for the purpose of any criminal investigation if the private
communication was lawfully intercepted; (c) in
giving notice under section 189 or furnishing further particulars pursuant to
an order under section 190; (d) in
the course of the operation of (i) a
telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public, (ii) a
department or an agency of the Government of Canada, or (iii) services
relating to the management or protection of a computer system, as defined in
subsection 342.1(2), if the
disclosure is necessarily incidental to an interception described in paragraph
184(2)(c), (d) or (e); (e) where
disclosure is made to a peace officer or prosecutor in Canada or to a person or
authority with responsibility in a foreign state for the investigation or
prosecution of offences and is intended to be in the interests of the
administration of justice in Canada or elsewhere; or (f) where
the disclosure is made to the Director of the Canadian Security Intelligence
Service or to an employee of the Service for the purpose of enabling the
Service to perform its duties and functions under section 12  of the Canadian
Security Intelligence Service Act . . . . PART XV SPECIAL PROCEDURE AND
POWERS . . .         487. (1) A justice who is satisfied by information on oath in
Form 1 that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in a
building, receptacle or place (a) anything
on or in respect of which any offence against this Act or any other Act of
Parliament has been or is suspected to have been committed, (b) anything
that there are reasonable grounds to believe will afford evidence with respect
to the commission of an offence, or will reveal the whereabouts of a person who
is believed to have committed an offence, against this Act or any other Act of
Parliament, (c) anything
that there are reasonable grounds to believe is intended to be used for the
purpose of committing any offence against the person for which a person may be
arrested without warrant, or (c.1) any
offence-related property, may at any time
issue a warrant authorizing a peace officer or a public officer who has been
appointed or designated to administer or enforce a federal or provincial law
and whose duties include the enforcement of this Act or any other Act of
Parliament and who is named in the warrant (d) to
search the building, receptacle or place for any such thing and to seize it,
and (e) subject
to any other Act of Parliament, to, as soon as practicable, bring the thing
seized before, or make a report in respect thereof to, the justice or some
other justice for the same territorial division in accordance with section
489.1.         (2) If
the building, receptacle or place is in another territorial division, the
justice may issue the warrant with any modifications that the circumstances
require, and it may be executed in the other territorial division after it has
been endorsed, in Form 28, by a justice who has jurisdiction in that
territorial division. The endorsement may be made on the original of the
warrant or on a copy of the warrant transmitted by any means of
telecommunication.         (2.1) A
person authorized under this section to search a computer system in a building
or place for data may (a) use
or cause to be used any computer system at the building or place to search any
data contained in or available to the computer system; (b) reproduce
or cause to be reproduced any data in the form of a print-out or other
intelligible output; (c) seize
the print-out or other output for examination or copying; and (d) use
or cause to be used any copying equipment at the place to make copies of the
data. . . .         487.01 (1)
A provincial court judge, a judge of a superior court of criminal jurisdiction
or a judge as defined in section 552 may issue a warrant in writing authorizing
a peace officer to, subject to this section, use any device or investigative
technique or procedure or do any thing described in the warrant that would, if
not authorized, constitute an unreasonable search or seizure in respect of a
person or a person’s property if (a) the
judge is satisfied by information on oath in writing that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that an offence against this or any other Act of Parliament
has been or will be committed and that information concerning the offence will
be obtained through the use of the technique, procedure or device or the doing
of the thing; (b) the
judge is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the administration of
justice to issue the warrant; and (c) there
is no other provision in this or any other Act of Parliament that would provide
for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique, procedure or
device to be used or the thing to be done. . . .         (3) A
warrant issued under subsection (1) shall contain such terms and conditions as
the judge considers advisable to ensure that any search or seizure authorized
by the warrant is reasonable in the circumstances. . . .         (5.1) A
warrant issued under subsection (1) that authorizes a peace officer to enter
and search a place covertly shall require, as part of the terms and conditions
referred to in subsection (3), that notice of the entry and search be given
within any time after the execution of the warrant that the judge considers
reasonable in the circumstances. . . .         487.012 (1) A justice or judge may order a person, other than a
person under investigation for an offence referred to in paragraph (3)(a), (a) to
produce documents, or copies of them certified by affidavit to be true copies,
or to produce data; or (b) to
prepare a document based on documents or data already in existence and produce
it.         (2) The
order shall require the documents or data to be produced within the time, at
the place and in the form specified and given (a) to
a peace officer named in the order; or (b) to
a public officer named in the order, who has been appointed or designated to
administer or enforce a federal or provincial law and whose duties include the
enforcement of this or any other Act of Parliament.         (3) Before
making an order, the justice or judge must be satisfied, on the basis of an ex parte application containing information
on oath in writing, that there are reasonable grounds to believe that (a) an
offence against this Act or any other Act of Parliament has been or is
suspected to have been committed; (b) the
documents or data will afford evidence respecting the commission of the
offence; and (c) the
person who is subject to the order has possession or control of the documents
or data.         (4) The
order may contain any terms and conditions that the justice or judge considers
advisable in the circumstances, including terms and conditions to protect a
privileged communication between a lawyer and their client or, in the province
of Quebec, between a lawyer or a notary and their client.                     Appeal
allowed, McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Stockwoods, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Public Prosecution Service of Canada, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Ontario:  Attorney General of
Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association:  Torys, Toronto.  [1]
The validity of a series of daily (or more frequent) production orders
was not argued by the parties, nor is addressing that issue necessary to
resolve this appeal.  Accordingly, I would not decide whether there exists any
statutory or constitutional bar to the police seeking such orders. [2] It is neither prudent nor necessary to draw a bright line in this
case as to when the period of delay would render the search technique substantively
different such that a general warrant would be acceptable.  Whatever that
timeframe may be, the 24-hour gap here fell short of the mark.  To the extent that
uncertainty arises in a future case, it must be resolved in keeping with the
approach to s. 487.01(1)(c) articulated here.  I also note that my
colleague Cromwell J. makes much of the fact that “some of the messages that
police were to receive would be delayed by 72 hours, not 24” (para. 183).  With
respect, I find his emphasis on this fact puzzling.  Even if one assumes that a
72-hour delay is substantively different from an intercept, it hardly follows
that because one part of an otherwise offensive authorization is valid,
the entire authorization should be spared. [3]
The record in this case suggests that the entirety of the information
sought by the police could have been obtained pursuant to a Part VI
authorization, a number recorder under s. 492.2(1), and an order to obtain
telephone records under s. 492.2(2).  Before this Court, none of the parties
concentrated on the latter two authorizations; rather, they focused on whether
the warrant’s core — the delivery of text messages — amounted to an intercept.  