SCC Case Information: 35372   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Auclair, 2014 SCC 6, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 83 Date:
  20140121 Docket:
  35372  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant and Guy
Auclair, Mario Auger, Daniel Beaulieu, Georges Beaulieu, Bruno Belzile, Claude
Berger, Jean-François Bergeron, René Bibeau, Alain Biron, Robert Bonomo, Éric
Bouffard, Vincent Boulanger, Louis Brochu, Aurèle Brouillette, Mario
Brouillette, Roberto Campagna, Clermont Carrier, Philippe Carrier, Salvatore
Cazzetta, Sylvain Chalifoux, Michel Charland, Benoît Charron, Pierre Chayer,
John Coates, Steven Collard, Rock Côté, Luc Dallaire, Christian Daneault,
Gaétan David, Rock Delaney, Claude Demers, Lionel Deschamps, Marcel Desloges,
Mario Dion, Steeve Doucet, Guy Dubé, Jacques Dumais, Gilles Dumas, Alain
Durand, Jacques Émond, Jacques Filteau, Paul Fontaine, Yves Forest, Simon
Forgues, Michel Fortier, Benoît Frenette, Daniel Gagné, Sylvain Gagné, Yves
Gagné, Martin Gamache, Mélanie Gauthier, Serge Gauthier, Yannick Gauthier,
Claude Giguère, Éric Giguère, François Goupil, Robert Groleau, Michel Guertin,
Pierre Hamilton, Alain Harton, Marc-André Hinse, Marc-André Hotte, Magella
Houde, Daniel Hudon, Richard Hudon, Benjamin Hudon-Barbeau, Bertrand Joyal,
Daniel Jutras, Normand Labelle, Gilles Lambert, Kaven Langlois, Michel
Langlois, Éric Laplante, Éric Larouche, Claude Lavigne, Serge Lebrasseur, Yves
Leduc, David Lefebvre, Guy Lemoyne, Marc Loiseau, Sylvain Lord, Stéphane Maheu,
Émery Martin, Éric Martin, Réginald Martin, Patrick Massicotte, Christian
Ménard, Marcel Messier, René Monfette, Dean Moore, Claude Morin, Daniel
Normand, Richard Ouellet, Pierre Ouellette, Marvin Ouimet, René Pearson, Marc
Pelletier, Claude Pépin, Jean-Damien Perron, Elliot Perry, Stéphane Plouffe,
Bernard Plourde, Stéphane Poitras, Gaétan Proulx, Patrick Pruneau, Steve
Rainville, Jean-Paul Ramsay, Marc Readman, Michel Rivard, Marc Roberge,
Jonathan Robert, Martin Robert, Kevin Robertson, Gilles Robidoux, Pierre
Rodrigue, Yvon Rodrigue, David Rouleau, Richard Rousseau, Daniel Royer, Louis
Ruel, Alain Ruest, Maurice Soucy, Yvon Tanguay, Normand Théorêt, Sylvain
Thiffault, François Vachon, Sylvain Vachon, Ghislain Vallerand, Michel
Vallières, Karl Véronneau, Bruno Villeneuve and Jean-Marc Vincent Respondents -
and - Attorney
General of Alberta Intervener  Official English Translation  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 3) McLachlin C.J. (LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
  Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)    R. v. Auclair,
2014 SCC 6, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 83 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Guy Auclair, Mario Auger, Daniel
Beaulieu, Georges Beaulieu, Bruno Belzile, Claude Berger, Jean-François
Bergeron, René Bibeau, Alain Biron, Robert Bonomo, Éric Bouffard, Vincent
Boulanger, Louis Brochu, Aurèle Brouillette, Mario Brouillette, Roberto
Campagna, Clermont Carrier, Philippe Carrier, Salvatore Cazzetta, Sylvain
Chalifoux, Michel Charland, Benoît Charron, Pierre Chayer, John Coates, Steven
Collard, Rock Côté, Luc Dallaire, Christian Daneault, Gaétan David, Rock
Delaney, Claude Demers, Lionel Deschamps, Marcel Desloges, Mario Dion, Steeve
Doucet, Guy Dubé, Jacques Dumais, Gilles Dumas, Alain Durand, Jacques Émond,
Jacques Filteau, Paul Fontaine, Yves Forest, Simon Forgues, Michel Fortier,
Benoît Frenette, Daniel Gagné, Sylvain Gagné, Yves Gagné, Martin Gamache,
Mélanie Gauthier, Serge Gauthier, Yannick Gauthier, Claude Giguère, Éric
Giguère, François Goupil, Robert Groleau, Michel Guertin, Pierre Hamilton,
Alain Harton, Marc-André Hinse, Marc-André Hotte, Magella Houde, Daniel Hudon,
Richard Hudon, Benjamin Hudon-Barbeau, Bertrand Joyal, Daniel Jutras, Normand
Labelle, Gilles Lambert, Kaven Langlois, Michel Langlois, Éric Laplante, Éric
Larouche, Claude Lavigne, Serge Lebrasseur, Yves Leduc, David Lefebvre, Guy
Lemoyne, Marc Loiseau, Sylvain Lord, Stéphane Maheu, Émery Martin, Éric Martin,
Réginald Martin, Patrick Massicotte, Christian Ménard, Marcel Messier, René
Monfette, Dean Moore, Claude Morin, Daniel Normand, Richard Ouellet, Pierre
Ouellette, Marvin Ouimet, René Pearson, Marc Pelletier, Claude Pépin, Jean-Damien
Perron, Elliot Perry, Stéphane Plouffe, Bernard Plourde, Stéphane Poitras,
Gaétan Proulx, Patrick Pruneau, Steve Rainville, Jean-Paul Ramsay, Marc
Readman, Michel Rivard, Marc Roberge, Jonathan Robert, Martin Robert, Kevin
Robertson, Gilles Robidoux, Pierre Rodrigue, Yvon Rodrigue, David Rouleau,
Richard Rousseau, Daniel Royer, Louis Ruel, Alain Ruest, Maurice Soucy, Yvon
Tanguay, Normand Théorêt, Sylvain Thiffault, François Vachon, Sylvain Vachon,
Ghislain Vallerand, Michel Vallières, Karl Véronneau,  Bruno Villeneuve and
Jean-Marc Vincent Respondents    and Attorney General of Alberta                                                                        Intervener  Indexed as:  R. v. Auclair    2014 SCC 6    File No.:  35372.    2014:  January
21.    Present:  McLachlin C.J.
and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.    on appeal from the court
of appeal for quebec                      Criminal
law — Trial — Trial management — Direct indictment before judge at first
instance setting out 29 counts involving more than 150 accused — Stay of
proceedings ordered on certain counts because of unreasonable delays — Judge
justified in exercising his discretion to protect rights of accused guaranteed
by Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and to further public’s interest in
avoiding collapse of prosecution.  Statutes
and Regulations Cited   Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .                        APPEAL
from a judgment of the Quebec Court of Appeal (Doyon, Gagnon and Levesque JJ.A.),
2013 QCCA 671, [2013] R.J.Q. 608, 302 C.C.C. (3d) 365, [2013] Q.J. No. 3349
(QL), 2013 CarswellQue 10165, SOQUIJ AZ-50956084, affirming
a decision of Brunton J., 2011 QCCS 2661, [2011] R.J.Q. 933, 86 C.R. (6th) 155,
[2011] Q.J. No. 6103 (QL), 2011 CarswellQue 12285, SOQUIJ AZ-50757582.  Appeal
dismissed.                      Marc Cigana and Andrée Vézina, for the appellant.                      Louis Belleau, Christian Desrosiers, Lida Nouraie and Annie Lahaise, for the respondents.                      Jolaine Antonio, for the intervener.                      English version of the judgment of
the Court delivered orally by [1]               The
Chief Justice — We all agree, essentially for the reasons given by Doyon
J.A. of the Quebec Court of Appeal, that this appeal should be dismissed. 
However, we would also like to stress the extraordinary and unique nature of
the circumstances faced by Brunton J. of the Superior Court as a result of the
proceedings brought against the accused by the Crown. [2]               The cumulative effects of those
circumstances justified Brunton J.’s significant intervention in matters
usually left to the discretion of the prosecution, namely the selection of the
charges and the prioritization of the order in which they would proceed.  The
direct indictment before the judge at first instance set out 29 counts
involving more than 150 accused.  It also contained a number of counts that
could not lawfully be included in it.  This direct indictment, as preferred by
the Crown, did not lend itself to a trial, and it gave rise to serious
challenges with respect to disclosure of the evidence to the accused. 
Furthermore, the prosecution did not have a realistic plan for taking those
charges to trial and conducting the trial within a reasonable time. [3]               As
Doyon J.A. mentioned at paragraph 60 of his reasons, Brunton J. had observed
that [translation] “the
prosecution had been making things up as it went along and had shown a flagrant
lack of preparation, analysis and foresight in managing the case” (2013 QCCA
671, [2013] R.J.Q. 608).  The unique nature of these extraordinary
circumstances satisfies us that the approach taken by the trial judge was the right
one in this case.  In light of these circumstances, and of the ones referred to
by Brunton J. in his reasons and by the majority of the Court of Appeal in
theirs, we agree with the latter that Brunton J. did not err in exercising his
discretion in this case.  He exercised it to protect the rights of the accused
guaranteed by the Charter , and to further the public’s interest in
avoiding the total collapse of the prosecution that could have been caused by
unreasonable delays.                     Judgment
accordingly.                      Solicitor for
the appellant:  Poursuites criminelles et pénales du Québec, Montréal.                      Solicitors for the
respondents:  Louis Belleau, Montréal; Desrosiers, Joncas, Massicotte, Montréal;
Annie Lahaise, Montréal.                      Solicitor for the intervener:  Attorney General of Alberta, Calgary.  