  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. J.F., 2013 SCC 12, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 565 Date:
  20130301 Docket:
  34284  Between: J.F. Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent -
and - British
Columbia Civil Liberties Association Intervener  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver
and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 76) Moldaver J. (McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Rothstein,
  Cromwell and Karakatsanis JJ. concurring)    R. v.
J.F., 2013 SCC 12, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 565 J.F.                                                                                                                   Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and British Columbia Civil
Liberties Association                                              Intervener Indexed as:  R. v. J.F. 2013 SCC 12 File No.:  34284. 2012:  October 12; 2013:  March 1. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                     J,
a youth, learned that his friend T and her sister R were planning to murder
their mother by plying her with alcohol and drowning her, a plan which the
sisters ultimately executed and were convicted for.  The police found an MSN
chat log between J and T in which J provided information to T about death by
drowning; suggested that the sisters should give their mother codeine pills in
addition to alcohol; and suggested ways to mislead the police.  The Crown also
led evidence that J supplied the girls with pills and met T and R after the
murder to provide an alibi.  The trial judge instructed the jury that J could
be convicted of conspiracy to commit murder under s. 465(1)  of the Criminal
Code  either as a principal, or as a party under s. 21(1) (b) or
(c) of the Criminal Code .  J was convicted of conspiracy to
commit murder.  The Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal from the conviction but
reduced J’s sentence.                     Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.                     Per McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish,
Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.:  Party liability to
conspiracy is an offence known to Canadian law.  Unlike
attempted conspiracy, it does not involve stacking one form of inchoate
liability upon another, and does not suffer from remoteness.                     The
Trieu model is a legitimate basis for party liability to a conspiracy. 
A person becomes party to an offence if he aids or abets a principal in the commission
of the offence.  It follows that party liability to a conspiracy is made out
where the accused aids or abets the actus reus of conspiracy, namely the
conspirators’ act of agreeing.                     The
McNamara model is not a basis for party liability to conspiracy.  Acts
that further the unlawful object of a conspiracy are not an element of the
offence of conspiracy.  Aiding or abetting the furtherance of the unlawful
object does not establish aiding or abetting the principal with any element of
the offence of conspiracy, and thus cannot ground party liability for
conspiracy.  However, where a person, with knowledge of a conspiracy, does or
omits to do something for the purpose of furthering the unlawful object, with
the knowledge and consent of one or more of the existing conspirators, this
provides powerful circumstantial evidence from which membership in the conspiracy
can be inferred.                     In
light of the conclusion that party liability does not extend to acts done in
furtherance of the unlawful object of the conspiracy, party liability should
not, in the present case, have been put to the jury.  There is no evidence that
J aided or abetted the initial formation of the agreement between R and T to
murder their mother or aided or encouraged a new member to join the existing
conspiracy.  The trial judge’s error, however, could not possibly have affected
the verdict.  The curative proviso under s. 686(1) (b)(iii) of the Criminal
Code  applies.  The evidence implicating J as a member of the conspiracy was
overwhelming and, once the jury rejected J’s defence, a finding of guilt under s. 465(1) 
of the Criminal Code  was inevitable. Cases Cited                     Approved:
R. v. Trieu, 2008 ABCA 143, 429 A.R. 200; R. v. Bérubé (1999),
139 C.C.C. (3d) 304, leave to appeal refused, [2000] 1 S.C.R. vii; disapproved:
 R. v. McNamara (No. 1) (1981), 56 C.C.C. (2d) 193; R. v.
Vucetic (1998), 129 C.C.C. (3d) 178; United States of America v. Lorenz
(2007), 222 C.C.C. (3d) 16, leave to appeal refused, [2008] 1 S.C.R. vi (sub
nom. Cheema v. Attorney General of Canada on behalf of the United States of
America); R. v. Taylor (1984), 40 C.R. (3d) 222; distinguished:  R.
v. Déry, 2006 SCC 53, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 669; referred to:  R. v.
O’Brien, [1954] S.C.R. 666; R. v. Lam, 2005 ABQB 849 (CanLII); Papalia v. The Queen, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 256; Sheppe v. The
Queen, [1980] 2 S.C.R. 22; R. v. Hibbert, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 973; R.
v. Briscoe, 2010 SCC 13, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 411; People v. Strauch, 240
Ill. 60 (1909); R. v. Alexander (2005), 206 C.C.C. (3d) 233; Paradis
v. The King, [1934] S.C.R. 165; R. v. Genser (1986), 39 Man. R. (2d)
203, aff’d [1987] 2 S.C.R. 685; R. v. Vu, 2012 SCC 40, [2012] 2 S.C.R.
411; Bell v. The Queen, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 471; R. v. Carter, [1982]
1 S.C.R. 938; R. v. Naicker, 2007 BCCA 608, 229 C.C.C. (3d) 187, leave
to appeal refused, [2008] 1 S.C.R. xi; R. v. Simpson, 2007 ONCA 793, 230
C.C.C. (3d) 542, leave to appeal refused, [2008] 2 S.C.R. xi. Statutes and Regulations Cited Authors Cited “Developments in the Law:  Criminal Conspiracy” (1959), 72 Harv.
L. Rev. 920. Doherty, David.  “Conspiracies and Attempts”, in National Criminal
Law Program, Substantive Criminal Law, vol. 1.  Edmonton: 
Federation of Law Societies of Canada, 1990. LaFave, Wayne R.  Substantive Criminal Law, vol. 2,
2nd ed.  St. Paul, Minn.:  Thomson/West, 2003. Manning, Morris, and Peter Sankoff.  Manning, Mewett &
Sankoff:  Criminal Law, 4th ed.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2009. Williams, Cameron R.  “Complicity in a Conspiracy as an
Approach to Conspiratorial Liability” (1968), 16 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 155.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Rosenberg, Rouleau and
Epstein JJ.A.), 2011 ONCA 220, 105 O.R. (3d) 161, 276 O.A.C. 292, 269
C.C.C. (3d) 258, 85 C.R. (6th) 304, [2011] O.J. No. 1577 (QL), 2011
CarswellOnt 2329, affirming the accused’s conviction for conspiracy to commit
murder.  Appeal dismissed.                     Ian R. Mang and
Shelley M. Kierstead, for the appellant.                     Alexander Alvaro and
Andreea Baiasu, for the respondent.                     Ryan D. W. Dalziel and Micah B. Rankin, for the intervener.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by [1]                             
Moldaver J. — In this appeal, the Court is required to
decide whether the aiding and abetting provisions in the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , are applicable to the offence of conspiracy and, if so,
how and under what circumstances.  Appellate courts are divided on these
questions, and the case at hand provides an opportunity to resolve the
conflicting approaches. I.       Background [2]                             
The appellant was convicted of conspiracy to
commit murder following a trial before Van Melle J. of the Ontario Superior
Court of Justice and a jury.  He was tried as a youth and received a sentence
of 12 months’ imprisonment and 6 months’ conditional supervision in the
community. [3]                             
The appellant appealed to the Ontario Court of
Appeal against both conviction and sentence.  His appeal from conviction was
dismissed; his appeal from sentence was allowed and the sentence was reduced to
8 months in custody and 4 months’ conditional supervision. [4]                             
The appellant appeals his conviction to this
Court with leave.  As I have said, the primary issue is whether a person can be
found liable as a party to the offence of conspiracy and, if so, under what
circumstances. [5]                             
The charge of conspiracy to commit murder, for
which the appellant stands convicted, revolves around the killing of A.K. by
her two daughters R and T.  The evidence at the appellant’s trial established
that R and T conspired to kill their mother and eventually carried out their
plan.  R and T were tried as youths and both were convicted of first degree
murder. A.     The Case Against the Appellant [6]                             
The theory of the Crown against the appellant
was that he and T were friends and that he learned from T that she and R were
planning to kill their mother.  It was their intention to ply her with alcohol,
drown her in the family bathtub, and make it look like an accident. [7]                             
According to the Crown, the appellant took
various steps to help R and T achieve their plan.  An MSN chat log, discovered
by the police on a computer belonging to R and T, contained a revealing
conversation between the appellant and T a few days before the killing.  In
that conversation, the appellant provided information to T about death by
drowning and explained what R and T should do if their mother woke up during
the drowning process.  He further suggested that in addition to plying their
mother with alcohol, R and T should give her about five Tylenol 3 pills as this
would “knock [her] right out” (A.R., at p. 198).  Autopsy results revealed
codeine in A.K.’s blood at 3.5 times the upper therapeutic level — a level
consistent with the consumption of four to six Tylenol 3 tablets.  The Crown
advanced evidence that it was the appellant who supplied R and T with Tylenol 3
tablets shortly before the killing. [8]                             
In the same conversation, the appellant promised
to provide R and T with an alibi for the time of the murder and he proposed a
plan that he described as “irrefutable”.  R and T did not take up the
appellant’s suggestion, choosing instead to follow a plan of their own which
involved meeting the appellant and another friend at a specified restaurant a
short time after the killing.  Evidence presented by the Crown showed that the
appellant agreed to that suggestion and attended the restaurant as planned. [9]                             
Finally, in the same chat with T, the appellant
offered to be present with R and T when the police arrived and he suggested
ways in which R and T should behave to mislead the police.  At one point in his
conversation with T, the appellant made the following telling admission:  “I’m
involved this much, I’m willing to help you out with any of it [T]” (A.R., at
p. 197). [10]                         
In a statement made to the police following his
arrest, the appellant did not deny that he was the one communicating with T in
the MSN chats; rather, he maintained that he was not being serious and did not
expect that his comments would be taken seriously (R.F., at para. 20). B.     The Crown’s Closing Address and the Trial Judge’s Instructions
to the Jury [11]                         
Crown counsel in her closing address invited the
jury to find the appellant guilty on one of two bases: either as a principal
in the conspiracy, or as a party to the conspiracy under s. 21(1) (b)
or (c).  In other words, the Crown argued that either the appellant had
become a member of the conspiracy between R and T or, in the alternative, he
had become an aider or abettor of the conspiracy. [12]                         
The trial judge acceded to the Crown’s request
that the jury be instructed on both bases of liability.  The relevant portions
of the charge on party liability are reproduced in full below: A
person also commits an offence if he does anything for the purpose of helping
another person to commit the offence.  Anyone
who actively assists or encourages somebody else to commit an offence is as
guilty of the offence as the person who actually commits it.  I remind you
though that mere knowledge of, discussion, or passive acquiescence in a plan of
criminal conduct is not of itself sufficient.  . . .  It
is the position of the Crown that [the appellant] can be convicted of
conspiracy as either a full partner like [T] and [R] or if he was a party to
the conspiracy.  He is a party to the conspiracy by aiding, which means
assisting, or abetting, which means encouraging [T] and [R] in their plan to
murder — in the plan to murder [the deceased].  Some
of you might think that [the appellant] was a main partner of the plan that he
agreed to murder [the deceased].  Others might agree at the end of the day that
he was only a party to the conspiracy in that he assisted or encouraged the
girls in their murder plot.  The Crown’s position is that [the appellant] was
involved in this conspiracy because he provided at least one of the following:  •   Advice about the drowning process and how to act when
interacting with the police.  •   Help with details of the plan including combining alcohol and
Tylenol 3’s and what to do if she woke up part way through.  •   An agreement to assist with the alibi and attended at Jack
Astor’s the night of the murder.  •   Or Tylenol 3’s to facilitate her death.  [A.R., at pp. 61 and 69-70] C.     Appeal to the Ontario Court of Appeal, 2011 ONCA 220, 15
O.R. (3d) 161 [13]                         
On his appeal from conviction to the Ontario
Court of Appeal, the appellant raised several grounds, one being that the jury
should not have been instructed on party liability.  Rosenberg J.A., on behalf
of a unanimous court, disagreed.  In his view, on the facts of the case, the
appellant could be convicted as a party to the offence of conspiracy to commit
murder “if he aided or abetted the sisters within the meaning of s. 21(1)  [of
the Criminal Code ] to pursue their unlawful object” (para. 27
(emphasis added)). [14]                         
Having concluded that party liability was
available, Rosenberg J.A. reviewed the instructions on party liability and
found them to be deficient.  In his view, they “were generic, divorced from the
facts of the case and failed to make clear that the jury had to find that the
appellant knew the object of the conspiracy and that his assistance was
intended to assist [R and T] in pursuing the unlawful object of murdering their
mother” (para. 29). [15]                         
Despite this deficiency, Rosenberg J.A. was
satisfied that the curative proviso in s. 686(1)(b)(iii) of the Code could
safely be applied to uphold the conviction.  In this regard, he observed that
the defence put forward by the appellant — his comments in the MSN chats
to T were not to be taken seriously — “did not depend on whether the
appellant was a principal in, or a party to, the conspiracy”.  If the jury
accepted his position or it raised a reasonable doubt, he would be acquitted. 
On the other hand, if the jury rejected his position, “a finding of guilt was inevitable”. 
Rosenberg J.A. further noted that the appellant’s MSN chats with T constituted
“direct evidence, in his own words, of the appellant’s role in the
conspiracy”.  It followed, in his view, that the “[appellant’s] liability as a
party or a member of the conspiracy was overwhelming” (para. 74). II.     Overview of Issues on Appeal [16]                         
Against that backdrop, I turn to what I believe
are the two main issues in this appeal, namely:  Can a person be a party to the
offence of conspiracy as a matter of law and, if so, how and
under what circumstances?  For the reasons that follow, I am satisfied that a
person can be a party to the offence of conspiracy as a matter of law under s.
21 of the Code. [17]                         
The more perplexing issue — and the one that in
my view forms the centerpiece of this appeal — is how and under what
circumstances.  The answer to that question hinges on how one conceptualizes
the offence of conspiracy for purposes of party liability.  Accepting that the
prohibited act in a conspiracy (the actus reus) consists of an agreement
by two or more persons to pursue an unlawful object, specifically a criminal
offence (R. v. O’Brien, [1954] S.C.R. 666), the question that arises is
this:  Should party liability be restricted to those who aid or abet the
agreement that forms the basis of the conspiracy, or does party liability
extend as well to those who aid or abet the furthering of the unlawful object
of the conspiracy? [18]                         
Canadian jurisprudence on the subject is
divided.  Alberta and Quebec have adopted the narrower approach, restricting
party liability to those who aid or abet the agreement itself, with a
particular focus on its formation.  See R. v. Trieu, 2008 ABCA 143, 429
A.R. 200, and R. v. Bérubé (1999), 139 C.C.C. (3d) 304
(Que. C.A.), leave to appeal refused, [2000] 1 S.C.R. vii.  Ontario and British
Columbia have adopted the broader approach, expanding party liability to also
include those who aid or abet the furthering of the unlawful object.  See R.
v. McNamara (No. 1) (1981), 56 C.C.C. (2d) 193 (Ont. C.A.); R. v.
Vucetic (1998), 129 C.C.C. (3d) 178 (Ont. C.A.); and United States of
America v. Lorenz (2007), 222 C.C.C. (3d) 16 (B.C.C.A.), leave to appeal
refused, [2008] 1 S.C.R. vi (sub nom. Cheema v. Attorney
General of Canada on behalf of the United States of America). [19]                         
The case at hand provides this Court with an opportunity to
resolve the conflicting viewpoints.  The first order of business, however, is
to address the seminal question raised by the appellant, namely:  Can a person
be a party to the offence of conspiracy as a matter of law? III.    Analysis A.     Can a Person Be a Party to the Offence of Conspiracy as a
Matter of Law? [20]                         
Section 465  of the Criminal Code 
criminalizes the offence of conspiracy.  Conspiracy to commit murder, the crime
at issue here, is a free-standing offence under s. 465(1)(a) of the Code,
which reads as follows: 465. (1) Except
where otherwise expressly provided by law, the following provisions apply in
respect of conspiracy:  (a) every
one who conspires with any one to commit murder or to cause another person to
be murdered, whether in Canada or not, is guilty of an indictable offence and
liable to a maximum term of imprisonment for life; [21]                         
Like all conspiracies, conspiracy to commit
murder is a form of inchoate liability.  The crime is complete when two or more
persons agree to kill a third party.  No one need be killed; nor is it
necessary that any steps be taken to bring about the murder. [22]                         
Section 21(1) of the Code sets out three
ways in which someone can be found liable as “a party to an offence”.                            21. (1) Every one is a party to an offence who                             (a) actually commits it;                             (b) does or omits to do
anything for the purpose of aiding any person to commit it; or                             (c) abets any person in
committing it. [23]                         
Nothing in the language of s. 21 suggests that
party liability does not apply to offences that punish inchoate behaviour. The
appellant’s real complaint, as I understand it, is that party liability ought
not to apply to the offence of conspiracy because being a party to a conspiracy
“is an offence unknown to the law” (A.F., at para. 41).  It suffers from the
same problem of remoteness that led this Court in R. v. Déry, 2006 SCC
53, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 669, to conclude that “attempted conspiracy” is not an
offence known to law.  As Fish J. explained, the separate rationales
underlining the offences of “conspiracy” and “attempt” lose their justification
when these two forms of inchoate liability are stacked upon one another:                     When
applied to conspiracy, the justification for criminalizing attempt is lost,
since an attempt to conspire amounts, at best, to a risk that a risk will
materialize.  [para. 50] [24]                         
Much as the appellant seeks to apply the logic
of Déry to party liability where the
offence in issue is conspiracy, I am respectfully of the view that the
comparison is inapt — no less so than comparing apples with oranges.  Quite
simply, unlike the crime of attempt, party liability is not inchoate.  In order
for the Crown to rely on party liability, the underlying offence must have been
committed by the principal.  Consequently, being a party to a conspiracy does
not involve stacking one form of inchoate liability upon another. [25]                         
The appellant raised this argument before the
Court of Appeal.  Rosenberg J.A. rejected it for the following reasons, with
which I agree:                            In
my view, the holding in Déry does not warrant reconsideration of this
court’s decisions in McNamara and Vucetic.  Party liability for
conspiracy does not suffer from the problem of remoteness identified in Déry
with respect to attempt to conspire.  A person can be liable as a s. 21(1) 
party to conspiracy only if the Crown proves an agreement by at least two
other people to commit a substantive offence.  If no agreement materialized,
the alleged party’s conduct would be at most an attempt to conspire and would
fail on the holding in Déry.  If, however, the accused is a party to
the conspiracy, . . . the risk of commission of the criminal offence has
sufficiently materialized to warrant criminal sanction.  [Emphasis added; para.
20.] [26]                         
I would accordingly not give effect to this
aspect of the appellant’s argument.  In short, I am satisfied that being a
party to a conspiracy is an offence known to law.  The more difficult question,
to which I now turn, is how and under what circumstances a person can be found
liable as a party to a conspiracy. B.     How and Under What Circumstances Can a Person Be Found
Liable as a Party to the Offence of Conspiracy?                     (1)      The Two Approaches in Canadian
Jurisprudence [27]                         
As mentioned, there are two schools of thought
in Canada as to how, and under what circumstances, a person can be found liable
as a party to the offence of conspiracy — the narrower view and the broader
view. [28]                         
The leading authority in support of the narrower
view is Trieu.  The facts are straightforward.  Trieu operated a
small business selling cellular phones.  He sold phones to five people who were
involved in a conspiracy to traffic in cocaine.  Trieu knew that the
conspirators were engaged in drug trafficking, that they worked as a group, and
that they would use the phones in their trafficking operation.  He claimed,
however, that he was not a member of the conspiracy and denied agreeing with
any of the conspirators to traffic in cocaine. [29]                         
The trial judge acquitted Trieu (R. v. Lam,
2005 ABQB 849 (CanLII)).  In his view, the evidence fell short of establishing
that Trieu was a member of the conspiracy.  He also rejected the Crown’s
alternate theory that in selling cellular phones to the conspirators, Trieu
intentionally assisted the conspirators in attaining their object — trafficking
in cocaine — and as such, he should be found liable as a party to the offence
of conspiracy. [30]                         
Recognizing that there were two lines of
authority on the subject, the trial judge adopted the narrower approach.  In
his view, party liability for the offence of conspiracy did not extend to those
who took steps to further the unlawful object of the conspiracy; rather, it was
restricted to those who aided in the formation of the agreement that had a
particular unlawful object as its goal.  And since there was no evidence that
Trieu aided in the formation of the agreement hatched by the conspirators, he
could not be found liable as a party to the offence of conspiracy. [31]                         
The Crown appealed Trieu’s acquittal to the
Alberta Court of Appeal, claiming that the trial judge erred in taking the
narrower approach to party liability.  The Court of Appeal disagreed. [32]                         
On behalf of the court, Costigan J.A. commenced
his analysis by reviewing some of the basic principles applicable to the law of
conspiracy and party liability.  Citing this Court’s decisions in Papalia v.
The Queen, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 256, and Sheppe v. The Queen, [1980] 2
S.C.R. 22, he noted that the essence of the offence of conspiracy is the
agreement, and acts done in furtherance of the unlawful object are not an
element of the offence.  He cited R. v. Hibbert, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 973,
for the proposition that “[t]o be a party to an offence, a person must aid the
principal in the commission of that offence” (para. 32). [33]                         
Having identified the basic principles that
apply to the law of conspiracy and parties, Costigan J.A. turned to the facts
of Trieu and commented as follows: It follows from these principles that for Trieu to be a party to the
offence of conspiracy to traffic in cocaine, the Crown had to prove that Trieu
performed acts for the purpose of aiding the formation of an agreement
to traffic in cocaine.  Acts performed after the agreement was formed did not
aid in the commission of the offence of conspiracy on the facts of this case. 
Therefore, Trieu could not be a party to the offence of conspiracy for
facilitating the conspirators in attaining their object of trafficking in
cocaine.  Although acts performed after the agreement was reached could have
aided in the commission of the offence of trafficking, Trieu was not charged
with the offence of trafficking.  [Emphasis added; para. 33.]  [34]                         
Trieu was brought
to the attention of the Court of Appeal in the present case.  Rosenberg J.A.
considered the reasoning underlying the narrower approach endorsed by Trieu
but refused to follow it, choosing instead the more expansive approach adopted
by the Ontario Court of Appeal in McNamara and Vucetic. [35]                         
At issue in McNamara was whether two
individuals and a company were liable as co-conspirators for joining an ongoing
bid-rigging scheme operated by a number of pre-existing conspirators.  One of
the issues before the Court of Appeal was whether the two individuals and the
company could be found liable as parties to the offence of conspiracy.  The
court answered that question in the affirmative: On the other
hand, if, at any time before the object of the conspiracy had been attained,
that is, the receipt of the contract money from the Crown, [the individuals and
the company] abetted or encouraged any of the conspirators to pursue its
object, they would become parties to the criminal offence of conspiracy by
virtue of s. 21 of the Code.  [Emphasis added; p. 454.] [36]                         
In Vucetic, the Ontario Court of Appeal
re-affirmed the expansive approach to party liability endorsed in McNamara: However, in
order to find him guilty as an aider and abettor, the jury would have to be
instructed that the appellant knew the object of the conspiracy and that his
assistance was intended to assist the conspirators in attaining their
unlawful criminal object.  [Emphasis added; para. 7.] [37]                         
In choosing to follow McNamara and Vucetic,
Rosenberg J.A. made the following observations in his reasons: Again,
I can see no basis in principle for refusing to follow McNamara and Vucetic
on this issue.  I appreciate the point made in Trieu that the essence of
a conspiracy is an agreement, but it is not an agreement in the abstract; it is
an agreement to attain a common goal, a particular unlawful object. . . .  Admittedly,
including party liability for aiding or abetting pursuit of the unlawful object
blurs the line between the conspiracy and the substantive offence.  The
distinction, however, is that party liability for conspiracy requires proof of
an agreement; there is no requirement of proof that the unlawful object was
attained.  Liability as a party to the substantive offence requires proof that
the substantive offence was committed.  Thus, in this case, the appellant could
be guilty of conspiracy if he aided or abetted the sisters within the meaning of
s. 21(1)  to pursue their unlawful object, even if they ultimately did not carry
out the plan or the deceased had survived the attempt on her life.  [paras. 26
and 27] [38]                         
To sum up, the cases illustrate two strands of
authority.  The first, favoured in Trieu, is narrower, grounding party
liability on aiding or abetting the agreement itself, specifically its
formation.  The second, as endorsed in McNamara, is broader, including
within the ambit of party liability aiding or abetting the furtherance of the
conspiracy’s unlawful object.  The question remains which of these two
approaches should be adopted. (2)        The
Approach to Be Followed [39]                         
The scope of party liability for conspiracy
turns on a proper understanding of the elements of the offence of conspiracy. 
That is because, to be a party to an offence, a person must aid or abet the
principals “in the commission of the offence”: R. v. Briscoe, 2010 SCC
13, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 411, at para. 16.  With respect to the offence of
conspiracy, this Court in Papalia held that “[t]he actus reus is
the fact of agreement” (p. 276).  Aiding or abetting the formation of an
agreement between conspirators (as contemplated in Trieu) amounts to
aiding or abetting the principals in the commission of the conspiracy, and
should therefore lead to party liability for conspiracy. [40]                         
Earlier in these reasons, I explained why, as a
matter of law, a person can be found liable as a party to the offence of
conspiracy.  Once that is accepted, I see no reason in principle or policy why
the limited form of party liability contemplated in Trieu should not be
criminalized.[1] 
The parties and the intervener have submitted no authorities or academic
writings to the contrary — and I know of none.  Nor do those who advocate the
more expansive approach to party liability sanctioned by McNamara
question the Trieu model as a basis upon which party liability
for the offence of conspiracy may be grounded.  Indeed, in the present case,
Rosenberg J.A. recognized it as such. [41]                         
It follows, in my view, that the Trieu
model represents a legitimate basis upon which party liability for the offence
of conspiracy may be found.  I hasten to add that a review of the jurisprudence
in Canada and elsewhere reveals that there are few reported cases where the
facts have come within the Trieu paradigm.  Trieu itself was not
such a case.  And the only authority that has come to my attention is People
v. Strauch, 240 Ill. 60 (1909).  In that case, a father introduced his son
to another person with the intention that they enter into a conspiracy, which
they did.  The father was convicted as a party to the conspiracy for aiding and
abetting its formation. [42]                         
That brings me to the broader approach endorsed
in McNamara and the central issue in this appeal — namely, whether party
liability can attach to someone who knows of a conspiracy and who does (or
omits to do) something for the purpose of furthering its unlawful object. [43]                         
With respect to those who hold a different view,
I have concluded that it should not.  Party liability should be restricted to
conduct that aids or abets the formation of the agreement that comprises
the essence of the crime of conspiracy.  In all other cases, a conviction for
conspiracy will not lie absent proof of membership in the conspiracy. [44]                         
As I have explained, agreement is a central
element to the offence of conspiracy.  Conversely, an act done in furtherance
of the unlawful object is not an element of the offence of conspiracy. 
Although such acts can serve as circumstantial evidence to support the
existence of a conspiracy, they are not themselves a component of the actus
reus of conspiracy.  Indeed, a conspiracy can be established in the absence
of any overt acts done in furtherance of its unlawful object. In other words,
“[t]he crime of conspiracy is complete once the agreement is reached”: Trieu,
at para. 31. [45]                         
It follows, in my view, that the broader
approach as endorsed in McNamara must be rejected.  Aiding or abetting
the furtherance of the unlawful object does not establish aiding or abetting
the principal with any element of the offence of conspiracy.  It cannot ground
party liability for conspiracy. [46]                         
The conclusion I have reached is consistent with
the following observation from a Harvard Law Review article, with which
I agree: But to aid and abet a crime it
is necessary not merely to help the criminal, but to help him in the commission
of the particular criminal offense.  A person does not aid and abet a
conspiracy by helping the “conspiracy” to commit a substantive offense, for the
crime of conspiracy is separate from the offense which is its object.  It is
necessary to help the “conspiracy” in the commission of the crime of
conspiracy, that is, in the commission of the act of agreement.  Only
then is it justifiable to dispense with the necessity of proving commission of
the act of agreement by the defendant himself.  In all other cases, to convict
the defendant of conspiracy it is necessary to prove not only knowledge on his
part that he was helping in a wrongful enterprise, but also knowledge on
another’s part that he intended to do so, and at least a tacit agreement to
give and accept such help. [Emphasis added; footnotes omitted.]  (“Developments
in the Law: Criminal Conspiracy” (1959), 72 Harv. L. Rev. 920, at pp.
934-35) [47]                         
In an article entitled “Conspiracies and
Attempts”, in National Criminal Law Program, Substantive Criminal Law (1990),
vol. 1, D. Doherty (then judge of the Supreme Court of Ontario), expressed the
same view: The aiding
and abetting provisions [s. 21(1)(b) and (c) of the Code]
should apply to conspiracy charges.  They must, however, be applied with
caution.  Those sections require that the assistance be rendered for the
purpose of assisting the commission of the crime.  In the context of a
conspiracy charge, the alleged acts of assistance or encouragement should have
to be done for the purpose of aiding or assisting the act of agreeing. 
Conduct which aids or assists in the achievement of the object of the
conspiracy should not be equated with assistance in the making of the
conspiracy.  [Emphasis added; p. 36.] (See also M. Manning and
P. Sankoff, Manning, Mewett & Sankoff:  Criminal Law (4th ed.
2009), at p. 316.) [48]                         
Those who prefer the McNamara approach
fear that persons who have not become members of the conspiracy, but who have
nonetheless done things to further the conspiracy’s unlawful object, will,
despite their moral culpability, slip through the cracks — that is, unless the
unlawful object of the conspiracy is attained or attempted, in which case they
could be charged as parties to the substantive offence or to an attempt to
commit that offence. [49]                         
Thus, in the case at hand, the fear is that, had
R and T not killed their mother or attempted to do so, the appellant would have
ended up going free, despite his efforts to further the planned killing, unless
the Crown could prove that he entered into the agreement formulated by R and T
and thus became a member of the conspiracy. [50]                         
Much as I appreciate the concern raised by those
who prefer the more expansive McNamara approach, viewed realistically, I
consider it to be more imaginary than real. [51]                         
In R. v. Alexander (2005), 206 C.C.C.
(3d) 233 (Ont. C.A.), a case involving various charges, including conspiracy to
extort, Doherty J.A. stated the following: The appellants’ submissions stand on firm legal footing.  The actus
reus of the crime of conspiracy lies in the formation of an agreement,
tacit or express, between two or more individuals, to act together in pursuit
of a mutual criminal objective.  Co-conspirators share a common goal borne out
of a meeting of the minds whereby each agrees to act together with the other to
achieve a common goal.  It follows from the mutuality of objective requirement of the actus
reus that a conspiracy is not established merely by proof of knowledge of
the existence of a scheme to commit a crime or by the doing of acts in
furtherance of that scheme.  Neither knowledge of nor participation in a
criminal scheme can be equated with the actus reus of a conspiracy:  see
R. v. Lamontagne (1999), 142 C.C.C. (3d) 561 (Que. C.A.), at 575-76; R.
v. Cotroni, supra, at pp. 17-8.  Knowledge and acts in furtherance
of a criminal scheme do, however, provide evidence, particularly where they
co-exist, from which the existence of an agreement may be inferred. 
[Emphasis added; citations omitted; paras. 46-47.] I agree with the
emphasized comment, but would state it slightly differently and in somewhat
more emphatic terms. [52]                         
In my view, where a person, with knowledge of a
conspiracy (which by definition includes knowledge of the unlawful object
sought to be attained), does (or omits to do) something for the purpose of
furthering the unlawful object, with the knowledge and consent of one or more
of the existing conspirators, this provides powerful circumstantial evidence
from which membership in the conspiracy can be inferred.  To be precise, it
would be evidence of an agreement, whether tacit or express, that the unlawful
object should be achieved.  Ultimately, that issue is one for the trier of
fact, who must decide whether any inference other than agreement can reasonably
be drawn on the evidence.  But, as I will explain, the case at hand illustrates
how a constellation of such facts can make a finding of membership a virtual
certainty. [53]                         
In so concluding, I note that conspiracies are
often proved by way of circumstantial evidence.  Direct evidence of an
agreement tends to be a rarity.  However, it is commonplace that membership in
a conspiracy may be inferred from evidence of conduct that assists the unlawful
object.  Justice Rinfret made this basic point in Paradis v. The King,
[1934] S.C.R. 165, some eight decades ago: Conspiracy, like all other crimes, may
be established by inference from the conduct of the parties. No doubt the
agreement between them is the gist of the offence, but only in very rare cases
will it be possible to prove it by direct evidence.  [p. 168] [54]                         
Furthermore, it is not necessary that all
members of a conspiracy play, or intend to play, equal roles in the ultimate
commission of the unlawful object.  Indeed, members in a conspiracy need not
personally commit, or intend to commit, the offence which each has agreed
should be committed: R. v. Genser (1986), 39 Man. R. (2d) 203 (C.A.),
aff’d [1987] 2 S.C.R. 685.[2] 
Any degree of assistance in the furtherance of the unlawful object can lead to
a finding of membership as long as agreement to a common plan can be inferred
and the requisite mental state has been established. [55]                         
I do not gainsay the possibility that someone,
with knowledge of an ongoing conspiracy, could do something for the purpose of
furthering the unlawful object without the knowledge or consent of the existing
conspirators.  An example would be where A and B conspire to kill C.  D learns of the conspiracy and
wishes to facilitate the murder.  Unbeknownst to A or B, D prevents
a warning message from reaching the intended victim, C: W. R. LaFave, Substantive
Criminal Law (2nd ed. 2003), vol. 2, at p. 270.  In
such circumstances, an agreement, tacit or otherwise, between the person
providing the assistance (D) and the existing conspirators (A and B)
would be a fiction as neither A nor B was aware of, or agreed to, D’s efforts. [56]                         
That situation does not arise here, and I leave
for another day whether a person providing “clandestine” assistance in
furtherance of the unlawful object of an ongoing conspiracy could be found
liable of any crime if the conspirators did not commit or attempt to commit the
substantive crime that formed the object of the conspiracy and if his own
efforts did not rise to the level of an attempt at the substantive offence. (3)        Aiding
or Abetting a Pre-Existing Agreement [57]                         
Beyond the debate between the narrower and
broader approaches, a question arises as to whether, within the narrower
approach, the Trieu model should be limited only to those who aid in the
formation of a new agreement to pursue an unlawful object or whether its
reach should extend to those who aid or abet a pre-existing agreement. [58]                         
In support of its position that the latter approach
should be followed, the Crown relied in part on this Court’s recent decision in
R. v. Vu, 2012 SCC 40, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 411.  In particular, the Crown
maintained that because conspiracy has been identified as a continuing offence
(Bell v. The Queen, [1983] 2 S.C.R. 471, at p. 488), party liability can
attach to anyone who aids or abets the agreement at any point during the life
of the conspiracy. [59]                         
In Trieu, Costigan J.A. opined that
because conspiracy is an ongoing crime, party liability can arise after the
initial agreement is formed if, for example, a person aids in the addition of a
new member to join an existing conspiracy (para. 34).  Justice Doherty also
took the position that party liability attaches to someone who encourages or
assists others to join an existing agreement: “Conspiracies and Attempts”, in
National Criminal Law Program, Substantive Criminal Law (1990), vol. 1,
at p. 37.  These authorities observe, and I agree, that aiding or encouraging
someone to become a member of a pre-existing conspiracy facilitates that new
member’s commission of the offence of conspiracy — that is, the act of
agreement.  To be consistent in principle, party liability should thus extend
to assistance or encouragement that results in the addition of a new member to
a pre-existing conspiracy. [60]                         
In this case, the Crown argued that the
appellant could become a party to the conspiracy by encouraging the sisters to
continue their conspiracy when there were signs that they might abandon it
(R.F., at para. 34).  As well, at least one American author has suggested that
a person might be found liable as a party to the offence of conspiracy “by
facilitating the continuance of the conspiracy as by ‘providing the group with
a hideout so that it does not have to disband’” (C. R. Williams, “Complicity in
a Conspiracy as an Approach to Conspiratorial Liability” (1968), 16 U.C.L.A.
L. Rev. 155, at p. 162, citing “Developments in the Law: Criminal
Conspiracy”, at pp. 934-35).  The same author suggests that “encouraging one or
more persons to follow through with already formulated conspiratorial plans”
might also attract party liability (p. 162). [61]                         
I would not give effect to the Crown’s
argument.  As a preliminary matter, the argument goes beyond the limited
situation endorsed by Costigan J.A. in Trieu and by Doherty J. in his
article.  And as to the substance of the Crown’s point, though I acknowledge
that these acts can be viewed as aiding or abetting the agreement itself, such
behaviour is equally if not more consistently characterized as aiding or
abetting the furtherance of the unlawful object, and thus captured by the McNamara
model.  As I explained earlier, the McNamara model should not lead to
party liability for conspiracy.  The Crown should thus not be able to achieve
through the back door what principle has denied from the front. [62]                         
  In my view, the Crown’s argument in favour of
criminalizing aiding or abetting a pre-existing agreement (short of adding a
new member to the agreement) is a solution in search of a problem.  As I have
explained, these acts, which aid or abet the furtherance of the unlawful
object, provide circumstantial evidence from which membership can be inferred. 
In cases where the circumstantial evidence falls short of establishing
membership, there are other charges open to the prosecution.  In some
instances, the Crown will be able to rely on party liability to charge the
substantive offence that forms the object of the conspiracy, or an attempt to
commit that offence; in other instances, the offence of counselling the
substantive offence may apply. [63]                         
To sum up, party liability to a conspiracy is
limited to cases where the accused encourages or assists in the initial
formation of the agreement, or when he encourages or assists new members to
join a pre-existing agreement. C.     Application to this Case [64]                         
In light of my conclusion that party liability
does not extend to acts done in furtherance of the unlawful object of the
conspiracy, I agree with the appellant that party liability should not, in the
circumstances, have been left to the jury.  There is no evidence that the
appellant aided or abetted the formation of the agreement to murder A.K. or
aided or encouraged a new member to join the existing conspiracy.  That said,
like the Court of Appeal, I am satisfied that the error, though significant,
could not possibly have affected the verdict. [65]                         
The evidence implicating the appellant as a
member of the conspiracy was overwhelming.  The Crown presented a powerful body
of evidence from which the jury could find that the appellant, with knowledge
of the conspiracy between R and T, provided advice and offered assistance to
them, with their knowledge and consent, for the purpose of facilitating the
killing of their mother.  As he said in his MSN conversation with T, shortly
before the murder occurred, “I’m involved this much, I’m willing to help you
out with any of it [T]” (A.R., at p. 197).  That, along with other evidence
which implicated the appellant in providing the Tylenol 3 pills and attending a
restaurant after the killing to provide R and T with an alibi, provided the
jury with all the evidence it needed to find an agreement between the appellant
and R and T that the murder should be carried out.  Nothing more was needed to
establish the appellant’s membership in the conspiracy.  It is immaterial that
the appellant, unlike R and T, took no part in the actual killing of A.K.  Once
the jury rejected his explanation that he was not being serious, as it must
have, a finding of guilt on the basis of membership was inevitable. [66]                         
I should point out that in the circumstances,
the decision on the part of the Crown to charge the appellant with conspiracy
to commit murder very much softened the blow that could otherwise have befallen
him.  The assistance he provided to R and T in facilitating the murder, which
they eventually committed, could well have led to a charge of first degree
murder against him. [67]                         
Accordingly, I would dismiss the appeal from
conviction.  I do so mindful of two alternate grounds of appeal raised by the
appellant. [68]                         
First, the appellant submits that evidence
admitted under the co-conspirators’ exception to the hearsay rule did not
satisfy the principled approach to hearsay.  Specifically, he complains that
statements made by T should not have been admitted for their truth because T
was available as a witness and could have been called by the Crown.  I would
not give effect to this submission.  Defence counsel at trial did not raise
this issue with the trial judge.  Had he done so, the Crown may have chosen to
call T as a witness.  In the circumstances, defence counsel’s decision not to
raise the matter could well have been a tactical choice — and as no issue is
taken with the competence of trial counsel, I see no need to address this
ground further. [69]                         
Second, the appellant says that the trial judge
failed to instruct the jury that the co-conspirators’ exception applied only to
membership and not to party liability.  Once again, defence counsel at trial
did not raise this issue with the trial judge.  Moreover, the instructions
given by the trial judge on the co-conspirators’ exception referred to use of
that evidence only to prove membership.  There was no suggestion that the
evidence could be used to prove party liability.  That being so, I would not
give effect to this ground. [70]                         
 Furthermore, in light of my conclusion that the
facts of this appeal do not give rise to party liability for the offence of
conspiracy, this is not an appropriate case to determine how, if at all, the
framework for the co-conspirators’ exception established by R. v. Carter,
[1982] 1 S.C.R. 938, might apply in the case of a party to a conspiracy. [71]                         
As a final matter, I note that there are
conflicting appellate decisions on the applicability of the co-conspirators’
exception where conspirators are tried separately:  R. v. Naicker, 2007
BCCA 608, 229 C.C.C. (3d) 187, leave to appeal refused, [2008] 1 S.C.R. xi; R.
v. Simpson, 2007 ONCA 793, 230 C.C.C. (3d) 542, leave to appeal refused,
[2008] 2 S.C.R. xi.  This issue, however, was not raised before us or in the
courts below.  Accordingly, I see no need to consider it. IV.    Conclusion [72]                         
The aiding and abetting of a conspiracy is an
offence known to Canadian law.  The offence is made out where the accused aids
or abets the actus reus of conspiracy, namely the act of agreeing. 
It follows that the approach adopted in Trieu is the only basis upon
which party liability for the offence of conspiracy may be found.  The McNamara
approach is rejected. [73]                         
I caution, however, that the behaviour captured
by McNamara may well support a charge of conspiracy.  As indicated,
where a person with knowledge of a conspiracy does (or omits to do) something
for the purpose of furthering the unlawful object, with the knowledge and
consent of one or more of the existing conspirators, this provides powerful
circumstantial evidence of his membership in the conspiracy. [74]                         
The approach I have adopted brings a measure of
simplicity and clarity to the law.  Party liability to a conspiracy is limited
to cases where the accused encourages or assists in the initial formation of
the agreement, or where he encourages or assists new members to join a
pre-existing agreement. [75]                         
For the reasons above, I would dismiss the
appeal from conviction. V.     Appeal from Sentence [76]                         
Before this Court, the appellant also sought to
appeal his sentence, even though he did not apply for or receive leave to do
so.  I see no basis for granting leave to appeal from sentence.  Accordingly, I
would not consider the proposed sentence appeal.                     Appeal
dismissed.                     Solicitors
for the appellant:  Mang, Steinberg, Toronto.                     Solicitor
for the respondent:  Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener:  Bull, Housser & Tupper, Vancouver.  [1]
I should point out that on the Trieu model, if A brings B and C
together in the expectation that they will enter into a conspiracy, but B and C
do not do so, A cannot be found liable of the offence of attempted conspiracy
since no such offence exists at law.  See Déry. [2]
In my view, R. v. Taylor (1984), 40 C.R. (3d) 222 (B.C.S.C.) — which
takes the contrary position — was wrongly decided.  