SCC Case Information: 36783   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Antic,
  2017 SCC 27, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 509 Appeal
  heard: December 2, 2016 Judgment rendered: June 1, 2017 Docket: 36783  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen in Right of Canada Appellant  and  Kevin
Antic Respondent  - and -  Canadian
Civil Liberties Association and Criminal
Lawyers’ Association (Ontario) Interveners   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner,
Gascon, Côté, Brown and Rowe JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 72) Wagner J. (McLachlin C.J. and Abella,
  Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Gascon, Côté, Brown and Rowe JJ. concurring)    R.
v. Antic, 2017 SCC 27, [2017] 1
S.C.R. 509 Her Majesty the Queen in Right
of Canada                                                  Appellant v. Kevin Antic                                                                                                   Respondent and Canadian Civil Liberties Association and Criminal Lawyers’ Association
(Ontario)                                                    Interveners Indexed as: R. v. Antic 2017 SCC 27 File No.: 36783. 2016: December 2; 2017: June 1. Present: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner, Gascon, Côté, Brown and Rowe JJ. on appeal from the ontario superior court of justice                     A
was arrested and charged with several drug and firearms offences. He was denied
release at his bail hearing, and sought review of the detention order. The bail
review judge declined to vacate the order, indicating that he would have
released A if he could have imposed both a surety and a cash deposit as release
conditions. However, s. 515(2)(e) of the Criminal Code  permits a
justice of the peace or judge to require both a cash deposit and surety
supervision only if the accused is from out of the province or does not
ordinarily reside within 200 km of the place in which he or she is in custody. As
an Ontario resident living within 200 km of the place in which he was detained,
A did not meet these criteria. A brought a subsequent bail review application,
challenging the constitutionality of s. 515(2) (e). The bail review judge
found that since the geographical limitation in s. 515(2) (e) prevented him
from granting bail on the terms that he deemed appropriate, the provision violated
the right not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause under s. 11 (e)
of the Charter . He severed and struck down the geographical limitation
in s. 515(2) (e) and ordered A’s release with a surety and a cash deposit
of $100,000.                     Held: The
appeal should be allowed and the declaration of constitutionality reversed.                     In
the instant case, s. 515(2) (e) of the Criminal Code  did not have
the effect of denying A bail — it was the bail review judge’s application of the bail provisions
that did so. The bail review judge committed two errors in fashioning A’s
release order. First, by requiring a cash deposit with a surety, one of the
most onerous forms of release, he failed to adhere to the ladder principle. Even
though A had offered a surety with a monetary pledge, the bail review judge was
fixated on and insisted on a cash deposit because he believed the erroneous
assumption that cash is more coercive than a pledge. Second, the bail review
judge erred in making his decision on the basis of speculation as to whether A
might believe that forfeiture proceedings would not be taken against his elderly
grandmother if he breached his bail terms. A judge cannot impose a more onerous
form of release solely because he or she speculates that the accused will not
believe in the enforceability of a surety or a pledge. Parliament expressly
authorized the possibility of an accused being released on entering into a
recognizance with sureties in the place of cash bail, and judges should not
undermine the bail scheme by speculating, contrary to any evidence and to
Parliament’s intent, that requiring cash will be more effective. Cases Cited Statutes and Regulations Cited Act respecting the duties of Justices of the Peace, out of Sessions,
in relation to persons charged with Indictable Offences, S.C. 1869, c. 30. Bill of Rights (Eng.), 1688, 1 Will.
& Mar. 2, c. 2. Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
s. 11 (e). Statutes
of Westminster, The First (Eng.), 1275, 3 Edw. 1, c. 15. Authors Cited Canada. Canadian Committee on Corrections. Report of the Canadian
Committee on Corrections — Toward Unity: Criminal Justice and Corrections.
Ottawa: Queen’s Printer, 1969 [Ouimet Report]. Canada. House of Commons. House of Commons Debates, vol. III,
3rd Sess., 28th Parl., February 5, 1971, p. 3118. Friedland, Martin L. Detention before Trial: A Study of Criminal
Cases Tried in the Toronto Magistrates’ Courts. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1965. Friedland, Martin L. “The Bail Reform Act Revisited”
(2012), 16 Can. Crim. L.R. 315. Irving, Nancy L. Alberta Bail Review: Endorsing a Call for Change,
2016 (online: https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/2532e913-c5c6-4316-842d-b1cf39217994/resource/4c134128-7c59-4057-8fdd-dbd0ce0a9ae8/download/AlbertaBailReview-REPORT.pdf;
archived version: http://www.scc-csc.ca/cso-dce/2017SCC-CSC27_2_eng.pdf). Roach, Kent. “A Charter Reality Check: How Relevant Is the Charter 
to the Justness of Our Criminal Justice System?” (2008), 40 S.C.L.R.
(2d) 717.                     APPEAL
from a decision of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Munroe J.), 2015
ONSC 6593, declaring s. 515(2) (e) of the Criminal Code  unconstitutional
and granting the accused judicial interim release. Appeal allowed.                     Nick Devlin and Amber
Pashuk, for
the appellant.                     No one
appeared for the respondent.                     Jonathan Shime, for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association.                     John Norris and Chris
Sewrattan,
for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association (Ontario).                     Vincenzo Rondinelli, as amicus curiae. The judgment of the
Court was delivered by                     Wagner J. — I.              
Overview [1]                             
The right not to be denied reasonable bail
without just cause is an essential element of an enlightened criminal justice
system. It entrenches the effect of the presumption of innocence at the
pre-trial stage of the criminal trial process and safeguards the liberty of
accused persons. This case requires the Court to clarify important aspects of
the law of bail, specifically, when a judge or a justice of the peace can
impose a cash deposit on an accused as a condition of release. [2]                             
At issue are the interpretation and the
constitutionality of s. 515(2) (e) of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 ,
which authorizes one form of pre-trial release. Section 515(2) (e) permits a
judge or a justice to require both a cash deposit and surety supervision[1] as conditions of release if an accused ordinarily resides out of
the province or more than 200 km away from the place in which he or she is in
custody. But this form of combined “cash-plus-surety” release is not available
to accused persons who do not meet these geographic criteria. [4]                             
The “ladder principle”, which is codified in s.
515(3) of the Code, requires a justice or a judge to impose the least
onerous form of release on an accused unless the Crown shows why that should
not be the case. The bail review judge failed to adhere to this central
principle. He erred by requiring a cash deposit with a surety, one of the most
onerous forms of release, even though Mr. Antic had offered a surety with a
monetary pledge (known in the Code as a recognizance[2]). A cash deposit and a monetary pledge both give an accused the
same financial incentive to abide by his or her release order. Neither is more
coercive than the other. But requiring cash can be unfair, as it makes an
accused person’s release contingent on his or her access to funds. Thus, cash
bail is merely a limited alternative to a pledge that should not be imposed
where accused persons or their sureties have reasonably recoverable assets[3]  to pledge. [5]                             
 I would allow the appeal. Mr. Antic had offered
to provide sureties with a monetary pledge. He could have been released without
a cash deposit.  Therefore, there is no need to address the question whether s.
515(2) (e) violates s. 11 (e). [6]                             
 Yet the concerns raised in this case extend
beyond the provision at issue. The bail review judge’s reasons appear to be
illustrative of how the bail provisions are being applied inconsistently across
the country. While the bail hearing is admittedly an expedited procedure, the
bail provisions are federal law and must be applied consistently in all
provinces and territories. This case affords an opportunity to determine the
proper approach to applying those provisions, one that is consistent with the
right not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause under s. 11 (e)
and with the presumption of innocence. II.           
Relevant Provisions [7]                             
Section 11 (e) of the Charter  reads
as follows: 11.  Any person charged with an offence has the right  . . .  (e)
not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause; [8]                             
And the relevant portions of s. 515 of the Code
read as follows: 515 (1) Subject to this section, where an accused who is charged with an
offence other than an offence listed in section 469  is taken before a justice,
the justice shall, unless a plea of guilty by the accused is accepted, order,
in respect of that offence, that the accused be released on his giving an
undertaking without conditions, unless the prosecutor, having been given a
reasonable opportunity to do so, shows cause, in respect of that offence, why
the detention of the accused in custody is justified or why an order under any
other provision of this section should be made and where the justice makes an
order under any other provision of this section, the order shall refer only to
the particular offence for which the accused was taken before the justice.  (2) Where the justice does not make an order under subsection (1), he
shall, unless the prosecutor shows cause why the detention of the accused is
justified, order that the accused be released  (a) on his giving an undertaking with such conditions as the justice
directs;  (b) on his entering into a recognizance before the justice, without
sureties, in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice
directs but without deposit of money or other valuable security;  (c) on his entering into a recognizance before the justice with
sureties in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice
directs but without deposit of money or other valuable security;  (d) with the consent of the prosecutor, on his entering into a
recognizance before the justice, without sureties, in such amount and with such
conditions, if any, as the justice directs and on his depositing with the
justice such sum of money or other valuable security as the justice directs; or  (e) if the accused is not ordinarily resident in the province in which
the accused is in custody or does not ordinarily reside within two hundred
kilometres of the place in which he is in custody, on his entering into a
recognizance before the justice with or without sureties in such amount and
with such conditions, if any, as the justice directs, and on his depositing
with the justice such sum of money or other valuable security as the justice
directs.  . . .  (3) The justice shall not make an order under any of paragraphs (2)(b)
to (e) unless the prosecution shows cause why an order under the immediately
preceding paragraph should not be made.  (4) The justice may direct as conditions under subsection (2) that the
accused shall do any one or more of the following things as specified in the
order:  (a) report at times to be stated in the order to a peace officer or
other person designated in the order;  (b)
remain within a territorial jurisdiction specified
in the order;  (c) notify the peace officer or other person designated under paragraph
(a) of any change in his address or his employment or occupation;  (d) abstain from communicating, directly or indirectly, with any
victim, witness or other person identified in the order, or refrain from going
to any place specified in the order, except in accordance with the conditions
specified in the order that the justice considers necessary;  (e) where the accused is the holder of a passport, deposit his passport
as specified in the order;  (e.1) comply with any other condition specified in the order that the
justice considers necessary to ensure the safety and security of any victim of
or witness to the offence; and  (f) comply with such other reasonable conditions specified in the order
as the justice considers desirable. III.         
Background and Judicial History [9]                             
Mr. Antic was arrested in Windsor, Ontario, and
charged with several drug and firearms offences. He is an Ontario resident, but
he spends much of his time in the state of Michigan and has no assets in
Canada. Mr. Antic’s initial bail hearing occurred after he was arrested. A.           
Ontario Court of Justice (Justice of the Peace
Renaud), No. C57727, June 30, 2015 [10]                         
At the bail hearing, the justice of the peace
denied Mr. Antic’s release. Because Mr. Antic was charged with drug
trafficking, the presumption in favour of pre-trial release did not apply and
he bore the burden of justifying his release (Code, s. 515(6)). The
justice concluded that having Mr. Antic’s girlfriend supervise him as a surety
would address any safety concerns. However, because Mr. Antic had no
significant ties to the local community, the justice found that his release
plan did not adequately address the substantial flight risk he posed. B.           
Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Munroe J.),
No. CR-15-3408, July 17, 2015 [11]                         
Mr. Antic sought a review of the detention order
under s. 520 of the Code. He offered a pledge or a deposit of money as
well as two additional sureties (his father and his grandmother) to satisfy the
flight risk concerns. [12]                         
The bail review judge rejected the new release
plan and declined to vacate the detention order. He insisted on a cash deposit
because he was worried that Mr. Antic could abscond if what was at stake was “a
mere pledge” of $10,000 from his grandmother. The bail review judge speculated
that Mr. Antic would assume that if he breached his bail conditions, the government
would not seize his elderly grandmother’s house. The bail review judge did not
consider Mr. Antic’s girlfriend as a potential surety even though she was
available at that time. [13]                         
The bail review judge wrote that he would have
released Mr. Antic if he could have imposed both a surety and a cash deposit as
release conditions in order to satisfy the flight risk and safety concerns.
However, s. 515(2)(e) of the Code permits a cash-plus-surety release
only if the accused is from out of the province or does not ordinarily reside
within 200 km of the place in which he or she is in custody. As an Ontario
resident living within 200 km of the place in which he was detained, Mr. Antic
did not qualify for this. C.           
Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Munroe J.),
No. CR-15-3429, August 28, 2015 [14]                         
In his second bail review application, Mr. Antic
argued that the following new facts justified his release: (i) he had pleaded
guilty to the drug trafficking charges and had been sentenced to a short term
in jail (which he had already served in pre-trial custody); (ii) the handgun
found under his bed had been misclassified as a 40 calibre weapon; (iii) his
co-accused had been released on bail; and (iv) there was a potential for delay
in obtaining a date for a preliminary inquiry on the remaining charges he
faced. [15]                         
The bail review judge disagreed. He was still
concerned that Mr. Antic would abscond regardless of these changed
circumstances. D.           
Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Munroe J.),
2015 ONSC 6593, October 23, 2015 [16]                         
Mr. Antic sought a third bail review, this time
challenging the constitutionality of s. 515(2) (e). [17]                         
The bail review judge found that s. 515(2) (e)
violates the right not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause under s.
11 (e) of the Charter . He held that the only viable conditions of
release for Mr. Antic would be a large cash deposit and surety supervision.
However, the geographical limitation in s. 515(2) (e) prevented him from
granting bail on these terms. The bail review judge thus concluded that the
geographical restriction unconstitutionally denied Mr. Antic bail. He severed
and struck down the geographical limitation in s. 515(2) (e). He then ordered
Mr. Antic’s release with a surety and a cash deposit of $100,000. [18]                         
This Court granted the Crown leave to appeal the
bail review judge’s decision, as the Crown has no right to appeal a bail review
decision made under s. 520  to the provincial court of appeal:  R. v. Smith,
2003 SKCA 8, 171 C.C.C. (3d) 383, at para. 25; Supreme Court Act, R.S.C.
1985, c. S-26, s. 40(1) . [19]                         
After over a year in pre-trial custody, Mr.
Antic raised sufficient funds to post the $100,000 cash deposit and was
released on July 15, 2016. IV.        
Issue [20]                         
Does s. 515(2)(e) of the Criminal Code 
infringe the right not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause under s.
11 (e) of the Charter ? V.           
Analysis A.           
Concept and History of Bail [21]                         
When someone is charged with a crime, the Code
and the Charter  typically require that the accused be released from
detention before trial on what is known as “bail”. Although release is the
default position in most cases, a judge or a justice also has the authority to
deny the release of an accused or to impose conditions on the accused when he
or she is released, provided that the Crown justifies the detention or the
conditions. The Code primarily utilizes the expression “judicial interim
release” to refer to “bail”. In these reasons, I will use the terms “bail” and
“pre-trial release” interchangeably in referring to this concept. [22]                         
The concept of bail traces back to English antiquity.
Early codifications of the law of bail include the Statutes of Westminster,
The First (Eng.) 1275, 3 Edw. 1, c. 15, which structured the terms under
which judges could grant bail, and The Bill of Rights (Eng.), 1688, 1
Will. & Mar. 2, c. 2, which prohibited excessive bail conditions. By the
1800s, the sole purpose of the law of bail in England was to ensure that
accused persons who were released on bail would attend their trials: G. T.
Trotter, The Law of Bail in Canada (3rd ed. (loose-leaf)), at p. 1-6. [23]                         
Bail has deep historical roots in Canada as
well. Canadian law reflected the English law of bail until Parliament enacted
legislation in 1869 that made bail discretionary for all offences: see An
Act respecting the duties of Justices of the Peace, out of Sessions, in
relation to persons charged with Indictable Offences, S.C. 1869, c.
30; R. v. Hall, 2002 SCC 64, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 309, at para. 14; R. v.
St-Cloud, 2015 SCC 27, [2015] 2 S.C.R. 328, at para. 26. In dissenting
reasons in Hall, Iacobucci J. explained that older versions of the Code
had provided justices, judges and magistrates with no real guidance on bail: Before 1972,
the law of bail was a highly discretionary matter. It was presumed that an
accused person would be detained prior to trial unless he or she applied for
bail under s. 463(1) of the Criminal Code, S.C. 1953-54, c. 51 (as
amended by S.C. 1960-61, c. 43, s. 16), and s. 463(3) gave virtually no
guidance to the bail judge charged with determining whether to detain an
accused committed for trial . . . . [para. 56] [24]                         
The provisions of the pre-1972 Code also
gave no guidance on the imposition of release conditions. There were three
forms of release: (a) release with sufficient sureties upon entering into a
recognizance, (b) release upon making a cash deposit, and (c) release upon
entering into a recognizance without a deposit: S.C. 1953-54, c. 51, ss. 451
and 463(3). These forms of release were not ranked in any way, which meant that
a justice, a judge or a magistrate could impose any of them in any given case. [26]                         
Both Professor Friedland and the authors of the
Ouimet Report recognized that the bail system’s overreliance on cash bail
limited the possibility of release for many accused persons. Professor
Friedland observed that there was an “undue preoccupation with [bail’s]
monetary aspects”: Friedland, Detention before Trial, at p. 176.
Generally, magistrates required accused persons to deposit cash before they
would release them. This led to an unconscionable result: “. . . the ability of
the accused to marshall funds or property in advance” determined whether he or
she would be released (ibid., at p. 176). [27]                         
Professor Friedland also mentioned some of the
practical challenges involved in setting the quantum of a cash deposit, as well
as the unfairness it produced: A system which requires security in
advance often produces an insoluble dilemma. In most cases it is impossible to
pick a figure which is high enough to ensure the accused’s appearance in court
and yet low enough for him to raise: the two seldom, if ever, overlap. [ibid.,
at p. 176] [28]                         
The 1972 Bail Reform Act, S.C.
1970-71-72, c. 37, was an attempt to address these concerns by placing strict
limits on cash bail. Then Justice Minister John Turner, speaking in the House
of Commons, recognized that requiring cash in advance to secure pre-trial
release could operate “harshly against poor people”. He stated that “cash bail
in this bill is only a last resort” and that the bill was intended to limit
cash bail to circumstances in which “the alleged offender was not ordinarily
resident in the community where he was in custody”: House of Commons Debates,
vol. III, 3rd Sess., 28th Parl., February 5, 1971, at p. 3118. [29]                         
The Bail Reform Act also codified what is
now known as the “ladder principle”. This Act set out possible forms of
release, which were ordered from the least to the most onerous. The ladder
principle generally requires that a justice not order a more onerous form of
release unless the Crown shows why a less onerous form is inappropriate. In
other words, the ladder principle means “that release is favoured at the
earliest reasonable opportunity and . . . on the least onerous grounds”: R.
v. Anoussis, 2008 QCCQ 8100, 242 C.C.C. (3d) 113, at para. 23, per Healy
J.C.Q. (as he then was). [30]                         
The ladder principle and the authorized forms of
release remain a central part of the Canadian law of bail and are now
enumerated in s. 515(1) to (3) of the Code. In the Code, the
possibility of requiring a cash deposit is limited to the two most onerous forms
of release: s. 515(2)(d) and (e). [31]                         
In 1982, the enactment of the Charter  transformed
the statutory right to bail into a
constitutional right: R. v. Pearson, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 665, at p.
691. I will now examine the Charter  right not to be denied reasonable
bail without just cause more closely. B.           
Interpretation of Section 11 (e) of the Charter [32]                         
Section 11 (e) of the Charter  states:
“Any person charged with an offence has the right . . . not to be denied
reasonable bail without just cause”. This right creates “a basic entitlement to be granted reasonable bail
unless there is just cause to do otherwise”: Pearson, at p. 691. [33]                         
Before proceeding, I must mention that the
expression “just cause” is used in two senses in the bail context. First, as
used in s. 11 (e) of the Charter , “just cause” relates to the
circumstances in which denying bail is constitutional: an accused has a
constitutional entitlement to be granted bail unless there is “just cause” to
deny it. [34]                         
Second, the expression “just cause” is also
commonly used to describe the statutory grounds that justify the pre-trial
detention of an accused. These grounds, which are enumerated in s. 515(10) of
the Code, are flight risk, public safety and public confidence in the
administration of justice. In most cases, it is presumed that the accused
should be released, and he or she will not be detained unless the Crown can
show on the basis of these statutory criteria that detention is warranted. [35]                         
In these reasons, I will use the expression
“just cause” only in the constitutional sense. To avoid confusion, I will refer
to the grounds under the Code as the “statutory criteria for detention”. [36]                         
This Court first interpreted the Charter  right
to bail in Pearson and in R. v. Morales, [1992] 3 S.C.R. 711. In Pearson,
Lamer C.J. observed that the word “bail” in the Charter  must be
interpreted broadly and include “all forms of what is formally known under the Criminal
Code  as ‘judicial interim release’”: Pearson, at p. 690. He noted
that the right under s. 11 (e) has two aspects, (1) the right not to be
denied bail without “just cause” and (2) the right to “reasonable bail”: Pearson,
at p. 689. [37]                         
In Pearson and Morales, the Court
considered the meaning of the first aspect of this right, that is, the right
not to be denied bail without “just cause”. This aspect “imposes constitutional
standards on the grounds under which bail is granted or denied”: Pearson,
at p. 689; see also Morales, at p. 735. The “reasonable bail” aspect, on
the other hand, concerns the terms and conditions of release: ibid. [38]                         
I will briefly summarize Lamer C.J.’s discussion
on this two-part right, after which I will consider the provision at issue in
the case at bar. (1)          
Right Not to Be Denied Bail Without “Just Cause” [39]                         
A statutory provision that allows for the
pre-trial detention of an accused triggers the protection of s. 11 (e).
For example, the Court held in Pearson that s. 515(6)(d) of the Code
constitutes a denial of bail under s. 11 (e) because it puts the onus on
an accused to justify pre-trial release if he or she is charged with certain
offences. Since this reverse onus amounts to a presumption in favour of
detention, “there is a departure from the basic entitlement to bail [that] is
sufficient to conclude that there is a denial of bail for the purposes of s. 11 (e)”:
p. 693. [40]                         
A provision may not deny bail without “just
cause”. The right not to be denied bail without just cause imposes a
constitutional standard that must be met for the denial of bail to be valid.
Lamer C.J. held that there is just cause to deny bail only if the denial (1)
occurs in a “narrow set of circumstances” and (2) the denial of bail “is
necessary to promote the proper functioning of the bail system and is not
undertaken for any purpose extraneous to the bail system”: Pearson, at
p. 693; see also Morales, at p. 737; Hall, at para. 16. (2)          
Right to “Reasonable Bail” [41]                         
In contrast to the first aspect of the s. 11 (e)
right, the right to reasonable bail relates to the terms of bail, including the
“quantum of any monetary component and other . . . restrictions” that are
imposed on the accused for the release period: Hall, at para. 16. The right
not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause protects accused persons
from conditions and forms of release that are unreasonable. The French version
of s. 11 (e) bears this out: a person charged with an offence has the
right to a release “assortie d’un cautionnement raisonnable” (“in
conjunction with reasonable bail”). [42]                         
It must be borne in mind that s. 515(2) of the Code
establishes the only legal forms of pre-trial release, such as a surety release
or release with a recognizance. But it is the justice or judge who ultimately
decides which form of release to order in a given case, and he or she also has
discretion under s. 515(4) of the Code to impose terms that are specific
to the circumstances of the accused. Both a legislated form of release and the
specific terms of release ordered by a justice or a judge can be unreasonable
and, as a result, unconstitutional. C.           
Provision at Issue: Section 515(2)(e) [43]                         
On the basis of these constitutional principles,
I will begin by discussing the proper interpretation of the challenged provision,
s. 515(2)(e) of the Code, and the scheme governing the forms of release.
I will then explain why I do not need to address s. 11 (e) of the Charter . (1)          
Proper Interpretation of Section 515(2)(e) and
the Scheme Governing the Forms of Release [44]                         
To interpret s. 515(2)(e), it is first necessary
to understand the ladder principle. As I explained above, the ladder principle
requires that the form of release imposed on an accused be no more onerous than
necessary. This principle is set out in s. 515(1) to (3) of the Code.
Although these provisions are more strictly applicable in a contested bail
hearing, they also provide the legal backdrop that should guide plans of
release to which the parties consent. [45]                         
Section 515(1) requires that, where an accused
is charged with an offence other than the ones listed in s. 469 of the Code,
“the accused be released on his giving an undertaking without conditions”.
However, s. 515(1) affords the prosecutor an opportunity to show why the
accused should either be detained or be released under more onerous forms of
release. The Code also requires that accused persons charged with any of
the offences listed in s. 515(6) be detained unless they justify their
release. [46]                         
Aside from the release of an accused under s.
515(1) on his or her giving an undertaking without conditions, s. 515(2) sets
out the other permissible forms of pre-trial release: (2) Where the justice does not make an order under subsection (1), he
shall, unless the prosecutor shows cause why the detention of the accused is
justified, order that the accused be released  (a) on his giving an undertaking with such conditions as the justice
directs;  (b) on his entering into a recognizance before the justice, without
sureties, in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice
directs but without deposit of money or other valuable security;  (c) on his entering into a recognizance before the justice with
sureties in such amount and with such conditions, if any, as the justice
directs but without deposit of money or other valuable security;  (d) with the consent of the prosecutor, on his entering into a
recognizance before the justice, without sureties, in such amount and with such
conditions, if any, as the justice directs and on his depositing with the
justice such sum of money or other valuable security as the justice directs; or  (e) if the accused is not ordinarily resident in the province in which
the accused is in custody or does not ordinarily reside within two hundred
kilometres of the place in which he is in custody, on his entering into a
recognizance before the justice with or without sureties in such amount and
with such conditions, if any, as the justice directs, and on his depositing
with the justice such sum of money or other valuable security as the justice
directs. Each provision, moving
from s. 515(2)(a) to s. 515(2)(e), involves more burdensome conditions of
release for the accused than the one before it. These forms of release, coupled
with the specific release terms a justice or a judge may impose under s.
515(4) , have significant potential to impinge on an accused person’s liberty. [47]                         
The ladder principle is codified in s. 515(3) ,
which prohibits a justice or a judge from imposing a more onerous form of
release unless the Crown shows why a less onerous form is inappropriate: “The
justice shall not make an order under any of paragraphs (2)(b) to (e) unless
the prosecution shows cause why an order under the immediately preceding
paragraph should not be made.” [48]                         
Parliament included cash in the most onerous
“rungs” of the ladder for added flexibility, not because cash is more effective
than other release conditions in ensuring compliance with bail terms. A
recognizance creates the same financial incentive for the accused to comply
with the terms of release as does a cash deposit. One does not mitigate the
flight or safety risk posed by an accused person more effectively than the other:
Anoussis, at para. 22.[4] The central purpose of the Bail Reform Act was to avoid the
harsh effects on accused persons of requiring cash deposits where other avenues
of release are available. As the authors of the Ouimet Report recognized, cash
bail provides added flexibility by offering an alternative form of release
where a meaningful recognizance cannot be given and a surety cannot be
obtained: pp. 106-7. [49]                         
Therefore, where a monetary condition of release
is necessary and a satisfactory personal recognizance or recognizance with
sureties can be obtained, a justice or a judge cannot impose cash bail. A
pledge and a deposit perform the same function: the accused or the surety may
lose his or her money if the accused person breaches the terms of bail. Release
with a pledge of money thus has the same coercive power as release with a cash
deposit. (2)          
Proper Application of Section 515(2)(e) and the
Scheme Governing the Forms of Release [50]                         
With these interpretive principles in mind, I
will now turn to the bail review decision at issue in this appeal. Mr. Antic’s
show cause hearing and bail reviews were contested. Mr. Antic bore the onus of
establishing why the detention order should be vacated. However, once Mr. Antic
had satisfied the bail review judge that new circumstances justified his
vacating the order, the ladder principle ought to have guided the judge in
fashioning a release order. Although Mr. Antic had been charged with drug
trafficking, which had reversed the onus at the initial bail hearing, he had
pleaded guilty to these charges by the time of his second bail review hearing.
He was therefore not in a reverse onus position at that time. [51]                         
No party disputes that Mr. Antic posed a flight
risk and a safety risk, but the bail review judge committed two errors in fashioning
Mr. Antic’s release order. [52]                         
First, the bail review judge failed to apply the
ladder principle properly. Although he purported to apply it, he erred by
insisting on cash despite the existence of other forms of release. The bail
review judge was fixated on a cash deposit because he believed the erroneous
assumption that cash is more coercive than a pledge. But, as I explained above,
a recognizance is functionally equivalent to cash bail and has the same
coercive effect. The bail review judge should not have insisted on a cash
deposit where the accused could have entered into a recognizance with a surety
(the effect of which is that the surety joins in acknowledging the debt to the
Crown). [53]                         
The bail review judge’s second error may in fact
have influenced the first. He expressed concern that the “pull of bail” would
not be strong enough without a cash deposit. Because the proposed surety was an
elderly woman, the bail review judge was concerned that Mr. Antic might believe
that a forfeiture proceeding would not be taken against her if he breached his
bail terms. [54]                         
The bail review judge erred in making his
decision on the basis of such conjecture. A justice or a judge cannot impose a
more onerous form of release solely because he or she speculates that the
accused will not believe in the enforceability of a surety or a pledge. The
bail system is based on the promises to attend court made by accused persons
and on their belief in the consequences that will follow if such promises are
broken. As Rosenberg J.A. rightly observed, “if accused came to believe that
they could fail to attend court without their sureties suffering any penalty,
the surety system would be ineffective”: Canada (Minister of
Justice) v. Mirza, 2009 ONCA 732, 248 C.C.C. (3d) 1, at
para. 41. [55]                         
Parliament expressly authorized the possibility
of an accused being released on entering into a recognizance with sureties in
the place of cash bail. Justices and judges should not undermine the bail
scheme by speculating, contrary to any evidence and to Parliament’s intent,
that requiring cash will be more effective. [56]                         
 Additionally, it now
appears obvious that the quantum of the cash deposit set by the bail review
judge was beyond the readily available means of the accused and his sureties. Courts have long held that it is impermissible to “fix the amount
of a surety or cash deposit so high as to effectively constitute a detention
order”, which means that the amount should not be beyond the readily available
means of the accused and his or her sureties: United States of America v.
Robertson, 2013 BCCA 284, 339 B.C.A.C. 199, at para. 22, citing R. v.
Garrington, [1973] 1 O.R. 370 (H.C.J.), at p. 379. As a result, a justice
or a judge setting bail is under a positive obligation “to make inquiries into
the ability of the accused to pay”: R. v. Brost, 2012 ABQB 696, 552 A.R.
140, at para. 40, citing R. v. Saunter, 2006 ABQB 808, at para. 17
(CanLII). At the same time,
the amount must be no higher than necessary to satisfy the concern that would
otherwise warrant detention. [57]                         
 Even though Mr. Antic testified that he had no
assets in Canada and the proposed sureties testified that they did not have
ready access to large sums of cash, the bail review judge set his cash bail at
$100,000. Unsurprisingly, it took Mr. Antic many months in custody to raise the
money needed to satisfy this release condition. Not only was the bail review judge’s reliance on cash
bail unreasonable in that he did not correctly apply the ladder principle, but
the quantum he chose also became Mr. Antic’s “de facto prison”, which is
a sign that the amount may have been set too high. [58]                         
Parliament limited cash bail for good reason.
All the parties and interveners recognized that cash bail can operate unfairly.
This is consistent with the findings of Professor Friedland’s study and of the
Ouimet Report. To interpret s. 515(2)(e) and the scheme governing the forms of
release in a way that readily allows for increased resort to cash bail would be
contrary to the intent of the Bail Reform Act and inconsistent with the
right not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause enshrined in the Charter . [59]                         
As this case illustrates, requiring cash as a
condition of release has the potential to result in increased incarceration of
accused persons. Cash bail does not give impecunious persons greater access to
bail. Rather, requiring a cash deposit will often prevent an accused person
from being released, as it did for many months in Mr. Antic’s case. Professor
Friedland observed in his study that a majority of accused persons who were
required to deposit security as a condition of release were unable to raise the
necessary funds: Detention before Trial, at pp. 130 and 176. An accused
person’s release should not be contingent on his or her ability “to marshall
funds or property in advance”: ibid., at p. 176. [60]                         
Had the bail review judge applied the bail provisions
properly, Mr. Antic could have been granted reasonable bail. Mr. Antic had
suitable sureties and his sureties had available assets, but the judge’s
insistence on cash bail led him to err. The bail review judge’s decision should
be reversed. (3)          
Does Section 515(2)(e) Violate the Charter ? [61]                         
In this case, given that s. 515(2)(e) did not
have the effect of denying Mr. Antic bail, I cannot conclude that it denies him
bail without “just cause”. Thus, the first aspect of the s. 11 (e) right
not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause is not triggered. [62]                         
If section 515(2)(e) had imposed a geographical
limit on a form of release that performs a function different than that of
money, such as a surety, it may indeed have denied an accused bail without just
cause. But that is not what is at issue in this case. As I explained above,
release with a pledge is functionally the same as release with a cash deposit.
The fact that cash bail was not an option in Mr. Antic’s case did not have the
effect of denying him bail. Because the Crown had justified a monetary
condition of release, Mr. Antic or his sureties should have been allowed to
pledge money rather than being required to deposit money with the court. [63]                         
Furthermore, I need not address the second
aspect of the s. 11 (e) right. Properly interpreted, s. 515(2)(e) does
not apply to Mr. Antic and cannot therefore authorize an unreasonable form of
release in his case. It is unnecessary to further elaborate on the meaning of
reasonable bail. D.           
Proper Approach to Bail Moving Forward [64]                         
Settling the proper interpretation of s.
515(2)(e) and the scheme governing the forms of release does not resolve one
concern that underlies this case. The bail review judge’s errors appear to be
symptomatic of a widespread inconsistency in the law of bail. One commentator,
Kent Roach, observes an
element of incongruity in the bail system: “Although
the Charter  speaks directly to bail, the bottom line so far has been that
remand populations and denial of bail have increased dramatically in the Charter 
era”: K. Roach, “A Charter
Reality Check: How Relevant Is the Charter  to the Justness of Our Criminal
Justice System?” (2008), 40 S.C.L.R. (2d) 717, at p. 727. [65]                         
Despite the fact that the Code applies
uniformly across the country some have suggested that courts are applying the
pre-trial forms of release differently in different provinces and territories.
For instance, Rosenberg J.A., writing for a unanimous five-judge panel of the
Court of Appeal for Ontario, recognized that “[t]here may now be an over
reliance on sureties” in that province: Mirza, at para. 47; see also Canadian
Civil Liberties Association and Education Trust, Set Up to Fail: Bail and
the Revolving Door of Pre-trial Detention, by A. Deshman and N. Myers
(2014) (online), at p. 36 (“CCLA Report”); M. L. Friedland,
“The Bail Reform Act Revisited” (2012), 16 Can. Crim. L.R. 315,
at p. 321; R. v. Rowan,
2011 ONSC 7362, at para. 16 (CanLII). Surety release
may also be relied on heavily in Yukon: CCLA Report, at pp. 35-36. In Alberta,
some judges and justices are improperly imposing cash bail without seeking the
consent of the Crown even though doing so is prohibited by the Code:
R. v. Folkes, 2007 ABQB 624, 430 A.R. 266, at paras. 2 and 13;
Brost, at para. 32; N. L. Irving, Alberta Bail Review: Endorsing a Call
for Change (2016) (online), at p. 20. These examples suggest a divergence
in the law of bail across this country. [66]                         
It is time to ensure that the bail provisions
are applied consistently and fairly. The stakes are too high for anything less.
Pre-trial custody “affects the mental, social, and physical life of the accused
and his family” and may also have a “substantial impact on the result of the
trial itself”: Friedland, Detention before Trial, at p. 172, quoted in Ell
v. Alberta, 2003 SCC 35, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 857, at para. 24; see also Hall,
at para. 59. An accused is presumed innocent and must not find it necessary to
plead guilty solely to secure his or her release, nor must an accused
needlessly suffer on being released: CCLA Report, at p. 3. Courts must respect
the presumption of innocence, “a hallowed
principle lying at the very heart of criminal law. . . . [that] confirms
our faith in humankind”: R. v. Oakes, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 103, at pp.
119-20. [67]                               
Therefore, the following principles and
guidelines should be adhered to when applying the bail provisions in a
contested hearing: (a)               
Accused persons are constitutionally presumed
innocent, and the corollary to the presumption of innocence is the
constitutional right to bail.  (b)              
Section 11 (e) guarantees both the right
not to be denied bail without just cause and the right to bail on reasonable
terms.  (c)               
Save for exceptions, an unconditional release on
an undertaking is the default position when granting release: s. 515(1).  (d)              
The ladder principle articulates the manner in
which alternative forms of release are to be imposed. According to it, “release
is favoured at the earliest reasonable opportunity and, having regard to the
[statutory criteria for detention], on the least onerous grounds”: Anoussis,
at para. 23. This principle must be adhered to strictly.  (e)               
If the Crown proposes an alternative form of
release, it must show why this form is necessary. The more restrictive the form
of release, the greater the burden on the accused. Thus, a justice of the peace
or a judge cannot impose a more restrictive form of release unless the Crown
has shown it to be necessary having regard to the statutory criteria for
detention.  (f)                
Each rung of the ladder must be considered
individually and must be rejected before moving to a more restrictive form of
release. Where the parties disagree on the form of release, it is an error of
law for a justice or a judge to order a more restrictive form of release
without justifying the decision to reject the less onerous forms.  (g)               
A recognizance with sureties is one of the most
onerous forms of release.  A surety should not be imposed unless all the less
onerous forms of release have been considered and rejected as inappropriate.  (h)               
It is not necessary to impose cash bail on accused
persons if they or their sureties have reasonably recoverable assets and are
able to pledge those assets to the satisfaction of the court to justify their
release. A recognizance is functionally equivalent to cash bail and has the
same coercive effect. Thus, under s. 515(2)(d) or s. 515(2)(e), cash bail
should be relied on only in exceptional circumstances in which release on a
recognizance with sureties is unavailable.  (i)                 
When such exceptional circumstances exist and
cash bail is ordered, the amount must not be set so high that it effectively
amounts to a detention order, which means that the amount should not be beyond the readily available means of the
accused and his or her sureties. As a corollary to
this, the justice or judge is under a positive obligation, when setting the
amount, to inquire into the ability of the accused to pay. The amount of cash
bail must be no higher than
necessary to satisfy the concern that would otherwise warrant detention and proportionate to the means of the accused and the circumstances of
the case.  (j)                
Terms of release imposed under s. 515(4)  may
“only be imposed to the extent that they are necessary” to address concerns
related to the statutory criteria for detention and to ensure that the accused
can be released.[5] They must not be imposed to change an accused person’s behaviour or
to punish an accused person.  (k)              
Where a bail review is applied for, the court
must follow the bail review process set out in St-Cloud. [68]                         
Of course, it often happens that the Crown and
the accused negotiate a plan of release and present it on consent. Consent
release is an efficient method of achieving the release of an accused, and the
principles and guidelines outlined above do not apply strictly to consent
release plans. Although a justice or a judge should not routinely second-guess
joint proposals by counsel, he or she does have the discretion to reject one.
Joint proposals must be premised on the statutory criteria for detention and
the legal framework for release. E.            
 Remedy [69]                         
Given the bail review judge’s errors, I must
reverse his declaration of unconstitutionality. Because Mr. Antic is ordinarily
resident in the province of Ontario, his release order is no longer legal.
Cash-plus-surety release is not available to local accused persons under s.
515(2)(e). This leaves Mr. Antic without a release order. [70]                         
 At the hearing, the Crown consented to Mr.
Antic’s release with only a cash deposit under s. 515(2)(d), which means that
the money he has deposited would remain with the court. This would relieve Mr.
Antic’s surety of her duties. [71]                         
 Given the Crown’s consent, I would order that
Mr. Antic’s release order be replaced with one for his release under s.
515(2)(d). As I explained above, cash bail is generally inappropriate in a case
such as this in which the accused has a surety and his surety has assets to
pledge. But Mr. Antic is out on bail and does not need to be reincarcerated.
Since he has already posted the cash deposit, the simplest way to keep Mr.
Antic out of custody is to convert his form of release to cash-only bail.
Although the quantum of bail may also be excessive, it would be inappropriate
for this Court to vary the amount without the benefit of evidence from Mr.
Antic and the Crown. The release order should retain the other conditions
imposed by the bail review judge. Mr. Antic and the Crown retain the right to
seek a variation of the release order. F.            
Disposition [72]                         
I would allow the appeal, reverse the
declaration of unconstitutionality and replace the cash-plus-surety release
ordered by the bail review judge with a cash-only release on the same terms as
those that he imposed. Appeal allowed.                     Solicitor
for the appellant: Public Prosecution Service of Canada, Toronto.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association: Cooper,
Sandler, Shime & Bergman, Toronto.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association (Ontario): Simcoe
Chambers, Toronto; Chris Sewrattan, Toronto. [1]   A surety is an individual who supervises the accused and ensures
that the accused remains faithful to his or her pledge to the court to appear
for trial: G. T. Trotter, The Law of Bail in Canada (3rd ed.
(loose-leaf)), at p. 6-11. [2]   A recognizance is the “formal record of an acknowledgement of
indebtedness to the Crown” that is usually nullified when the accused attends
in court for trial: Trotter, at p. 6-11. [3]   By “reasonably recoverable assets”,
I mean assets that could be recovered by the Crown by way of a forfeiture
proceeding such that the risk for the accused of losing the assets is
meaningful. Whether assets are reasonably recoverable
is for the judge or the justice to determine. [4]   In fact, there is no evidence that a release with sureties
results in greater compliance with bail terms than does a recognizance:
Canadian Civil Liberties Association and Education Trust, Set Up to Fail:
Bail and the Revolving Door of Pre-trial Detention, by A. Deshman and N.
Myers (2014) (online), at p. 37 (“CCLA Report”). [5]   Trotter, at p. 6-4. See e.g. Re Keenan and The Queen
(1979), 57 C.C.C. (2d) 267 (Que. C.A.); Anoussis,  at para. 17; R. v.
Brown (1974), 21 C.C.C. (2d) 575 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. D.A., 2014 ONSC
2166, [2014] O.J. No. 2059 (QL); R. v. G. (C.A.), 2014 ABQB 119, 306
C.R.R. (2d) 288, at para. 18; R. v. Omeasoo, 2013 ABPC 328, 576 A.R.
357, at para. 30; R. v. Patko, 2005 BCCA 183, 197 C.C.C. (3d) 192, at
paras. 19 and 23.  