  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Quesnelle, 2014 SCC 46, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 390 Date: 20140709 Docket: 35390  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant and Vincent
Quesnelle Respondent - and - Attorney
General of Alberta, Canadian
Association of Chiefs of Police, Criminal
Lawyers’ Association of Ontario and Barbra
Schlifer Commemorative Clinic Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 68) Karakatsanis J. (McLachlin C.J. and
  LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver and Wagner JJ. concurring)    r. v. quesnelle, 2014
SCC 46, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 390 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Vincent Quesnelle                                                                                        Respondent and Attorney General of Alberta, Canadian Association of Chiefs of
Police, Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario
and Barbra Schlifer Commemorative
Clinic                                                    Interveners Indexed as: R. v.
Quesnelle 2014 SCC 46 File No.: 35390. 2014: March 20; 2014: July 9. Present: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                     Criminal law — Evidence — Disclosure — Whether police occurrence reports prepared in the investigation of
unrelated incidents involving a complainant or witness are “records” within the
meaning of s. 278.1  of the Criminal Code , such that they are subject to the
Mills regime — Whether
the exemption for investigatory and prosecutorial records applies to all police
occurrence reports or only those made in relation to the offence in question — Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46,
ss. 278.1  to 278.91 .                     Q
was charged with sexually assaulting two complainants.  Before
trial, Q made an application seeking disclosure of certain police
occurrence reports which involved a complainant but which were not made in the
course of the investigation of the charges against Q.  The trial judge ruled
that the occurrence reports at issue were “records” under the Mills
regime, specifically s. 278.1  of the Criminal Code .  As such, Q applied
for disclosure of the occurrence reports pursuant to s. 278.3 of the Code. 
The trial judge dismissed the application and Q was ultimately convicted.  The
Court of Appeal allowed Q’s appeal on the basis that the police occurrence
reports were not “records” under the Mills regime and should have been
part of regular Crown disclosure under R. v. Stinchcombe, [1991]
3 S.C.R. 326.  The Court of Appeal therefore ordered a new trial.                     Held: The appeal is
allowed, the order for a new trial is set aside, and the conviction is restored
with the sentence appeal remitted to the Court of Appeal.                     Sections 278.1  to 278.91  of the Criminal
Code , known as the Mills regime, permit disclosure of private
records relating to complainants and witnesses in cases involving particular
sexual offences only where a record is likely relevant and its disclosure is
necessary in the interests of justice.  The regime reflects Parliament’s intention to
accommodate and reconcile the right of the accused to make full answer and
defence with the privacy and equality rights of complainants in sexual offence
cases.  While it governs the disclosure of “records” in
sexual offence trials, the regime does not displace the Crown’s duty to make
reasonable inquiries and obtain potentially relevant material in
accordance with R. v. McNeil, 2009 SCC 3, [2009]
1 S.C.R. 66.                     Whether
a document counts as a “record” depends first on whether the document contains
personal information for which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy,
and second on whether it falls into the exemption for investigatory and
prosecutorial documents.  Section 278.1  provides an illustrative list of some
types of records that generally give rise to a reasonable expectation of
privacy, but other documents will still be covered if they attract a reasonable
expectation of privacy. Trial judges will usually assess
reasonable expectations on the basis of the type of document at issue.  Police occurrence reports prepared in the investigation of previous
incidents involving a complainant or witness other than the offence being
prosecuted count as “records”
and are subject to the Mills regime.                     Given the sensitive nature of the information frequently contained
in such police occurrence reports, and the impact that their disclosure can
have on the privacy interests of complainants and witnesses, there will
generally be a reasonable expectation of privacy in such reports.  Police occurrence reports may contain
highly sensitive material including unproven allegations and statements of
complainants.  They may reveal family status, health information, and other
personal details.  Most significantly, they can reveal previous instances where
the witness or complainant has been the victim of criminal activity, including
previous sexual assaults.  Disclosure of this information engages complainants’
and witnesses’ “informational privacy”, the right to control how their
information is shared.  Disclosure of this information to the accused is
particularly likely to engage the dignity interests of complainants and
witnesses, and to discourage victims of sexual offences from coming forward.  The
fact that this information has already been obtained by police does not destroy
the affected person’s interest in keeping the information private from others. 
People are entitled to provide information to police with confidence that the
police will only disclose it for good reason.                     The exemption for investigatory and prosecutorial records
contained in s. 278.1  does not strip the protection of the Mills regime
from police occurrence
reports.  In light of the text of the provision in both
languages, as well as its purpose, context, and the consequences of concluding
otherwise, the trial judge was correct in deciding that the
exemption applies only to records made in relation to the offence in question,
and not to police occurrence reports made in the course of unrelated
investigations. Cases Cited                     Referred
to: R. v. Stinchcombe, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 326; R. v. McNeil,
2009 SCC 3, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 66; R. v. O’Connor, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 411; R.
v. Mills, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 668; R. v. Esau, [1997] 2 S.C.R. 777; R.
v. Ewanchuk, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330; R. v. Osolin, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 595;
R. v. Patrick, 2009 SCC 17, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 579; R. v. Edwards,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 128; R. v. Tessling, 2004 SCC 67, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 432; R.
v. Buhay, 2003 SCC 30, [2003] 1 S.C.R. 631; R. v. Dinh, 2001 ABPC
48, 42 C.R. (5th) 318; R. v. Dyment, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417; Escher v.
Brazil (2009), Inter-Am. Ct. H.R. (Ser. C) No. 200; R. v. Fiddler,
2012 ONSC 2539, 258 C.R.R. (2d) 193; R. v. McAdam (2008), 172 C.R.R.
(2d) 27; R. v. Daoust, 2004 SCC 6, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 217. Statutes and Regulations Cited Act to amend the Criminal Code (production of records in sexual
offence proceedings), S.C. 1997, c. 30, preamble. Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
s. 8 . Constitution Act, 1867, s. 133 . Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, ss.
193(1) , 278.1  to 278.91 , 278.2(2) , (3) , 278.3 , 278.5 , 278.7 . Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.56. Authors Cited Canada.  House of Commons.  House of Commons Debates, vol. 134,
No. 122, 2nd Sess., 35th Parl., February 4, 1997, p. 7664. Canada.  House of Commons.  House of Commons Debates, vol. 134,
No. 150, 2nd Sess., 35th Parl., April 7, 1997, pp. 9361-62. Gotell, Lise.  “When Privacy is Not Enough: Sexual Assault
Complainants, Sexual History Evidence and the Disclosure of Personal Records”
(2006), 43 Alta. L. Rev. 743. Keen, Peter Carmichael.  “Gebrekirstos: Fallout from Quesnelle”
(2013), 4 C.R. (7th) 56. Sullivan, Ruth.  Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes,
5th ed.  Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2008.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Rosenberg, Sharpe and
MacFarland JJ.A.), 2013 ONCA 180, 114 O.R. (3d) 779, 303 O.A.C. 18, 1 C.R.
(7th) 394, 297 C.C.C. (3d) 414, [2013] O.J. No. 1365 (QL), 2013 CarswellOnt
3337, setting aside the accused’s convictions for sexual assault and assault
and ordering a new trial.  Appeal allowed and convictions restored.                     Milan Rupic, for the appellant.                     Najma Jamaldin and Paul Genua, for the respondent.                     Maureen J. McGuire, for the intervener the
Attorney General of Alberta.                     Philip Wright, Vincent Westwick and Christiane Huneault, for the intervener the Canadian
Association of Chiefs of Police.                     Jonathan Dawe and Michael Dineen, for the intervener the Criminal
Lawyers’ Association of Ontario.                     Susan Chapman and Joanna Birenbaum, for the intervener the Barbra
Schlifer Commemorative Clinic.                      The judgment of the Court was
delivered by                      Karakatsanis J. — I.         
Overview [1]                             
In sexual offence cases, the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 ,
limits the disclosure of private records relating to complainants and
witnesses.  The relevant provisions, ss. 278.1  to 278.91 , known as the Mills
regime, permit disclosure only where a record is likely relevant and its
disclosure is necessary in the interests of justice.  The
regime applies to “records” that contain personal information for which there
is a reasonable expectation of privacy, unless they are made by persons
responsible for the investigation or prosecution of the offence.  The
issue on appeal is whether these provisions apply to police occurrence reports
prepared in the investigation of previous incidents involving a complainant or
witness and not the offence being prosecuted.  The question is whether these
unrelated police occurrence reports count as “records” as defined in s. 278.1 ,
such that the statutory disclosure limits apply. [2]                             
I conclude that the Mills regime applies to police
occurrence reports that are not directly related to the charges against the
accused.  Privacy is not an all or nothing right. Individuals involved in a
criminal investigation do not forfeit their privacy interest for all future
purposes; they reasonably expect that personal information in police reports
will not be disclosed in unrelated matters.  Moreover, while the regime exempts
investigatory and prosecutorial records, that exemption applies only to records
made in relation to the particular offence in question. [3]                             
Accordingly, I agree with the trial judge that
the unrelated police occurrence reports at issue were “records” within the
definition of s. 278.1  and thus subject to the Mills regime.  The
trial judge was entitled to conclude that the reports should not be disclosed.  I would allow the appeal, set aside the
order for a new trial, and restore the conviction, remitting the sentence
appeal to the Court of Appeal. II.      
Facts [4]                             
The respondent, Vincent Quesnelle, was
charged with sexually assaulting two complainants, T.R. and L.I.  Prior to
trial, CBC Radio aired a documentary about the complainant T.R. (a street sex worker), during which the lead investigator in this case
indicated that she had obtained and reviewed four or five police occurrence
reports which involved T.R. but were not made in the course of the
investigation that resulted in the charges against the respondent.  The
detective did not include the reports in the investigatory file. [5]                             
The police create occurrence reports to document
incidents to which they respond, including disturbances, requests for
assistance, reports of alleged crimes and even medical emergencies or car
accidents.  The reports contain police officers’ recollections and notes
concerning the facts of the incident. III.    Judicial History A.       Ontario Superior Court of Justice [6]                             
Before trial, the respondent made an application
seeking disclosure of the police occurrence reports that had been reviewed by
the detective.  The trial judge, Thorburn J., ruled that the occurrence reports
at issue were “records” under the Mills regime for two reasons: 2009
CanLII 73645.  First, occurrence reports contain personal information in which
there is a reasonable expectation of privacy.  Second, the reports do
not fall under the exception to the Mills regime in s. 278.1  because
they are not “records made by persons responsible for the investigation or
prosecution of the offence”: that section excludes only police records made in
relation to the case being prosecuted.  Under the Mills regime, a
“record” may only be disclosed to the accused if the trial judge is satisfied
that it is likely relevant to an issue at trial and disclosure is necessary in
the interests of justice. [8]                             
The respondent was ultimately convicted and
sentenced to six and a half years in jail, less credit for time served: 2010
ONSC 3713 (CanLII).  B.       Ontario Court of Appeal, 2013 ONCA 180, 114 O.R. (3d) 779 [9]                             
The respondent appealed his conviction and
sentence to the Ontario Court of Appeal.  He argued that the police occurrence
reports were not “records” under the Mills regime, and therefore should
have been part of regular Crown disclosure under R. v. Stinchcombe,
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 326. [10]                         
The Court of Appeal allowed his appeal on this
basis and ordered a new trial.  First, MacFarland J.A. concluded that
complainants and witnesses who give information to the police have no
reasonable expectation of privacy in police documents recording that
information.  Second, she concluded that s. 278.1  exempts all records that are
prepared by the investigating police service, whether or not the records are
related to the case being prosecuted.  Thus the police occurrence reports at
issue were not subject to the Mills regime.  The court reasoned that the
police occurrence reports reviewed by Detective Leaver were fruits of the
investigation, and ordered their disclosure. IV.    Analysis A.       The Principles Governing Crown Disclosure (1)      Disclosure in Criminal Cases Generally [11]                         
The Crown has a broad duty to disclose relevant
evidence and information to persons charged with criminal offences.  Stinchcombe,
at pp. 336-40, provides that the Crown is obliged to disclose
all relevant, non-privileged information in its possession or control so as to
allow the accused to make full answer and defence.  For purposes of this “first
party” disclosure, “the Crown” does not refer to all Crown entities, federal
and provincial: “the Crown” is the prosecuting Crown.  All other Crown entities,
including police, are “third parties”.  With the exception of the police duty
to supply the Crown with the fruits of the investigation, records in the hands
of third parties, including other Crown entities, are generally not subject to
the Stinchcombe disclosure rules. [12]                         
In R. v. McNeil, 2009 SCC 3, [2009]
1 S.C.R. 66, this Court recognized that the Crown cannot merely be a passive
recipient of disclosure material.  Instead, the Crown has a duty to make
reasonable inquiries when put on notice of material in the hands of police or
other Crown entities that is potentially relevant to the prosecution or the
defence.  This Court also recognized that police have a duty to disclose,
without prompting, “all material pertaining to its investigation of the accused”
(para. 14) as well as other information “obviously relevant to the accused’s
case” (para. 59). [13]                         
In R. v. O’Connor, [1995] 4
S.C.R. 411, at paras. 15-34, this Court established a separate disclosure
regime for records in the hands of “third parties” that are “likely relevant”
to an issue at trial.  Under O’Connor, an application is made to the
court and the judge determines whether production
should be compelled in accordance with a two-stage test.  At the first stage,
the applicant has an onus to establish the likely relevance of the record.  At
the second stage, the judge examines the record and determines whether, and to
what extent, it should be produced for the accused: in the case of relevant
information, privacy interests yield to the right to a full answer and defence. [14]                         
Beginning in the late 1980s, it became
commonplace in sexual offence trials for defence counsel to seek the private
records of complainants in order to attack the complainant through invasive
(and often inappropriate) credibility probing: House of Commons Debates,
vol. 134, No. 122, 2nd Sess., 35th Parl., February 4, 1997.  The Mills regime,
enacted in 1997, was a response to these practices.  The provisions of the Mills
regime are set out in the Appendix.  The central idea, according to the
preamble to the legislation enacting the regime, is that while production to the court
and to the accused of personal information regarding any person may be
necessary in order for an accused to make a full answer and defence, that
production may breach the person’s right to privacy and equality and therefore
the determination as to whether to order production should be subject to
careful scrutiny;  (An
Act to amend the Criminal Code (production of records in sexual offence
proceedings), S.C. 1997, c. 30) The regime reflects Parliament’s
intention to accommodate and reconcile the right of the accused to make full
answer and defence with the privacy and equality rights of complainants in
sexual offence cases.  In the words of Professor Lise Gotell, the regime was
created in order to “to limit what it is that a woman/child complainant must be
forced to reveal at trial as the price of her access to the criminal justice
system” (“When Privacy is not Enough: Sexual Assault Complainants, Sexual
History Evidence, and the Disclosure of Personal Records” (2006), 43 Alta.
L. Rev. 743, at p. 745).  That approach was upheld by this Court in R.
v. Mills, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 668, and its constitutionality is not
challenged in this appeal. [16]                         
Once the Crown obtains a record and determines
that it is covered by the Mills regime, it must give notice to the
accused: Criminal Code, s. 278.2(3) .  While the Crown may not disclose
the contents of the record, it should in appropriate circumstances give an
assessment of the likely relevance of a record in its possession, as well as
indicate the basis of its relevance.  At a minimum, the Crown should advise if
it intends to use any information contained in records protected by Mills
as part of its case against an accused.  The Crown’s assessment that the record
is relevant for a specific reason will likely establish a basis for the judge to
order production to the court. [17]                         
The mere fact that a police occurrence report
concerns a complainant or witness is not enough to make the report relevant to
an otherwise unrelated prosecution.  The Mills provisions echo this
Court’s frequent warnings against relying on myths and stereotypes about sexual
assault complainants in assessing the relevance of evidence in the context of
sexual assault trials.  For example, the fact that a complainant has reported
sexual violence in the recent or distant past, provides sexual services for
money, or suffers from addiction is not, without more, enough to render a
police occurrence report “relevant”: see, e.g., R. v. Esau, [1997] 2
S.C.R. 777, at para. 82 (per McLachlin J., dissenting); R. v.
Ewanchuk, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330, at paras. 86-97 (per
L’Heureux-Dubé J.); R. v. Osolin, [1993] 4 S.C.R. 595, at pp. 670-72
(per Cory J.).  However, occurrence reports which raise legitimate
questions about the credibility of the complainant or a witness, or some other
issue at trial, will be treated as relevant. (3)      The McNeil Duties and the Mills Notice Obligation [18]                         
The Crown’s McNeil duty to make
reasonable inquiries and the corresponding police duty to supply relevant
information and evidence to the Crown apply notwithstanding the Mills
regime.  The Mills regime governs the disclosure of “records” in
sexual offence trials, but does not displace the Crown’s duty to make
reasonable inquiries and obtain potentially relevant material (or the
police duty to pass on material to the Crown) under McNeil.  As an
officer of the court and Minister of Justice, the Crown is duty-bound to seek
justice, not convictions, and to avoid wrongful convictions, in the
prosecutions of all offences, including sexual offences.  The Mills regime
simply replaces the obligation to produce relevant records directly with
an obligation to give notice of their existence: Criminal Code,
s. 278.2(3) . B.       Are Unrelated Police Occurrence Reports “Records”? [19]                         
The issue in this appeal is
whether police occurrence reports prepared in the investigation of
unrelated incidents involving a complainant or witness are “records” within the meaning of s. 278.1  of the Criminal Code ,
such that they are subject to the Mills regime.  Section 278.1  defines
“records” as follows: 278.1 For the purposes of sections 278.2 to 278.9, “record” means any
form of record that contains personal information for which there is a
reasonable expectation of privacy and includes, without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, medical, psychiatric, therapeutic, counselling, education,
employment, child welfare, adoption and social services records, personal
journals and diaries, and records containing personal information the
production or disclosure of which is protected by any other Act of Parliament
or a provincial legislature, but does not include records made by persons
responsible for the investigation or prosecution of the offence. [20]                         
The determination of
whether a document counts as a “record” involves two inquiries.  First, does
the document contain personal information for which there is a reasonable
expectation of privacy?  Second, does it fall into the exemption for
investigatory and prosecutorial documents?  I consider these questions in turn. (1)      Documents Attracting a Reasonable Expectation of Privacy (a)   Section 278.1  Requires a Categorical Approach [21]                         
Under the first step of
the Mills regime, the trial judge makes a preliminary determination of
whether a document is a “record” covered by the regime, without seeing the
specific document.  Only if the judge decides that the document is likely
relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify and
that production to the court is necessary in the interests of justice will the
judge then have the opportunity to view and assess the particular document. 
Therefore, the judge will usually determine whether a record “contains personal information for which there is a reasonable
expectation of privacy”, on
the basis of the type of document at issue. [22]                         
The definition of “record”
is broad and non-exhaustive.  Section 278.1  provides an illustrative list of
some of the types of records that usually give rise to a reasonable expectation
of privacy.  However, documents that do not fall into
the listed categories will still be covered by the Mills regime if they
contain information that gives rise to a reasonable expectation of privacy. [23]                         
The question here is
whether the trial judge committed a reversible error at the preliminary stage
by holding that police occurrence reports relating to the complainant were
“records” because they generally contain information that gives rise to a
reasonable expectation of privacy.  The Court of Appeal concluded that the
trial judge erred because the definition of “record” under s. 278.1 
contemplates the types of personal information disclosed in the context of a
“trust-like, confidential or therapeutic relationship” and which an individual
would “seek to withhold from the state” (paras. 32-33).  In my view, such a
restricted approach is not warranted. The trial judge was right to treat the
reports as “records” under the Mills regime because the reports
generally contain information in which there is a reasonable expectation of
privacy. (b)   Reasonable Expectation of Privacy [24]                         
In order for a document
to constitute a “record” and therefore fall within the Mills regime it
must be a “record that contains personal information for which there is a
reasonable expectation of privacy”: s. 278.1 . [25]                         
The appellant submits that police occurrence
reports will often contain deeply personal and potentially embarrassing
information, and that witnesses and complainants retain a privacy interest in
the reports.  The subject of an occurrence report will not expect the report to
be disclosed to impeach his or her credibility in an unrelated case. [26]                         
The respondent agrees with the Court of Appeal
that police occurrence reports do not “implicate the types of privacy interests
envisioned in s. 278.1  or in Mills” (R.F., at para. 58, citing Court of
Appeal reasons, at para. 41).  The Court of Appeal observed that the
complainant cannot have a subjective expectation of privacy in previous
complaints to police: she will know, at the time of making a complaint to
police, that the information she discloses will end up in a public trial.  Moreover,
the victim of an attack does not speak to police in the context of a
trust-like, confidential, or therapeutic relationship. (i) 
General Principles [27]                         
The assessment of
whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy for purposes of s. 278.1 
of the Criminal Code  draws on the jurisprudence applying s. 8  of
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms : see Mills, at para.
99.  That jurisprudence establishes that expectations of privacy must be
assessed in light of the “totality of the circumstances” (R. v. Patrick, 2009 SCC 17, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 579, at para. 26; R. v. Edwards,
[1996] 1 S.C.R. 128, at para. 45; R. v. Tessling, 2004 SCC 67, [2004] 3
S.C.R. 432, at para. 19).  The circumstances (or nature of the relationship) in
which information is shared are not determinative: the reasonable expectation
of privacy is not limited to trust-like, confidential, or therapeutic
relationships. [28]                         
 Unlike much of the jurisprudence under s. 8  of
the Charter , the analysis of the reasonable expectation of privacy in
this case does not concern the right to be free from unreasonable intrusion by
the state.  Rather, the question is whether it is reasonable to expect that the
state will keep information that it has legitimately acquired private from
other private individuals. [29]                         
A reasonable
expectation of privacy is not an all or nothing concept: Mills, at para.
108.  A person may have a reasonable expectation that the state will not have
access to her hotel room, even if she fully expects hotel staff to enter the
premises: R. v. Buhay, 2003 SCC 30,
[2003] 1 S.C.R. 631, at para. 22, discussing R. v. Dinh, 2001 ABPC
48, 42 C.R. (5th) 318.  Equally, a person may divulge information to an
individual or an organization with the expectation that it be used only for a
specific purpose: R. v. Dyment, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417, at pp.
429-30.  The same principle applies to disclosure to the police. [30]                         
In this case, the question is whether the
subjects of police occurrence reports could reasonably expect the police to
safeguard their private information, unless and until disclosure is justified. 
After describing the information contained in the reports, I will discuss the
privacy interests engaged by that information.  Finally, I will address the
implications arising from the fact that the reports are in the hands of police. (ii)            
The Information in Police Occurrence Reports [31]                         
Police occurrence reports contain information
disclosed to police by the persons concerned, by third parties, or obtained by
police through search, seizure, surveillance, or information sharing. [32]                         
This Court observed in McNeil, at para.
19: Criminal investigative files may
contain highly sensitive material including: outlines of unproven allegations;
statements of complainants or witnesses — at times concerning very personal matters
. . . . [33]                         
Police occurrence reports may reveal family
status, health information (including statements concerning mental health or
the use of drugs and alcohol), and details about housing and employment.  They
may reveal personal conflicts or details about relationships between
individuals.  See P. C. Keen, “Gebrekirstos: Fallout from Quesnelle”
(2013), 4 C.R. (7th) 56, at pp. 60-61.  Moreover, they very often reveal the
extent of an individual’s engagement with the criminal justice system.  Most significantly,
they can reveal previous instances where the witness or complainant has been
the victim of criminal activity, including previous sexual assaults. (iii)      
The Price of Disclosure [34]                         
The disclosure of the
information described above engages complainants’ and witnesses’
“[i]nformational privacy”, “the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions
to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about
them is communicated to others” (Tessling, at para. 23, quoting A. F.
Westin, Privacy and Freedom (1970), at p. 7).  As L’Heureux-Dubé J.
observed in O’Connor, at para. 119: Although it may appear trite to say so,
I underline that when a private document or record is revealed and the
reasonable expectation of privacy therein is thereby displaced, the invasion is
not with respect to the particular document or record in question.  Rather, it
is an invasion of the dignity and self-worth of the individual, who enjoys the
right to privacy as an essential aspect of his or her liberty in a free and
democratic society. [35]                         
The Mills regime regulates disclosure in
the context of a criminal trial: information that is disclosed will often be
exposed in court.  Significantly, even where the information is not used in the
trial, it will certainly be seen by the accused, who will often be known to the
affected person, and whose use of the information is not subject to the legal
oversight of the Charter  or privacy legislation that applies when such
information is given to law enforcement.  Consequently, disclosure may involve
a more serious violation of the complainant’s dignity than disclosure to the
state. [36]                         
There are tangible
harms associated with disclosure of personal information in the context of
prosecutions for sexual offences, particularly when information about the
complainant is disclosed to the person accused of sexually assaulting her.  In
the preamble to the legislation enacting the Mills regime, Parliament
recognized “that the compelled production of personal information may deter
complainants of sexual offences from reporting the offence to the police”. 
Victims of sexual offences will be less likely to come forward if they know
that doing so will entail disclosure of their past interactions with police to
the very person who they claim has wronged them. (iv)      
The Effect of Third Party Disclosure on
Expectations of Privacy [37]                         
It bears repeating that
privacy is not an all or nothing concept; rather, “[p]rivacy interests in modern society include the reasonable
expectation that private information will remain confidential to the persons to
whom and restricted to the purposes for which it was divulged” (Mills,
at para. 108).  Consequently, the fact that information about a person has been disclosed to a third
party does not destroy that person’s privacy interests.  Because the contents
of occurrence reports will be disclosed under certain circumstances does
not mean that there is not a reasonable expectation of privacy in those
records. [38]                         
The Court of Appeal erred in concluding that the
complainant could not have a reasonable expectation of privacy because the
information was disclosed outside the context of a “trust-like, confidential or
therapeutic relationship”.  While such relationships may give rise to
heightened privacy interests, their absence is not dispositive.  Whether a person
is entitled to expect that their information will be kept private is a
contextual inquiry. [39]                         
Where an individual
voluntarily discloses sensitive information to police, or where police uncover
such information in the course of an investigation, it is reasonable to expect
that the information will be used for the purpose for which it was obtained:
the investigation and prosecution of a particular crime.  Similarly, it is
reasonable to expect individual police officers to share lawfully gathered
information with other law enforcement officials, provided the use is
consistent with the purposes for which it was gathered. [40]                         
However, when the
government divulges sensitive information to private individuals this may
violate reasonable expectations of privacy.  For example, if police were to
publicly broadcast a wiretap recording this would clearly constitute an
interference with privacy (see Escher v. Brazil, Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, judgment of July 6, 2009, series C, No. 200, at paras. 157-58) as
well as a violation of s. 193(1)  of the Criminal Code .  To
indiscriminately publicize the contents of police occurrence reports would
result in similar interference. [41]                         
That is not to say that
all disclosures of personal information by the police unreasonably intrude upon
privacy.  Where private information becomes part of a criminal case, the
disclosure of that information to the court, the accused, and to the public is
reasonable and unavoidable.  For example, police occurrence reports made in the
course of the investigation of the offence being prosecuted must be disclosed
under Stinchcombe. [42]                         
But what of police
occurrence reports that were made in connection with separate incidents, rather
than as part of the investigation into the offence being prosecuted?  There will certainly be times when the disclosure of
such records is necessary to ensure a fair trial.  Consequently, the Mills
regime gives trial judges the power to disclose records under such
circumstances.  The judge must balance the privacy of complainants and
witnesses against ensuring the disclosure necessary to make full answer and
defence.  However, the fact that a record might be disclosed under appropriate
circumstances does not nullify the expectation of privacy in that record in
general. [43]                         
People provide information to police in order to
protect themselves and others.  They are entitled to do so with confidence that
the police will only disclose it for good reason.  The fact that the
information is in the hands of the police should not nullify their interest in
keeping that information private from other individuals. (c)   Conclusion on Reasonable Expectation of Privacy [44]                         
Fundamentally, the privacy analysis turns on a
normative question of whether we, as a society, should expect that police
occurrence reports will be kept private.  Given the sensitive nature of the
information frequently contained in such reports, and the impact that their
disclosure can have on the privacy interests of complainants and witnesses, it
seems to me that there will generally be a reasonable expectation of privacy in
police occurrence reports. (d)  Personal
Information Protected by Legislation [45]                         
The appellant Crown
submits that police occurrence reports are “records containing personal
information the production or disclosure of which is protected by any other Act
of Parliament or a provincial legislature” and are therefore “records” for
purposes of s. 278.1 .  The trial judge held that police occurrence reports
“contain personal information protected by provincial legislation” (2009 CanLII
73645, at para. 18).  Given my conclusion that such reports contain information
in which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, it is unnecessary to
decide whether they are protected by the Municipal Freedom of Information
and Protection of Privacy Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.56. (2)      The Exemption for Investigatory and Prosecutorial Records [46]                         
Even records that give rise to a
reasonable expectation of privacy are not covered by the Mills regime if
they fall into the exemption contained in s. 278.1 :                  278.1 . . .
“record” . . . does not include records made by persons responsible
for the investigation or prosecution of the offence.             278.1 . . . N’est pas visé par la
présente définition le dossier qui est produit par un responsable de l’enquête
ou de la poursuite relativement à l’infraction qui fait l’objet de la
procédure. [47]                         
The trial judge held
that the exemption applies only to records made in relation to the offence in
question, and not to police occurrence reports made in the course of unrelated
investigations.  Other courts have generally reached the same conclusion: see, e.g.,
R. v. Fiddler, 2012 ONSC 2539, 258 C.R.R. (2d) 193, at paras. 36-38; R.
v. McAdam (2008), 172 C.R.R. (2d) 27 (Ont. S.C.J.). [48]                         
The Court of Appeal,
however, held that the exemption applies to all records made by the responsible
police force, whether or not they were made in relation to the offence at
issue.  The Court of Appeal relied on the plain wording of the English version
of the provision, the view that such records are unlikely to engage privacy
interests, and this Court’s description of the exemption, in Mills, as “excluding
investigatory or prosecutorial records” (para. 39, citing Mills, at
para. 50). [49]                         
With respect, I do not
agree with the Court of Appeal’s interpretation of the exception.  In light of
the text of the provision in both languages, as well as its purpose, context,
and the consequences of the Court of Appeal’s interpretation, I conclude that
the trial judge correctly interpreted the exemption to exclude only those
records made in relation to the offence at issue. (a)   The Text of the Provision [51]                         
However, the French “le dossier qui est
produit par un responsable de l’enquête ou de la poursuite relativement
à l’infraction qui fait l’objet de la procédure” can only mean that the
exemption applies to records made by police or prosecutors in relation to
the offences at issue. [52]                         
The Court of Appeal did not address the French
version of the provision, because the Crown’s position in that court was that
the French text was amenable to both interpretations.  Before this Court, the
Crown resiled from that position.  Because the word “relativement” is an
adverb, the expression “relativement à l’infraction qui fait l’objet
de la procédure” must modify the expression “qui est produit”.  The
word “relativement” cannot modify the nouns “enquête” or “poursuite”. 
If the last clause of the exemption were intended to apply to “enquête”
and “poursuite”, the grammatically correct phrase would be “de
l’enquête ou de la poursuite relative à l’infraction qui
fait l’objet de la procédure”. [53]                         
Section 133  of the Constitution Act, 1867 
establishes that Parliament enacts legislation in both French and English. 
This “means that both language versions of a bilingual statute or
regulation are official, original and authoritative expressions of the law” (R.
Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes (5th ed. 2008), at p.
95).  It is a rule of statutory interpretation that where the version in one
language can bear two meanings, only one of which is consistent with the
version in the other language, the shared meaning governs: R. v. Daoust,
2004 SCC 6, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 217, at para. 28. (b)   The Purpose of the Exemption in Section 278.1 [54]                         
The Mills regime
serves two goals: first, the regime protects the privacy of complainants and
witnesses, and second, it preserves the fair trial rights of the accused. [55]                         
The definition of
“record” in s. 278.1  serves a gatekeeping function within the regime.  The
reasonable expectation of privacy test sweeps in records that merit the
protection afforded by the Mills regime.  The exemption further
contributes to the gatekeeping role of the section by bypassing the balancing
process for records that Parliament recognized should always be produced. (c)   Incongruous Consequences of a Broad Exemption [58]                         
This would mean that an
accused whose case was investigated by a large police force would be more
likely to get easy access to occurrence reports than if the case was
investigated by a small force.  For example, where the RCMP is involved in an
investigation, the Court of Appeal’s interpretation of the exemption would
waive the Mills regime for RCMP occurrence reports from across the
country. (d)   Application of the Exemption to Other Third Party Documents in the
Investigative File [60]                         
The English and French
versions of the provision, considered in isolation, provide some support for
the intervener’s position.  The terms “record” and “dossier” can refer
to individual documents or to collections of documents such as case files. 
Consequently, on a purely textual basis, one might think that the exemption
covers the investigative “record” in its entirety, as opposed to only
individual “records”. (e)   The Effect on Trial Fairness [62]                         
The respondent and the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario raise concerns about
the effect of an expansive interpretation of “records” in s. 278.1  on trial
fairness.  A broad interpretation of “records” means
that the Mills regime applies to a larger number of documents.  While
this furthers Parliament’s objective of protecting the privacy of complainants
and witnesses, it may also impose procedural burdens on defendants and create
the risk that some helpful documents would not be available to the defence. 
However, largely for the reasons set out in Mills, I do not think these
concerns require a narrower reading of s. 278.1 . [63]                         
Documents protected by the Mills regime
are not inaccessible to the defence.  Defendants can access records when the
privacy infringement is proportionate, given the relevance of the record to the
defence.  Where the Crown plans to use information from police occurrence
reports as part of its case against an accused, disclosure of that information
will always be in the interests of justice.  In Mills, this Court held
that the process for accessing documents was adequate to preserve the
constitutionality of the regime. [64]                         
The principles of fundamental justice and trial
fairness do not guarantee defence counsel the right to precisely the
same privileges and procedures as the Crown and the police (Mills, at
para. 111).  Nor is the right to a full answer and defence a right to pursue
every conceivable tactic to be used in defending oneself against criminal
prosecution.  The right to a full answer and defence is not without limit. [65]                         
Because the Crown is an officer of the court,
with undivided loyalty to the administration of justice, the Crown is not in an
adversarial role in relation to its disclosure obligations.  The information
obtained through investigation is “not the property of the Crown for use in
securing a conviction but the property of the public to be used to ensure that
justice is done” (Stinchcombe, at p. 333).  The Crown has an obligation
under s. 278.2(3)  of the Criminal Code , to notify the accused of records
in its possession covered by the Mills regime.  Moreover, as
discussed above, both police and Crown have common law duties aimed at ensuring
proper disclosure, which apply notwithstanding the application of the Mills
regime. (f)    Conclusion on the Exemption [66]                         
For these reasons, I
conclude that s. 278.1  exempts records made in relation to the offence being
prosecuted, not other records made by the same police or prosecution agencies. V.      
Disposition [67]                         
It follows from this analysis that the police
occurrence reports mentioned in the CBC radio documentary were subject to the Mills
regime for disclosure, not Stinchcombe.  The trial judge was right to
require a Mills application before disclosing them to the defence, and
the Court of Appeal was wrong to interfere.  The trial judge’s application of
the Mills regime was not challenged before us.  Accordingly, I would
allow the appeal, set aside the order for a new trial, and restore the
conviction, remitting the sentence appeal to the Court of Appeal. [68]                         
I would grant the motion to strike para. 10 of
the respondent’s factum, but dismiss the motion to strike para. 11.  I would
also grant the motion to strike the appellant’s reply factum. APPENDIX  Criminal Code, R.S.C.
1985, c. C-46       278.1 For
the purposes of sections 278.2 to 278.9, “record” means any form of record that
contains personal information for which there is a reasonable expectation of
privacy and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
medical, psychiatric, therapeutic, counselling, education, employment, child
welfare, adoption and social services records, personal journals and diaries,
and records containing personal information the production or disclosure of
which is protected by any other Act of Parliament or a provincial legislature,
but does not include records made by persons responsible for the investigation
or prosecution of the offence.        278.2 (1) No record relating to a complainant or a
witness shall be produced to an accused in any proceedings in respect of  (a) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159,
160, 170, 171, 172, 173, 210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272 or 273,  (b) an offence under section 144 , 145 , 149 , 156 , 245  or 246 
of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada,
1970, as it read immediately before January 4, 1983, or  (c) an offence under section 146 , 151 , 153 , 155 , 157 , 166  or
167  of the Criminal Code , chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of
Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 1, 1988,  or in any proceedings in respect of two or more offences that
include an offence referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (c),
except in accordance with sections 278.3  to 278.91 .        (2) Section 278.1 , this section and sections 278.3  to 278.91 
apply where a record is in the possession or control of any person, including
the prosecutor in the proceedings, unless, in the case of a record in the
possession or control of the prosecutor, the complainant or witness to whom the
record relates has expressly waived the application of those sections.        (3) In the case of a record in respect of which this section
applies that is in the possession or control of the prosecutor, the prosecutor
shall notify the accused that the record is in the prosecutor’s possession but,
in doing so, the prosecutor shall not disclose the record’s contents.        278.3 (1) An accused who seeks production of a record
referred to in subsection 278.2(1) must make an application to the judge before
whom the accused is to be, or is being, tried.        (2) For greater certainty, an application under subsection (1)
may not be made to a judge or justice presiding at any other proceedings,
including a preliminary inquiry.        (3) An application must be made in writing and set out  (a) particulars identifying the record that the accused seeks
to have produced and the name of the person who has possession or control of
the record; and  (b) the grounds on which the accused relies to establish that
the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a
witness to testify.        (4) Any one or more of the following assertions by the accused
are not sufficient on their own to establish that the record is likely relevant
to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify:  (a) that the record exists;  (b) that the record relates to medical or psychiatric
treatment, therapy or counselling that the complainant or witness has received
or is receiving;  (c) that the record relates to the incident that is the
subject-matter of the proceedings;  (d) that the record may disclose a prior inconsistent
statement of the complainant or witness;  (e) that the record may relate to the credibility of the
complainant or witness;  (f) that the record may relate to the reliability of the testimony
of the complainant or witness merely because the complainant or witness has
received or is receiving psychiatric treatment, therapy or counselling;  (g) that the record may reveal allegations of sexual abuse of
the complainant by a person other than the accused;  (h) that the record relates to the sexual activity of the
complainant with any person, including the accused;  (i) that the record relates to the presence or absence of a
recent complaint;  (j) that the record relates to the complainant’s sexual
reputation; or  (k) that the record was made close in time to a complaint or
to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge against the
accused.        (5) The accused shall serve the application on the prosecutor,
on the person who has possession or control of the record, on the complainant
or witness, as the case may be, and on any other person to whom, to the
knowledge of the accused, the record relates, at least seven days before the
hearing referred to in subsection 278.4(1) or any shorter interval that the
judge may allow in the interests of justice. The accused shall also serve a
subpoena issued under Part XXII in Form 16.1 on the person who has possession
or control of the record at the same time as the application is served.        (6) The judge may at any time order that the application be
served on any person to whom the judge considers the record may relate.        278.4 (1) The judge shall hold a
hearing in camera to determine whether to order the person who has
possession or control of the record to produce it to the court for review by
the judge.        (2) The person who has possession or control of the record,
the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and any other person to whom
the record relates may appear and make submissions at the hearing, but they are
not compellable as witnesses at the hearing.        (3) No order for costs may be made against a person referred
to in subsection (2) in respect of their participation in the hearing.        278.5 (1) The judge may order the person who has
possession or control of the record to produce the record or part of the record
to the court for review by the judge if, after the hearing referred to in
subsection 278.4(1), the judge is satisfied that  (a) the application was made in accordance with subsections
278.3(2) to (6);  (b) the accused has established that the record is likely
relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify; and  (c) the production of the record is necessary in the
interests of justice.        (2) In determining whether to order the production of the
record or part of the record for review pursuant to subsection (1), the judge
shall consider the salutary and deleterious effects of the determination on the
accused’s right to make a full answer and defence and on the right to privacy
and equality of the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and any other
person to whom the record relates. In particular, the judge shall take the
following factors into account:  (a) the extent to which the record is necessary for the
accused to make a full answer and defence;  (b) the probative value of the record;  (c) the nature and extent of the reasonable expectation of
privacy with respect to the record;  (d) whether production of the record is based on a
discriminatory belief or bias;  (e) the potential prejudice to the personal dignity and right
to privacy of any person to whom the record relates;  (f) society’s interest in encouraging the reporting of sexual
offences;  (g) society’s interest in encouraging the obtaining of
treatment by complainants of sexual offences; and  (h) the effect of the determination on the integrity of the
trial process.        278.6 (1) Where the judge has ordered the production of
the record or part of the record for review, the judge shall review it in the
absence of the parties in order to determine whether the record or part of the
record should be produced to the accused.        (2) The judge may hold a hearing in camera if the judge
considers that it will assist in making the determination.        (3) Subsections 278.4(2) and (3) apply in the case of a
hearing under subsection (2).        278.7 (1) Where the judge is satisfied that the record
or part of the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the
competence of a witness to testify and its production is necessary in the
interests of justice, the judge may order that the record or part of the record
that is likely relevant be produced to the accused, subject to any conditions
that may be imposed pursuant to subsection (3).        (2) In determining whether to order the production of the
record or part of the record to the accused, the judge shall consider the
salutary and deleterious effects of the determination on the accused’s right to
make a full answer and defence and on the right to privacy and equality of the
complainant or witness, as the case may be, and any other person to whom the
record relates and, in particular, shall take the factors specified in paragraphs
278.5(2)(a) to (h) into account.        (3) Where the judge orders the production of the record or
part of the record to the accused, the judge may impose conditions on the
production to protect the interests of justice and, to the greatest extent
possible, the privacy and equality interests of the complainant or witness, as
the case may be, and any other person to whom the record relates, including,
for example, the following conditions:  (a) that the record be edited as directed by the judge;  (b) that a copy of the record, rather than the original, be
produced;  (c) that the accused and counsel for the accused not disclose
the contents of the record to any other person, except with the approval of the
court;  (d) that the record be viewed only at the offices of the
court;  (e) that no copies of the record be made or that restrictions
be imposed on the number of copies of the record that may be made; and  (f) that information regarding any person named in the
record, such as their address, telephone number and place of employment, be
severed from the record.        (4) Where the judge orders the production of the record or
part of the record to the accused, the judge shall direct that a copy of the
record or part of the record be provided to the prosecutor, unless the judge
determines that it is not in the interests of justice to do so.        (5) The record or part of the record that is produced to the
accused pursuant to an order under subsection (1) shall not be used in any
other proceedings.        (6) Where the judge refuses to order the production of the
record or part of the record to the accused, the record or part of the record
shall, unless a court orders otherwise, be kept in a sealed package by the
court until the later of the expiration of the time for any appeal and the
completion of any appeal in the proceedings against the accused, whereupon the
record or part of the record shall be returned to the person lawfully entitled
to possession or control of it.        278.8 (1) The judge shall provide reasons for ordering or
refusing to order the production of the record or part of the record pursuant
to subsection 278.5(1) or 278.7(1).        (2) The reasons referred to in subsection (1) shall be entered
in the record of the proceedings or, where the proceedings are not recorded,
shall be provided in writing.        278.9 (1) No person shall publish in any document, or
broadcast or transmit in any way, any of the following:  (a) the contents of an application made under section 278.3 ;  (b) any evidence taken, information given or submissions made
at a hearing under subsection 278.4(1) or 278.6(2); or  (c) the determination of the judge pursuant to subsection
278.5(1) or 278.7(1) and the reasons provided pursuant to section 278.8, unless
the judge, after taking into account the interests of justice and the right to
privacy of the person to whom the record relates, orders that the determination
may be published.        (2) Every person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of
an offence punishable on summary conviction.        278.91 For the purposes of sections 675 and 676, a
determination to make or refuse to make an order pursuant to subsection
278.5(1) or 278.7(1) is deemed to be a question of law.                     Appeal
allowed.                     Solicitor for the
appellant: Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
respondent: Najma Jamaldin, Toronto; Paul Genua, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Alberta: Attorney General of Alberta,
Edmonton.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police: Ottawa Police Service,
Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario: Dawe & Dineen,
Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Barbra Schlifer Commemorative Clinic: Ursel Phillips Fellows
Hopkinson, Toronto.  [1] 
The legislative history of the Mills regime further confirms that it was
intended to apply to third party records in the hands of the police or the
Crown: see, e.g., House of Commons Debates, vol. 134, No. 122, 2nd
Sess., 35th Parl., February 4, 1997, at p. 7664 (Gordon Kirkby); House of
Commons Debates, vol. 134, No. 150, 2nd Sess., 35th Parl., April 7, 1997,
at pp. 9361-62 (Shaughnessy Cohen).  