  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. McRae, 2013 SCC 68, [2013] 3
  S.C.R. 931 Date: 20131206 Docket: 34743  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant and Stéphane
McRae Respondent    Coram: LeBel, Fish, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and
Wagner JJ.  Joint
  Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 41) Cromwell and Karakatsanis JJ. (LeBel,
  Fish, Abella, Moldaver and Wagner JJ. concurring)   R. v. McRae, 2013
SCC 68, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 931 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Stéphane McRae                                                                                          Respondent Indexed as:  R. v.
McRae 2013 SCC 68 File No.:  34743. 2013:  May 21; 2013:  December 6. Present:  LeBel, Fish, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and
Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec                     Held: 
The appeal should be allowed and a new trial ordered.                     The actus reus
of the offence of uttering threats will be made out if a reasonable person
fully aware of the circumstances in which the words were uttered or conveyed
would have perceived them to be a threat of death or bodily harm.  The Crown
need not prove that the intended recipient of the threat was made aware of it,
or if aware of it, that he or she was intimidated by it or took it seriously.  Nor
must the words be directed toward a specific person; a threat against an ascertained
group of people is sufficient.                     The mens
rea of the offence is made out if the accused intended the words uttered or
conveyed to intimidate or to be taken seriously.  It is not necessary to
prove an intent that the words be conveyed to the subject of the threat or that
the accused intended to carry out the threat.  A subjective standard of fault
applies.  However, in order to determine what was in the accused’s mind, a
court will often have to draw reasonable inferences from the words and the circumstances,
including how the words were perceived by those hearing them.                     In
this case, both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal erred in law in finding
that the elements of the offence had not been made out.  With respect to the actus reus
of the offence, the Court of Appeal erred in concluding that the words uttered
by the accused did not amount to threats because they were not conveyed to
their intended recipients and they did not cause anyone to be fearful or
intimidated.  It is not necessary to prove that the threats were conveyed to
their intended recipients or to prove that anyone was actually intimidated or
made fearful as a result of the words uttered in order to make out the
prohibited act of the offence.  As for the mens rea of the offence, both
the trial judge and the Court of Appeal erred in finding that in order to make
out the fault element it was necessary to prove that the accused intended the
words to be transmitted to their objects/recipients and specifically intended
to intimidate the ultimate objects of the threats.  In other words, each failed
to consider the disjunctive nature of the fault element required for the
offence.  It would have been sufficient had the accused intended that the
threats be taken seriously by those to whom the words were spoken.                     The
Crown has met its burden to demonstrate that the trial judge’s legal error with
regard to the fault element might reasonably be thought, in the circumstances
of this case to have had a material bearing on the acquittal.  Indeed, had the
trial judge not erred as to that element of the offence, he would have had to
consider whether the accused intended his threatening words to be taken
seriously and the evidence of two witnesses provided some basis to conclude
that he did.  Accordingly, the acquittals should be set aside.  However, this
is not the clearest of cases where this Court’s power to enter a conviction
should be exercised.  A new trial is therefore required to determine whether
the charges against the accused will be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Cases Cited                     Referred
to:  R. v. Comeau, 2010 QCCQ 20939 (CanLII); R. v. McCraw,
[1991] 3 S.C.R. 72; R. v. Clemente, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 758; R. v. O’Brien,
2013 SCC 2, [2013] 1 S.C.R. 7, aff’g 2012 MBCA 6, 275 Man. R. (2d) 144; R.
v. MacDonald (2002), 166 O.A.C. 121; R. v. Felteau, 2010 ONCA 821
(CanLII); R. v. LeBlanc, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1583, rev’g (1988), 90 N.B.R.
(2d) 63; R. v. Rémy (1993), 82 C.C.C. (3d) 176, leave to appeal refused,
[1993] 4 S.C.R. vii; R. v. Upson, 2001 NSCA 89, 194 N.S.R. (2d) 87; R.
v. Batista, 2008 ONCA 804, 62 C.R. (6th) 376; R. v. Neve (1993), 145
A.R. 311; R. v. Hiscox, 2002 BCCA 312, 167 B.C.A.C. 315; R. v. Noble,
2009 MBQB 98, 247 Man. R. (2d) 6, aff’d 2010 MBCA 60, 255 Man. R. (2d) 144; R.
v. Heaney, 2013 BCCA 177 (CanLII); R. v. Rudnicki, [2004] R.J.Q.
2954; R. v. Beyo (2000), 47 O.R. (3d) 712; R. v. Hundal, [1993] 1
S.C.R. 867; R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 609; Lewis
v. The Queen, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 821; R. v. Katigbak, 2011 SCC 48,
[2011] 3 S.C.R. 326; R. v. Audet, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 171. Statutes and Regulations Cited                     Stéphanie Carrier, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     Cromwell and
Karakatsanis JJ. — I.       Introduction [1]                             
This appeal provides an opportunity to consolidate
and clarify the elements of the offence of uttering threats. In particular, it
raises two issues: (1)              
In order for the offence to be made out, is it
necessary to prove that the threats were conveyed to their subjects and/or that
the accused intended that they be so conveyed?  (2)              
If the trial judge erred in this respect, has
the Crown discharged its burden to have the acquittals entered at trial set
aside? [2]                             
We conclude that the offence does not require
proof that the accused’s threats were conveyed to their subject or that someone
was actually intimidated by them. Further, the Crown need not establish that
the accused intended that the threats be conveyed to their subject or to
intimidate anyone. In our view, and with respect to the contrary opinion of the
Court of Appeal, the trial judge made legal errors in his analysis of the
offence and the Crown has met its burden of showing that these errors might
reasonably be thought to have had a material bearing on his decision to acquit.
We would, therefore, allow the appeal and order a new trial. II.     Facts and Proceedings A.     Overview of the Facts [3]                             
In June of 2009, the respondent Stéphane McRae
was detained awaiting trial on several charges relating to trafficking in
narcotics. For a time, Louis-Joseph Comeau, Édouard Collin, and Patrick
Cloutier were also detained at the same detention centre.  The respondent
introduced Mr. Comeau to Mr. Cloutier as his [translation]
“contract killer”.  At times, Mr. Cloutier passed on
messages from Mr. Comeau to the respondent. [4]                             
Based on the statements of Édouard Collin and
Patrick Cloutier, various charges of uttering threats were laid against the
respondent and Mr. Comeau. Mr. Comeau was convicted of uttering threats in a
separate trial (R. v. Comeau, 2010 QCCQ 20939 (CanLII)). At issue on
this appeal are five counts of knowingly conveying to Patrick Cloutier and
Édouard Collin, at various times between June 1, 2009, and September 5, 2009,
threats to cause death or bodily harm, contrary to s. 264.1(1) (a) of the
Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , to: the Crown prosecutor; an
officer-investigator; and four witnesses involved in the case being brought
against the respondent and Mr. Comeau for trafficking narcotics. [5]                             
At trial, it was established, among other
things, that the respondent had: (1) told Mr. Collin that he would take down
the guys at the top to rearrange the face of the Crown prosecutor and one of
the witnesses because he thought that he was the one who snitched on him; (2)
informed Mr. Cloutier that he had hired a private detective to find the Crown
prosecutor’s address; (3) asked Mr. Cloutier to do what was necessary to find
the address of the officer-investigator; and (4) told Mr. Cloutier that once
his trial was over he would kill the witnesses who had informed against him (2010
QCCQ 9043 (CanLII), at para. 6). B.     Court of Québec, 2010 QCCQ 9043 (Decoste J.) [6]                             
The respondent did not testify at trial (appeal
decision, 2012 QCCA 236 (CanLII), at para. 18). The trial judge found that
Messrs. Cloutier and Collin were credible witnesses
(para. 12), but held that the fault element (the mens rea) of the
offences had not been established because the words were not conveyed by the
respondent with the intent that they would be transmitted to the subjects of
the threats in an attempt to influence their actions (paras. 14-15). He found
that the respondent rather intended to seek revenge once the trial was done,
and that he had uttered the words out of anger and frustration (paras. 14 and
16). C.     Court of Appeal, 2012 QCCA 236 (Rochette and Giroux JJ.A.
and Viens J. (ad hoc)) III.    Analysis A.     The Applicable Law [8]                             
The respondent is charged with the offence of
uttering threats, provided for in s. 264.1(1) (a) of the Criminal Code :      264.1 (1) Every one commits an offence who, in any manner, knowingly utters, conveys or causes any person to receive a
threat                                   (a) to cause death or bodily
harm to any person; [9]                             
This Court has previously considered this
offence in R. v. McCraw, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 72, R. v. Clemente,
[1994] 2 S.C.R. 758, and more recently in R. v. O’Brien, 2013 SCC 2,
[2013] 1 S.C.R. 7. The elements of the offence include: (1) the utterance or
conveyance of a threat to cause death or bodily harm; and (2) an intent to
threaten. We review here the law relating to each element.               (1)   The Prohibited Act (Actus Reus) [10]                         
The prohibited act of the offence is “the
uttering of threats of death or serious bodily harm” (Clemente, at p.
763). The threats can be uttered, conveyed, or in any way caused to be received
by any person. The question of whether words constitute a threat is a question
of law to be decided on an objective standard. Justice Cory put it this way in McCraw: The structure and wording of
s. 264.1(1) (a) indicate that the nature of the threat must be looked at
objectively; that is, as it would be by the ordinary reasonable person. . . .       The question to be
resolved may be put in the following way. Looked at objectively, in the context
of all the words written or spoken and having regard to the person to whom they
were directed, would the questioned words convey a threat of serious bodily
harm to a reasonable person? [pp. 82-83] [11]                         
The starting point of the analysis should always
be the plain and ordinary meaning of the words uttered. Where the words clearly
constitute a threat and there is no reason to believe that they had a secondary
or less obvious meaning, the analysis is complete. However, in some cases, the
context reveals that words that would on their face appear threatening may not constitute
threats within the meaning of s. 264.1(1) (a) (see, e.g., O’Brien,
at paras. 10-12). In other cases, contextual factors might have the effect of
elevating to the level of threats words that would, on their face, appear
relatively innocent (see, e.g., R. v. MacDonald (2002), 166
O.A.C. 121, where the words uttered were “You’re next”). [12]                         
For example, in R. v. Felteau, 2010 ONCA
821 (CanLII), the accused had told a mental health care worker that he was
going to follow Ms. G, his former probation officer, and “assault” her (paras.
1-2).   The trial judge found that the words did not constitute a threat
because the threat must be of death or bodily harm and the accused’s reference
to “assault” did not necessarily include bodily harm (para. 3). The Court of
Appeal for Ontario found that the trial judge had erred in looking at the word
“assault” in isolation from the circumstances (para. 7). The court held that
the factors relevant to the determination of the meaning of the words included
the facts that: the accused was fixated upon Ms. G and had very recently been
convicted of harassing her; he was angry with Ms. G when he uttered the words;
he blamed her for his arrest and detention; and he was mentally unstable, had
been consuming cocaine and had a known history of serious violence directed at
women (para. 8). The Court of Appeal concluded that the accused’s words, viewed
in these circumstances, would convey a threat of bodily harm to a reasonable
person (para. 9). [13]                         
Thus, the legal question of whether the accused
uttered a threat of death or bodily harm turns solely on the meaning that a
reasonable person would attach to the words viewed in the circumstances in
which they were uttered or conveyed. The Crown need not prove that the intended
recipient of the threat was made aware of it, or if aware of it, that he or she
was intimidated by it or took it seriously (Clemente, at p. 763; O’Brien,
at para. 13; R. v. LeBlanc, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 1583 (confirming the trial
judge’s instruction that it was not necessary that “the person threatened be
ever aware that the threat was made”: (1988), 90 N.B.R. (2d) 63 (C.A.), at
para. 13)).  Further, the words do not have to be directed towards a specific
person; a threat against an ascertained group of people is sufficient (R. v.
Rémy (1993), 82 C.C.C. (3d) 176 (Que. C.A.), at p. 185, leave to appeal
refused, [1993] 4 S.C.R. vii (threat against “police officers” generally); R.
v. Upson, 2001 NSCA 89, 194 N.S.R. (2d) 87, at para. 31 (threat against
“members of the black race” generally)). [14]                         
The reasonable person standard must be applied
in light of the particular circumstances of a case. As the Court of Appeal for
Ontario explained in R. v. Batista, 2008 ONCA 804, 62 C.R. (6th) 376:      An ordinary reasonable
person considering an alleged threat objectively would be one informed of all
the circumstances relevant to his or her determination.  The characteristics of
a reasonable person were considered by the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v.
S. (R.D.), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 484 (S.C.C.), in the context of the test for
bias.  In that case, L’Heureux-Dubé and McLachlin JJ., at para. 36, described
such a person as a:  reasonable,
informed, practical and realistic person who considers the matter in some
detail. . . .  The person postulated is not a “very sensitive or scrupulous”
person, but rather a right-minded person familiar with the circumstances of the
case.  Similarly, in R. v.
Collins, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 265 (S.C.C.), at p. 282, in the context of the
test for bringing the administration of justice into disrepute, Lamer J. for
the majority describes a reasonable person as “dispassionate and fully apprised
of the circumstances of the case”: see also R. v. Burlingham, [1995] 2
S.C.R. 206 (S.C.C.), at para. 71.       It follows that a
reasonable person considering whether the impugned words amount to a threat at
law is one who is objective, fully-informed, right-minded, dispassionate,
practical and realistic. [Emphasis added; paras. 23-24.] [15]                         
Thus, while testimony from persons who heard or
were the object of the threat may be considered in applying this objective
test, the question in relation to the prohibited act is not whether people in
fact felt threatened. As the Court of Appeal for Ontario put it in Batista, witness opinions are
relevant to the application of the reasonable person standard; however, they
are not determinative, given that they amount to personal opinions
and “d[o] not necessarily satisfy the requirements of the legal test” (para. 26). [16]                         
To conclude on this point, the prohibited act of
the offence of uttering threats will be made out if a reasonable person fully
aware of the circumstances in which the words were uttered or conveyed would
have perceived them to be a threat of death or bodily harm.               (2)   The Fault Element (Mens Rea) [17]                         
The fault element is made out if it is shown
that threatening words uttered or conveyed “were meant to intimidate or to be
taken seriously” (Clemente, at p. 763). [18]                         
It is not necessary to prove that the threat was
uttered with the intent that it be conveyed to its intended recipient (Clemente,
at p. 763) or that the accused intended to carry out the threat (McCraw,
at p. 82). Further, the fault element is disjunctive: it can be established by
showing either that the accused intended to intimidate or intended that
the threats be taken seriously (see, e.g., Clemente, at p. 763; O’Brien,
at para. 7; R. v. Neve (1993), 145 A.R. 311 (C.A.); R. v. Hiscox,
2002 BCCA 312, 167 B.C.A.C. 315, at paras. 18 and 20; R. v. Noble, 2009
MBQB 98, 247 Man. R. (2d) 6, at paras. 28 and 32-35, aff’d 2010 MBCA 60, 255 Man. R. (2d) 144, at paras. 16-17; R. v.
Heaney, 2013 BCCA 177 (CanLII), at para. 40; R. v. Rudnicki, [2004]
R.J.Q. 2954 (C.A.), at para. 41; R. v. Beyo (2000), 47 O.R. (3d) 712
(C.A.), at para. 46). [19]                         
The fault element here is subjective; what
matters is what the accused actually intended. However, as is generally the
case, the decision about what the accused actually intended may depend on
inferences drawn from all of the circumstances (see, e.g., McCraw, at p.
82). Drawing these inferences is not a departure from the subjective standard
of fault. In R. v. Hundal, [1993] 1 S.C.R. 867, Justice Cory cites the
following words from Professor Stuart which explain this point: In trying to ascertain what was
going on in the accused’s mind, as the subjective approach demands, the trier
of fact may draw reasonable inferences from the accused’s actions or words at
the time of his act or in the witness box.  The
accused may or may not be believed.  To conclude that, considering all the
evidence, the Crown has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused
“must” have thought in the penalized way is no departure from the subjective
substantive standard.  Resort to an objective substantive standard would only
occur if the reasoning became that the accused “must have realized it if he had
thought about it”. [Emphasis added: p. 883.] [21]                         
Similarly, in Noble, the court had to
determine if the accused intended to be taken seriously when he uttered the words
“I guess we know whose house is going to burn down”, immediately followed by
“just kidding” and laughter (trial decision, at para. 1).  The accused had
uttered the words to a sheriff’s officer as he was returning to prison from
court after having been sentenced for threatening to kill the Crown attorney
who had successfully prosecuted him for robbery.  The trial judge found that in
spite of the remark’s off-the-cuff nature and the absence of any indication
that the accused was angry or upset when he uttered the words, when viewed in
the larger context, the accused was aware that his words, which were very
specific, would be taken seriously as a threat against that same Crown attorney
(paras. 33-35).  After the first time the accused had threatened the Crown
attorney, she had been the victim of an attempted home invasion. Although it
was not alleged that the accused was involved, he told the media that the Crown
attorney had gotten what she deserved. After she was made aware of the
accused’s reference to a house burning, the Crown attorney took the comment
seriously and was very frightened by it. As a result, she and her partner sold
their house (trial decision, at paras. 2-19).  In addition to the Crown
attorney’s reaction to the threats, the fact that the accused knew that
criminal sanctions flowed from threatening language, as a result of having just
been sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for uttering threats, was also an
important factor with regard to the fault element in this case (para. 34). The
trial judge concluded that the words might “have been blurted out on the spur
of the moment, or driven by bravado, but given all the circumstances . . . the
evidence demonstrate[d] that the accused was aware that it would be taken
seriously” (para. 35). [22]                         
The Court of Appeal for Manitoba confirmed the
factual findings of the trial judge, specifically the contextual analysis she
undertook with regard to the fault element (Noble, at para. 17). [23]                         
To sum up, the fault element of the offence is
made out if the accused intended the words uttered or conveyed to intimidate or
to be taken seriously. It is not necessary to prove an intent that the
words be conveyed to the subject of the threat. A subjective standard of fault
applies. However, in order to determine what was in the accused’s mind, a court
will often have to draw reasonable inferences from the words and the
circumstances, including how the words were perceived by those hearing them. B.     First Issue: Is the Confidential Nature of a Threat
Relevant to the Analysis? [24]                         
In our view, both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal erred in law
in finding that the elements of the offence had not been made out because the
threats were conveyed in a so-called “closed circle”. Even if it is true that
the respondent could have expected his words to remain confidential, a
conclusion we would not necessarily be ready to confirm, this does not preclude
a finding that both the prohibited act and the fault element of the offence had
been made out. This is so because, as explained above, it is not necessary to
prove that the threats were conveyed to their intended recipients (prohibited
act) or that the accused intended the threats to be so conveyed (fault
element). Further, it is not necessary to prove that anyone was actually
intimidated by the threats (prohibited act) or that the accused specifically
intended to intimidate anyone (fault element). The concept of the “closed
circle” is therefore legally wrong.  Threats are tools of intimidation and
violence.  As such, in any circumstance where threats are spoken with the
intent that they be taken seriously, even to third parties, the elements of the
offence will be made out.  As we explain below, the trial judge erred in both
respects with regard to the fault element, and the Court of Appeal erred in
both respects with regard to the prohibited act and the
fault element.               (1)   The Prohibited Act [25]                         
The trial judge did not specifically address the
prohibited act of the offence. For its part, the Court of Appeal found that the
“words used by the respondent, considered objectively, may raise serious
concerns that acts likely to cause death or bodily harm will occur at the
respondent’s behest” and that this was “in fact what the respondent’s fellow
inmates understood him to mean” (para. 8). However, the court found that “when
these words and comments are put in context”, they did not constitute a threat
(para. 8). The court described that context as follows:      The comments transmitted or
conveyed by the respondent to three fellow inmates cannot be likened to a “tool
of intimidation which is designed to instill a sense of fear in its recipient”;
rather, it is on par with a threatening letter that is never sent in the mail.
These conversations took place in a closed circle. The mere expression of a
thought is not enough to attribute a criminal act. As the trial judge rightly
pointed out, there is no “recipient” here. The comments made are [translation] “an expression of a
criminal’s frustration and outrage at feeling caught by the judicial system”.
The element of fear instilled in a victim is therefore absent. [para. 9] [26]                         
In sum, the Court of Appeal concluded that the
words did not amount to threats because they were not conveyed to their
intended recipients and they did not cause anyone to be fearful or intimidated.
As we see it, in light of the legal principles reviewed above, the court erred in this conclusion: in our view, it is not
necessary to prove that the threats were conveyed to their intended recipients
or to prove that anyone was actually intimidated or made fearful as a result of
the words uttered in order to make out the prohibited act of the offence.               (2)   The Fault Element [27]                         
The trial judge’s reasons only addressed the fault
element of the offence. He held that the fault element had not been made out because [translation]
“the evidence d[id] not establish that the words used by the accused when
addressing Collin and Cloutier were intended to reach the ears of the possible
or potential witnesses” [1]
 (para. 14). He found that it would have been different if the respondent
intended to convey a message to the potential informers in order to dissuade
them from testifying (para. 14). Similarly, he found that the respondent could
not have imagined that if Mr. Cloutier and Mr. Collin conveyed the words to the
Crown prosecutor or the officer-investigator that their attitude might change
(para. 15). Thus, in the trial judge’s opinion, the respondent did not have the
necessary intent to utter threats towards any of the complainants. [28]                         
The Court of Appeal for Quebec confirmed the
trial judge’s findings that the words “were [not] intended to reach the
ears of the possible or potential witnesses” and that Mr. Cloutier and Mr.
Collin were not “supposed to, either implicitly or explicitly, convey this
message to the persons concerned” (para. 16). In short, the fault element was
not made out because there was no intent to intimidate (para. 16). The court
concluded, with regard to the fault element: [29]                         
In our view, both the trial judge and the Court of
Appeal erred in finding that in order to make out the fault element it was necessary to prove that the accused intended the words to be
transmitted to their objects/recipients and specifically intended to intimidate
the ultimate objects of the threats. It would have been sufficient had the
respondent intended that the threats be taken seriously by those to whom the
words were spoken. C. Second Issue: Should the Acquittal Be Set Aside? [30]                         
To succeed on appeal against an acquittal, the
Crown must show that the legal error or errors of the trial judge “might
reasonably be thought, in the concrete reality of the case at hand, to have had
a material bearing on the acquittal” (R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16,
[2006] 1 S.C.R. 609, at para. 14). [31]                         
As we explained above, the trial judge erred
with regard to the fault element in finding that it was
necessary to prove that the respondent intended his threats to be conveyed to
the intended victims in order to intimidate them. He acquitted the respondent
on the basis of a lack of intent to convey the threats and failed to consider
the disjunctive nature of the fault element required for this offence: either
the intent to intimidate, or the intent to be taken seriously. [32]                         
In spite of this error of law, the trial judge
made a number of findings potentially relevant to the respondent’s intent. We
must therefore consider whether these findings were affected by the legal error
and if not, whether they provide a legal basis for the trial judge’s decision
to acquit. As we see it, the judge’s findings are inextricably linked to his
legal error as to the necessary intent and do not provide a correct legal basis
for the acquittals. [33]                         
The trial judge found, with regard to the fault element, that the respondent’s intent was [translation]
“to seek revenge once the trial was over because they [the witnesses] had
informed on him” (para. 14). He found that the respondent’s words were “the
expression of a criminal’s frustration and outrage at being caught by
the judicial system” and that the respondent was simply “show[ing] his
anger: in fact, in one case he said that he would act once his sentence was
served, and in another he asked for help in finding the address of a police
officer” (para. 16). [34]                         
The role of these findings in the respondent’s acquittal is undermined
by the trial judge’s legal error in relation to the required intent,
specifically that he thought the intent had not been proved because the
respondent did not intend that his words would be conveyed to the objects of
the threats. This error caused the trial judge to fail to consider whether the
respondent intended the threats to be taken seriously. [35]                         
The trial judge found that Mr. Cloutier and Mr. Collin were credible
witnesses and that they were both of the opinion that the threats were serious
and they feared that murders would be committed (para. 12).  Had the trial
judge not erred as to the fault element of this offence, he would have had to
consider whether the accused intended his threatening words to be taken
seriously and the evidence of Mr. Cloutier and Mr. Collin provided some basis
to conclude that he did (see O’Brien (S.C.C.), at paras. 10-12). [36]                         
Furthermore, the trial judge’s finding that the
words were spoken out of anger or frustration does not avoid the difficulty
that he failed to consider whether the respondent intended the words to be
taken seriously.  The respondent’s [translation]
“frustration and outrage at being caught by the judicial system” speak to his motive
for saying what he did, and not necessarily his intent as to how his
words should be received.  As this Court noted in Lewis v. The Queen,
[1979] 2 S.C.R. 821, at p. 831, “the mental element, the [fault element] with which the court is concerned, relates to ‘intent’, i.e.
the exercise of a free will to use particular means to produce a particular
result, rather than with ‘motive’, i.e. that which precedes and induces
the exercise of the will”. [37]                         
As a result, we conclude that the Crown
has met its burden to demonstrate that the trial judge’s legal error “might
reasonably be thought, in the concrete reality of the case at hand, to have had
a material bearing on the acquittal” (Graveline, at para 14).  We would
therefore set aside the acquittals. [38]                         
While the Crown asks this Court to exercise its
discretion under s. 686(4)  of the Criminal Code  and enter a conviction,
we are of the view that a new trial is required in this case. [39]                         
In order to set aside an acquittal and enter a
conviction, we must be satisfied that “the trial judge’s findings of fact,
viewed in light of the applicable law, supported a conviction beyond a
reasonable doubt” (R. v. Katigbak, 2011 SCC 48, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 326, at
para. 50). This is a power that should be used only in the clearest of cases (R.
v. Audet, [1996] 2 S.C.R. 171, at para 48). [40]                         
As noted above, the trial judge made no findings
with regard to the respondent’s intent to be taken seriously.  The trial
judge’s finding that the respondent said the words out of anger or frustration
or a desire for revenge goes to his motive for saying the words, and not
necessarily his intention.  It is reasonably possible that he was
motivated by anger or frustration or by the desire for revenge, and yet did not
intend to be taken seriously.  Questions of motive and intent are two separate
inquiries and, given the trial judge’s legal errors, we cannot be certain what
he would have found had he turned his mind to the correct legal question.  This
is not the clearest of cases.  Accordingly, a new trial is required to
determine whether the charges against the respondent will be proved beyond a
reasonable doubt. IV.    Disposition [41]                         
We would allow the appeal and order a new trial.                     Appeal allowed.                     Solicitor for the
appellant:  Poursuites criminelles et pénales du Québec, Québec.  [1] The translations are from the Court of Appeal’s decision, at para.
3.  