  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Conception, 2014 SCC 60, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 82 Date: 20141003 Docket: 34930  Between: Brian
Conception Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen, Person in Charge of the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health and Person in Charge of the Mental Health Centre Penetanguishene Respondents - and - Attorney
General of Canada, Attorney General of Quebec, Criminal Lawyers’ Association of
Ontario and Mental Health Legal Committee Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner and Gascon JJ.  Joint
  Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 44)  Concurring
  Reasons: (paras. 45 to 133) Rothstein and Cromwell JJ. (LeBel, Abella
  and Gascon JJ. concurring)  Karakatsanis J. (McLachlin C.J. and
  Moldaver and Wagner JJ. concurring)     r. v. conception, 2014
SCC 60, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 82 Brian Conception                                                                                            Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen, Person in Charge of the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and Person in Charge of the Mental Health Centre Penetanguishene                                                                            Respondents and Attorney General of Canada, Attorney General of Quebec, Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario
and Mental Health Legal Committee                                                                 Interveners Indexed as:  R. v. Conception 2014 SCC 60 File No.:  34930. Hearing: October 17, 2013. Present: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver, Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. Judgment:  October 3, 2014. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein,
Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner and Gascon JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                      C was charged with sexual assault.  When he
appeared in court, he was in a psychotic state and was declared unfit to stand
trial.  Crown counsel recommended a treatment order.  The Crown stated that a
bed would be available in a facility at one hospital six days after the
hearing.  The hearing judge issued a “forthwith” treatment order, specifying C
be treated at a second hospital or its “designate” (preferably the facility at
the first hospital).  Court services delivered C to the first hospital and left
him in a hallway.  The hospitals appealed this decision.  The Court of Appeal
held that the hearing judge erred by acting on the basis that the consent
requirement of the Criminal Code  provision relating to treatment had
been satisfied.  The Court of Appeal also determined that the applicable
provisions of the Criminal Code  (ss. 672.58  and 672.62(1) (a))
engage the rights to liberty and security of the person guaranteed under s. 7 
of the Charter , but do not violate the principles of fundamental
justice.                     Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.                     Per LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell and Gascon JJ.: Consent is
required for the disposition order in its entirety, not simply to the treatment
aspect of it.  A court may not make a disposition order directing that
treatment begin immediately if the hospital or treating physician does not
consent to that disposition unless the situation is a rare
case in which a delay in treatment would breach the accused’s rights under the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms  and an order for immediate treatment is an
appropriate and just remedy for that breach.                     The
hospital or person in charge of treatment must consent to all the terms of a
disposition ordering treatment and, if there is no consent, the order cannot be
made.  The starting point is the text of the provisions in their grammatical
and ordinary sense according to the modern principle of statutory
interpretation.  The Criminal Code  provides that no court shall make a “disposition”
under s. 672.58  without the consent of the hospital or person in charge of
treatment.  “Disposition” is a technical term, used throughout Part XX.1.  While
a disposition ordering treatment may be referred to as a “treatment order” in
colloquial language, there is no such thing provided for in the Criminal
Code .  It is clear that a “disposition” under s. 672.58  necessarily
has a temporal aspect both as to its beginning and its ending and may include
other conditions that the court considers it appropriate to impose.  Thus
consent is required to the disposition which the court makes under s. 672.58 ,
not simply to certain aspects of it.  This is supported by the meaning of the
word “consent” and the context in which it is used in these provisions. Where
the Criminal Code  intends to differentiate between consent to treatment
and consent to a disposition order, it does so expressly.                     An
order under s. 672.58  is extraordinary in that it directs that treatment
of an accused be carried out without the accused’s consent and by necessary
implication, it authorizes medical personnel to carry out that treatment
against the accused’s wishes.  The provisions recognize the importance of the
treatment provider’s clinical judgment, not only as to the particular treatment
but as to the location at which it is to be carried out.  This broad
understanding of the scope of the required consent is reinforced by the practical
realities of providing involuntary treatment to potentially dangerous
individuals.  The timing of a treatment order for an accused who has been found
unfit to stand trial must be an element of the hospital’s consent because, from
the hospital’s perspective, the time at which treatment is to be provided is
inextricably linked to the hospital’s ability to provide treatment safely and
effectively.  The ability of the hospital to administer the suitable treatment
is inextricably linked to whether it has the facilities and personnel available
to do so.  Timing is therefore an essential element of suitability and not
distinct from it.  Consent under s. 672.62(1) of the Code must
therefore include timing.                     The
consent requirement does not deprive the accused of procedural fairness and is
not unconstitutionally vague or arbitrary.  Any potential violation of s. 7 
rights would result from the exercise of the hospital’s discretion to withhold
consent in a particular case, and is not inherent in the section itself.  No
such breach was established in this case.  That said, a judge proposing to make
a disposition is entitled to consider, in an appropriate case, whether a
refusal of consent will have the effect of unconstitutionally limiting the
accused’s rights to life, liberty or security of the person in a fashion that
does not accord with the principles of fundamental justice.  If so persuaded,
the judge would be entitled to consider whether ordering an immediate admission
would constitute an appropriate and just remedy for that breach.                     Per McLachlin C.J. and Moldaver, Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ.:  The
treatment order regime in Part XX.1 of the Criminal Code  is intended to
bring mentally ill accused persons to the cognitive threshold required to
proceed to trial.  A court’s discretion under s. 672.58  to order treatment
to render an individual fit for trial is subject to stringent safeguards and
timelines.  Given the potential for involuntary medical treatment, one such
safeguard is the requirement for hospital consent set out in s. 672.62(1) (a). 
However, when the consent requirement is read in its proper statutory context,
it is clear that hospital consent is not required to all the terms and
conditions of the treatment order.  The hospital’s consent is required only to
the treatment itself.  Bed shortages and patient wait lists do not permit a
hospital to refuse, or defer, consent.  Consent may be withheld only for
medical reasons and cannot be withheld on the basis of efficient management of
hospital resources.                     Treatment
orders seek to render the accused fit to stand trial, in order to protect the
rights to a timely trial and procedural fairness, as well as to safeguard the
public interest in accused persons standing trial.  They also serve to ensure
that the accused’s liberty is minimally impaired.  While the medical and legal
interests of accused persons are both at stake, the ultimate purpose of
treatment orders is to protect the legal interests of the accused.                     Thus
while bed shortages are not a basis for the hospital to refuse consent, they
are part of the circumstances in which the judge exercises her discretion in
deciding the start date of a treatment order.  If the hospital is concerned
about bed unavailability, or its ability to safely carry out the treatment
immediately, the discussion about triage can take place before the judge. In
setting the start date for treatment, the judge will consider bed shortages,
but she does so along with the liberty, security and procedural fairness
interests of the accused, as well as assessing the impact on the accused of
waiting in jail and the delays to the trial.  If the court attaches what the
hospital considers to be unreasonable conditions to a treatment order, the
hospital may exercise its statutory right of appeal, and benefit from the
automatic stay.                     The
Court of Appeal was correct in deciding that the “forthwith” order in this case
should not have been issued; however, this is not because the trial judge
lacked jurisdiction to issue a treatment order.  Rather, the hearing judge’s
decision regarding the timing of the treatment order was not reasonable. Cases Cited By Rothstein and Cromwell JJ.                     Referred
to:  Winko v. British Columbia (Forensic Psychiatric Institute), [1999]
2 S.C.R. 625; Mazzei v. British Columbia (Director of Adult Forensic
Psychiatric Services), 2006 SCC 7, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 326. By Karakatsanis J. Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
s. 7 . Authors Cited Canada.  House of Commons.  Standing Committee on Public Safety and
National Security.  Mental Health and Drug and Alcohol Addiction in the
Federal Correctional System:  Report of the Standing Committee on Public Safety
and National Security, 3rd Sess., 40th Parl., December 2010. Centre for Addiction and Mental Health.  “Statement of Principles
and Practices for Admission Prioritization”, October 2010. Driedger, Elmer A.  Construction of Statutes, 2nd ed. 
Toronto:  Butterworths, 1983. Sullivan, Ruth.  Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes,
5th ed.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2008.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Simmons, Blair and Hoy JJ.A.),
2012 ONCA 342, 111 O.R. (3d) 19, 259 C.R.R. (2d) 286, 292 O.A.C. 20, 94 C.R. (6th)
405, 284 C.C.C. (3d) 359, [2012] O.J. No. 2253 (QL), 2012 CarswellOnt 6369,
setting aside a treatment disposition of Hogan J.  Appeal dismissed.                     Frank
Addario and Paul Burstein, for the
appellant.                     Riun
Shandler, Grace Choi and Dena Bonnet,
for the respondent Her Majesty The Queen.                     Jonathan C.
Lisus, Eric R. Hoaken and Ian C.
Matthews, for the respondent the Person in Charge of the Centre for Addiction
and Mental Health.                     James P. Thomson and Janice E. Blackburn, for the respondent the Person
in Charge of the Mental Health Centre Penetanguishene.                     Richard
Kramer and Ginette Gobeil, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Canada.                     Dominique A.
Jobin and Caroline Renaud, for the
intervener the Attorney General of Quebec.                     Jill R.
Presser and Anita Szigeti, for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario.                     Suzan E.
Fraser and Mercedes Perez, for the
intervener the Mental Health Legal Committee.                     The
judgment of LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell and Gascon JJ. was delivered by                      Rothstein and Cromwell
JJ. — I.         
Introduction [1]                             
When an accused person has been found unfit to
stand trial and the other statutory requirements have been met, the court may
make a disposition order directing that treatment be carried out for a
specified period not exceeding 60 days and on such conditions as the judge
considers appropriate for the purpose of making the accused fit to stand trial.
The disposition order may not be made, however, without the consent of either
the person in charge of the hospital where the accused is to be treated or the
person to whom responsibility for the treatment of the accused has been
assigned. (For ease of reference, we will refer to this as the hospital’s
consent.) [2]                             
The main issue on appeal is whether, as the
appellant contends, the court may make a disposition order directing that
treatment begin immediately even though the hospital or treating physician does
not consent to that disposition.  In our view, the answer to this question is
“no” in all but the rare case in which a delay in treatment would breach the
accused’s rights under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , and
an order for immediate treatment is an appropriate and just remedy for that
breach. [3]                             
Thus, while we would dismiss the appeal, we
respectfully disagree with our colleague Karakatsanis J. that the hospital’s
consent relates only to the treatment ordered in the disposition and not to the
disposition order itself. As we see it, that reading of the relevant provisions
of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , cannot be reconciled
with its unambiguous text. The Code specifically distinguishes between
consent to treatment and consent to the disposition and explicitly requires
that a disposition may not be made without the hospital’s consent. The hospital
consent is required for the disposition order in its entirety, not simply to
the treatment aspect of it. Read any other way, the appeal provisions relating
to dispositions are incoherent. Moreover, the interpretation that we favour is
consistent with the purpose of the scheme and the broader context in which it
exists. [4]                             
The specific provisions of the Criminal Code 
dealing with UST accused that are relevant to this appeal are ss. 672.58  and
672.62 . As we shall see, these provisions make clear that while the court may
not make a disposition — which may include not only the treatment, but also the
period of treatment and other conditions which the court considers appropriate
— without the hospital’s consent, the accused’s consent is dispensed with in
relation only to the treatment to “be carried out pursuant to a
disposition”.       672.58 [Treatment disposition] Where a verdict of unfit to stand
trial is rendered and the court has not made a disposition under section 672.54
in respect of an accused, the court may, on application by the prosecutor, by
order, direct that treatment of the accused be carried out for a specified
period not exceeding sixty days, subject to such conditions as the court
considers appropriate and, where the accused is not detained in custody,
direct that the accused submit to that treatment by the person or at the
hospital specified.        672.62 (1) [Consent of hospital required for treatment] No court shall
make a disposition under section 672.58  without the consent of  (a)
the person in charge of the hospital where the accused is to be treated; or  (b)
the person to whom responsibility for the treatment of the accused is assigned
by the court.        (2)
[Consent of accused not required for treatment] The court may direct that
treatment of an accused be carried out pursuant to a disposition made under
section 672.58  without the consent of the accused . . . . Other relevant provisions
referred to in these reasons are set out in the Appendix. II.      
Facts, Proceedings and Issues [5]                             
The appellant was charged with sexual assault. 
When he appeared in court, he was in a psychotic state and was declared unfit
to stand trial (“UST”).  Crown counsel recommended a treatment order.  When
asked about security concerns, a psychiatrist testified that treatment at Oak
Ridge, a facility at the Mental Health Centre Penetanguishene (“MHCP”), would
make more sense than the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (“CAMH”),
another hospital with which he had experience.  The Crown stated that a bed
would be available at Oak Ridge no later than the 19th of April which was six
days after the date of the hearing. The hearing judge, Hogan J., issued a
“forthwith” treatment order pursuant to s. 672.58  of the Criminal Code  directing
that the appellant shall be treated at “CAMH or designate (preferably Oakridge
[sic]”, he shall remain in custody at “CAMH or designate”, and he shall
“be taken directly from court to the designated hospital and from hospital
directly back to court” and not to “a jail or correctional facility under any
circumstances” (A.R., vol. I, at p. 2). [6]                             
Reasons for judgment were not issued but during
the proceedings, the hearing judge said: When I
made a determination that as of today this individual needs to have a treatment
order[,] I have based that on expert psychiatric opinion.  I would be negligent
and derelict in my duty and my responsibilities [i]f I were to say, well it is
okay, he has — you know he is the subject of a treatment order which I consider
to be an extreme measure . . . .  . .
.        . . .
I make orders that people [are] against sometimes, not always, but essentially
against their will have drugs administered to them. That is extraordinarily
serious and we do that because we feel it is absolutely necessary and that
means now, not a week from now and I understand that, as I said, and I do not
do it lightly when I do things like this, but I understand it does create
disruption. But, you know, it would probably be better if he is in a bed in the
hall of a psychiatric hospital than if he is in the medical unit not getting
what I have been told is absolutely necessary treatment for, you know, a week.  . . .        . .
. if it is okay to have him wait a week then we should not be asking for
treatment orders today and I should not be making them; it is not okay.  . .
.        . . .
if we are prepared to do something as serious as make treatment orders and then
say, but it is okay they can sit in a jail bed.  That is not appropriate.  We
have a mental health system here that is supposed to treat people and you know
ordering treatment orders is one of the most serious things we can do in terms
of the mental health system and yet we cannot seem to provide a bed for them to
get treated in and that is totally unacceptable.  And I understand the argument
but it is not an argument that carries any weight with
me . . . .  . .
.        . . .
I am prepared to be flexible where he goes as long as it is a hospital.  I know
Oak Ridge is preferable but in these circumstances I can be flexible about
that.        . . . so if I say CAMH or
designate; I will ask that the order say preferably Oak Ridge, but I think
getting him to a hospital at least, initially, is probably the most important
thing . . . . [A.R., vol. I, at pp. 7-11] [7]                             
Court services delivered the appellant to the
Mental Health Centre Penetanguishene and left him in a hallway. [8]                             
The respondent hospitals appealed the timing
aspect of the disposition under s. 672.72(1) which provides for appeals
“against a disposition . . . by a court”.  (We note that if
the appellant is right that a “disposition” does not include timing, there
would be no right of appeal of the timing aspect of the disposition order under
this provision. No one has ever taken this position.) Notwithstanding that the
appellant thereafter was treated, eventually returned to court, and the charge was
stayed by the time the appeal began, the Court of Appeal proceeded to determine
that ss. 672.58  and 672.62(1) (a) of the Criminal Code  engage the
rights to liberty and security of the person guaranteed under s. 7  of the Charter ,
but do not violate principles of fundamental justice. [9]                             
The Court of Appeal held that Hogan J. erred by
acting on the basis that the consent requirement had been satisfied.  It held
that there was never any doubt that CAMH or its designate, MHCP, would admit
the appellant. It noted that a memorandum of understanding between CAMH and 102
Mental Health Court provided a form of general consent to the placement and
treatment of accused persons.  It held that this memorandum implicitly provided
that hospitals would have the necessary facilities, personnel, and resources
for effective and safe treatment.  It held that this implied that admission
would be withheld when a bed was not available for safety reasons. It held that
consent to treat a patient when a bed becomes available is not consent to
accept a patient forthwith. [10]                         
The Court of Appeal accepted that a mentally
unfit accused person’s right to liberty and security of the person is engaged but that the consent requirement in s. 672.62(1) (a)
does not violate the principle of fundamental justice requiring procedural
fairness because the consent requirement responds to a general reluctance in
law to compel a medical practitioner or hospital authorities to administer
treatment; it responds to the common law’s unwillingness to compel someone to
submit involuntarily to medical treatment by assuring that “the treatment order
process is initiated and . . . likely to produce positive
results” (para. 52); it responds to the significant risks to patients and
to medical personnel, hospital staff and others when potentially violent
psychotic patients are detained in settings where proper facilities are not
available; and it permits Ontario’s forensic psychiatric facilities to
co-operate in triaging the needs of UST and NCR accused, matters not within the
knowledge of the courts. The Court of Appeal concluded that it is not unreasonable that
a UST accused may have to wait on some occasions for a short period of time
until a bed becomes available in a designated psychiatric facility and there
was no evidence that a six-day delay in starting treatment might impair the
likelihood of the appellant becoming fit to stand trial. [11]                         
The Court of Appeal also held that s. 672.62(1) (a)
is not void for vagueness or arbitrariness. [12]                         
On the further appeal to this Court, the
appellant raises two main questions concerning the scope of the hospital’s
required consent: 1.           
Does the consent requirement relate to the
timing of carrying out the order or just to the treatment itself? 2.           
If the consent requirement relates to the timing
of carrying out the order, does the s. 672.58  order violate s. 7  of the Charter ? III.    Analysis A.       Does the Consent Requirement Relate to Timing? (1)        
The Approach to Statutory Interpretation [13]                         
In our view, the meaning of the relevant
provisions, supported by an understanding of their full context, leads to the
conclusion that the hospital or person in charge of treatment must consent to
all the terms of a disposition ordering treatment and, if there is no consent,
the order cannot be made. The terms of the order include when it is to be
carried out and therefore consent relates to timing. [14]                         
This issue raises a question of statutory
interpretation which must be resolved according to the modern principle of
statutory interpretation: “the words of an Act are to be read in their entire
context, in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme
of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament” (R.
Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes (5th ed. 2008), at p.
1, citing E. A. Driedger, The Construction of Statutes (1974), at
p. 67). We underline that the starting point is the text of the provisions
in their grammatical and ordinary sense. This is especially the case where, as
here, the key term “disposition” is expressly defined in the statute. In our
view, the appellant fails to do this. (2)        
Statutory Context and Statutory Text [15]                         
It is helpful to begin by putting the most
relevant provisions in their wider statutory context. The relevant provisions
are found within Part XX.1 of the Code which deals with mental disorder.
The twin purposes of this Part of the Code are protection of the public
and fair treatment, in the sense of procedural fairness, of the accused:  Winko
v. British Columbia (Forensic Psychiatric Institute), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 625,
at paras. 20, 21 and 44; see also Mazzei v. British Columbia (Director of
Adult Forensic Psychiatric Services), 2006 SCC 7, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 326, at
para. 27. [16]                         
The Code provides that no court shall
make a “disposition” under s. 672.58  without the consent of the hospital
or person in charge of treatment. The provisions respecting “dispositions” are
central to the legislative scheme set out in Part XX.1 of the Code. Several
provisions give both a court and a Review Board the authority to make various
dispositions in relation to persons falling within the ambit of Part XX.1. 
Under the scheme, courts reach a “verdict” (respecting fitness to stand trial
and criminal responsibility), both courts and Review Boards make a
“disposition” (in relation to persons found UST and not criminally responsible)
and Review Boards make a “placement decision” (with respect to a “dual status
offender”, that is, a person who is both serving a sentence of imprisonment and
is subject to a custodial disposition under Part XX.1). [17]                         
The key point is that “disposition” is a
technical term, used throughout Part XX.1. While a disposition ordering
treatment may be referred to as a “treatment order” in colloquial language,
there is no such thing provided for in the Code.  “Disposition” is a
defined term.  In the context of dispositions made by courts, a “disposition”
is defined by s. 672.1 as meaning “an order made by a court” under
s. 672.54  or s. 672.58 , the latter being the provision that concerns us
here. [18]                         
As s. 672.58 makes clear, a “disposition”
ordering treatment under that section necessarily includes aspects relating to
timing:  it must set out a “specified period not exceeding sixty days”
and it may be made “subject to such conditions as the court considers
appropriate”, including presumably conditions related to timing.  Moreover, a
disposition comes into force on the day on which it is made or on any later day
that the court specifies: s. 672.63. [19]                         
All of this makes it clear that a “disposition”
under s. 672.58 necessarily has a temporal aspect both as to its beginning and
its ending and may include other conditions that the court considers it
appropriate to impose. [20]                         
The Code provides that “[n]o court shall make a
disposition under section 672.58 without the consent of (a) the
person in charge of the hospital where the accused is to be treated; or (b)
the person to whom responsibility for the treatment of the accused is assigned
by the court”: s. 672.62. At paragraph 109, our colleague suggests that s.
672.62 provides for hospital consent with respect to only the “treatment”
aspect of the disposition, and not the “disposition” generally. With respect,
this is not how we read s. 672.62. If “[n]o court shall make a disposition
. . . without . . . consent”, then the consent relates to
the disposition. Further, as just discussed, a “disposition under section
672.58” necessarily has a temporal element. The hospital must consent to the
“disposition”; there is nothing in the text to suggest that this requirement
should be given anything other than its defined meaning in the Code.
Consent is required to a “disposition” and “disposition” is defined to mean “an
order made by a court under section 672.58”: s. 672.1. Thus the hospital’s
consent is required to the disposition which the court makes under s. 672.58,
not simply to certain aspects of it. [21]                         
This conclusion is supported by the meaning of
the word “consent” and the context in which it is used in these provisions. [22]                         
The ordinary meaning of the word “consent” in
the context of medical treatment is understood to be voluntary agreement to a
medical course of action made with an appreciation of all material information
and risks. The starting date of treatment is a material fact, going to the
availability of the necessary bed and staff ready to execute the treatment
order safely. [23]                         
The context in which the word “consent” is used
in this scheme supports this broad understanding of the term.  Where the Code
intends to differentiate between consent to treatment and consent to a
disposition order, it does so expressly.  For example, in s. 672.62 , subsection
1  deals with the hospital’s consent to “a disposition” whereas subsection 2
deals with the accused’s consent to “treatment . . . pursuant to a
disposition”.  Had the intention been to simply require the hospital’s consent
to the proposed treatment, language similar to that used in subsection 2, which
links consent only to the treatment, could have made that intent clear. 
Instead, subsection 1 links the hospital’s consent to the “disposition” not
merely to the “treatment of an accused . . . carried out pursuant to
a disposition” as in subsection 2. This demonstrates that Parliament, which
took care to define the term “disposition”, used the term in its defined sense
— as it did in relation to hospital consent under s. 672.62(1)  — and used
different language to refer only to the treatment component of a disposition —
as it did in relation to the accused’s consent in s. 672.62(2). [24]                         
Given that “disposition” is a defined term
meaning the “order made by a court under section 672.58” and the Code
explicitly requires the hospital’s consent to a disposition under that section,
we see no possible ambiguity in the text of these provisions. Any possible
doubt is dispelled by the clear distinction in s. 672.62 between, on the one
hand, the hospital’s consent to the “disposition” which is required under s.
672.62(1)  and, on the other hand, the accused’s consent to “treatment
. . . carried out pursuant to a disposition” which is not required.
We do not see how Parliament could have more clearly expressed its intent that
the hospital’s consent in s. 672.62(1)  relates to all the provisions of the
disposition, including when treatment will begin as well as what is to be done. [25]                         
Our colleague Karakatsanis J. reads the appeal
provisions in Part XX.1 as supporting the appellant’s view that consent to a
disposition order does not require consent to the timing aspects of the
disposition order. We respectfully disagree.  As we see it, the interpretation
that we propose is reinforced, not weakened, by the
appeal provisions in Part XX.1. Under s. 672.72(1), “[a]ny party may appeal
against a disposition made by a court . . . on any ground of appeal
that raises a question of law or fact alone or of mixed law and fact.”  This,
of course, is the provision that allowed the hospital in this case to appeal
the judge’s “forthwith” disposition order.  However, the appellant contends
that the “disposition” under s. 672.58 does not include the timing of the
treatment which is ordered. It follows that, on the appellant’s reading of the Code,
the term “disposition” means something different in ss. 672.58 and 672.62 than
it does in s. 672.72.  If, as the appellant contends, consent to a
“disposition” as required by s. 672.62 does not require consent as to timing of
treatment, it must follow that an appeal under s. 672.72 from a “disposition”
cannot relate to the timing of the treatment either. Respectfully, this simply
cannot be the case. “Disposition” is a defined term: it means an “order made by
a court under section 672.58”.  The term “disposition” must bear this meaning
everywhere it is used in Part XX.1 of the Code. The appellant offers no
explanation as to why the express definition of the term applies in the appeal
provisions but not in the treatment disposition provisions even though both the
consent requirement and the right of appeal relate to a disposition under s.
672.58. [26]                         
We also, respectfully, cannot agree that if the
hospital’s consent were required to the timing aspect of a disposition, there
would be no point in providing the hospital with a right of appeal as it could
simply refuse to consent. This case shows that this line of argument is
incorrect. The appeal process under Part XX.1 permitted
the judge’s forthwith order in this case to be appealed and her legal error in
making it to be corrected on appeal. [27]                         
The appellant argues that consent in relation to
a s. 672.58 disposition order must not include timing because the institutions
do not have any right to refuse to accept immediately patients on other
court-ordered placements as, for example, under s. 672.11 (psychiatric
assessments) and s. 672.54(c) and s. 672.46(2)  (transfers to a
psychiatric institution or to a hospital). In effect, the appellant urges us to
infer from the fact that hospital consent to timing is not required in these
situations that it similarly should not be required under s. 672.62. We cannot
agree. [28]                         
Section 672.58 is unique in that it requires an
accused to be subject to treatment and authorizes medical personnel to
administer it without the accused’s consent. The section is not concerned
simply with admission but with treatment upon admission. Thus, the provision
deals with distinct situations and this argues against drawing any inference
from distinct and different provisions about the meaning of this one. Moreover,
any potential inference that might otherwise be drawn from the absence of a
consent requirement in these other provisions is negated by the language in s.
672.62. It expressly makes the hospital’s consent relate to the disposition
order itself, not simply to the treatment to be carried out pursuant to it. (3)        
The Broader Context [29]                         
The interpretation that we arrive at looking at
the text of the provisions in their statutory context is reinforced by other,
broader contextual considerations. We will refer to the purpose of the scheme
and the artificiality of separating “treatment” from “timing” in this context. [30]                         
We agree with the respondent Attorney General of
Ontario that the purposes of this scheme point to a broad understanding of the
requirement for hospital consent. [31]                         
An order under s. 672.58 is extraordinary in at
least two respects. First, it directs that treatment of an accused be carried
out without the accused’s consent. The exceptional nature of this power was
noted by the then Justice Minister Kim Campbell when she introduced the
legislation in 1991: At
present, there is no power to order a person detained pursuant to a
Lieutenant-Governor’s warrant to submit to treatment involuntarily.  Apart from
emergency, there is no power to treat an accused without obtaining consent. We
have concluded that the general rule preventing the involuntary treatment of
mentally disordered accused ought to be preserved.  However, subject to
stringent safeguards, the bill permits a court to order involuntary
treatment to make the accused fit to stand trial, thereby avoiding a
potentially lengthy period of detention. [Emphasis added.]  (House
of Commons Debates, vol. 3, 3rd Sess., 34th Parl., October 4, 1991, at pp.
3297-98) [32]                         
The Code establishes a number of special
protections that highlight the unusual nature of this power. As provided for in
s. 672.59, the order may only be made if the court is satisfied on the basis of
testimony from a medical practitioner that a specific treatment should be
administered for the purpose of making the accused fit to stand trial. That testimony
must fulfill the detailed criteria set out in s. 672.59(2), including that the
treatment is the least restrictive and least intrusive that could be specified
for the purpose and that the risk of harm to the accused is not
disproportionate to its anticipated benefit.  The accused has important
procedural rights including notice, and the right to challenge the application
and certain treatments including the performance of psychosurgery or
electro-convulsive therapy are not permitted: ss. 672.6 and 672.61. [33]                         
Second, by necessary implication, it authorizes
medical personnel to carry out that treatment against the accused’s wishes.
This is a remarkable provision, given that informed consent of the patient is
generally the sine qua non of medical treatment. However, s. 672.62, by
requiring consent of the hospital or the person responsible for the accused’s
treatment, makes it clear that this provision does not oblige them to carry out
the court’s disposition order without their consent.  As the Court noted in Mazzei,
doing so “would constitute interference with the authority and responsibility
of hospital authorities to provide medical services to persons in their custody
according to their view of what is appropriate and effective”: para. 34
(emphasis in original). [34]                         
That understanding serves the purpose of
safeguarding the accused; hospital consent is one of the “stringent safeguards”
referred to by Minister Campbell and is designed to ensure that the order can
be carried out safely, both with regard to the accused, other patients and
medical personnel. Parliament also intended to respect the important role of
the treatment provider and to acknowledge how intrusive these provisions are,
not only in relation to the accused but in relation to the institutions and personnel
who are called on to administer treatment against the patient’s will.  The
provisions recognize the importance of the treatment provider’s clinical
judgment, not only as to the particular treatment but as to the location, among
those designated by the Minister of Health, at which it is to be carried out. [35]                         
This broad understanding of the scope of the
required consent is reinforced by the practical realities of providing
involuntary treatment to potentially dangerous individuals. The timing of a
treatment order for UST accused must be an element of the hospital’s consent
because, from the hospital’s perspective, the time at which treatment is to be
provided is inextricably linked to the hospital’s ability to provide treatment
safely and effectively. The context of the involuntary treatment of a UST
accused involves a number of safety considerations. Special precautions must be
made when treating these individuals in order to protect the accused, other
patients, staff and the public at large. These measures include all rooms being
designed for single occupancy only, double air locking doors, furniture
specially designed so it cannot be used as a weapon, specially trained staff,
perimeter security, sally ports and specialized automated locking doors. If these
facilities are not available at a given time, these safety concerns cannot be
adequately met and the treatment cannot be provided safely. [36]                         
The appellant would have us draw a line between
“suitability of treatment” — that is, whether a specific UST accused will
benefit from the type of treatment recommended to which the hospital must
consent — and “timing of treatment” as to which its consent is not required.
However, this is an artificial distinction in the real world of involuntary
hospital treatment. It ignores the fact that the ability of the hospital to
administer the suitable treatment is inextricably linked to whether it has the
facilities and personnel available to do so. A treatment is not suitable if it
cannot be administered. [37]                         
The artificiality of the distinction between
“suitability” and “timing” can be seen by looking at the difference between a
hospital that does not have the facilities at all and a hospital that does not
have the facilities available “forthwith”. Not all hospitals are equipped to
handle the most dangerous offenders; they simply do not have the appropriate
facilities. Surely, a hospital can refuse to consent to treat a very dangerous
offender if it does not have the appropriate facilities to handle him or her.
This would not be considered a question of timing. Similarly, a hospital can
acknowledge that a UST accused needs specific treatment, but recognize it does
not have the proper facilities to treat him or her immediately. In both these
cases, the hospital would be unable to provide safe treatment and therefore
would be entitled to withhold consent under s. 672.62(1)  because the hospital
is not suited to safely treat the UST accused at that time. Timing is therefore
an essential element of suitability and not distinct from it. Consent under s.
672.62(1) of the Code must therefore include timing. [38]                         
Interpreting consent to exclude the element of
timing, as the appellant would have us do, leaves allocation of scarce medical
and hospital resources to those needing treatment squarely in the hands of the
courts. This undermines the ability of hospitals to make medical triage
decisions, which could not have been the intent of Parliament in enacting s.
672.62(1) of the Code. In making a “forthwith” treatment order, judges
are necessarily deciding who will not get treatment forthwith just as
they are deciding who will.  Judges would be deciding who should get medical
treatment first, but without any overall sense of the needs and priorities of
others who their “forthwith” orders are displacing. Judges would, in effect, be
making medical triage decisions but without the benefit of being informed about
the other patients awaiting attention. [39]                         
This scheme requires a co-operative and mutually
respectful approach if it is to function, and we encourage that approach.
However, our colleague’s suggestion at paras. 118 and 122 of her reasons that
judges should routinely inquire into matters of bed availability or the
hospital’s ability to safely carry out treatment immediately cannot have been
Parliament’s intent in enacting the hospital consent provision. It does not
strike us as likely that this scheme intended that the scarce resources of both
the courts and the health care system should be devoted to judges micromanaging
medical triage decisions and health care providers defending their triage
decisions in court. Moreover, a judge’s decision to overrule the hospital on
these matters may well affect the important rights and interests of other
people needing treatment.  Quite apart from the impracticality of seeing the
judge’s role in this way, it also undermines rather than furthers the broader
objectives of protecting the rights of the accused as well as those of others
needing treatment and the broader public. We do not think, with respect, that
these are matters that Parliament intended should routinely be decided by
judges making disposition orders under s. 672.58  of the Criminal Code . (4)        
Conclusion [40]                         
We conclude that the text, context and purpose
of the provisions show that the hospital’s consent is required in relation to
all the aspects of the disposition order made under s. 672.58  and, absent that
consent, the court may not make the order.  This conclusion is subject only to
what we will say in the next section of our reasons in relation to circumstances
in which a judge is convinced that the hospital’s refusal of consent breaches
the accused’s Charter  rights and that an order for immediate treatment
is an appropriate and just remedy for that breach. B.       The Consent Requirement and Section 7  of the Charter [41]                         
We agree with the Court of Appeal that the
consent requirement does not deprive the accused of procedural fairness and
that it is not unconstitutionally vague or arbitrary. To the extent that it has
any potential to infringe the accused’s s. 7  rights, we agree with the
respondent CAMH that any potential violation of s. 7  rights results from the
exercise of the hospital’s discretion to withhold consent conferred in s.
672.62(1)  in a particular case, and is not inherent in the section itself. [42]                         
No such breach was established. As the Court of
Appeal pointed out, there is no evidence that a six-day delay in starting
treatment might impair the likelihood of the appellant becoming fit to stand
trial within the 60-day statutory window provided in s. 672.59(2), and there is
no suggestion that the six-day delay in any other respect infringed the
appellant’s right to life, liberty or security of the person. There is,
accordingly, no basis on which to find that the hospital’s exercise of
discretion not to consent to immediate admission for treatment had any
unconstitutional effects on the appellant. [43]                         
That said, although we think it would be
exceedingly rare, we would not rule out this possibility in other cases. A
judge proposing to make a disposition is entitled to consider, in an
appropriate case, whether a refusal of consent will have the effect of
unconstitutionally limiting the accused’s rights to life, liberty or security
of the person in a fashion that does not accord with the principles of
fundamental justice. If so persuaded, the judge would also be entitled to
consider whether ordering an immediate admission would constitute an
appropriate and just remedy for that breach. While we think the circumstances
under which this inquiry is appropriate will be rare, the Charter 
assures that judges and not the person in charge of the hospital where the
accused is to be treated will have the last word in terms of the disposition
order where the accused’s Charter  rights would otherwise be
compromised.  That, however, is not this case. IV.    Disposition [44]                         
We would dismiss the appeal without costs.                     The
reasons of McLachlin C.J. and Moldaver, Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. were
delivered by                      Karakatsanis J.  — I.         
Overview [45]                         
When an accused person is found unfit to stand
trial under Part XX.1 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , the
court may order involuntary treatment to render that person fit for trial,
provided that the hospital administering the treatment consents.  Often, the
hospital withholds its consent until mental health beds become available. 
Consequently, treatment cannot always start immediately. [47]                         
In this case, the accused was found unfit to
stand trial.  The hospital indicated that it would not have a bed available for
six days, but the hearing judge nonetheless issued a treatment order directing
that the accused be taken to hospital “forthwith”.  The hospital appealed, and
the Court of Appeal concluded that since the hospital had not consented to the
start date of the order, the judge did not have the jurisdiction to issue the
treatment order.  Further, the Court of Appeal found that the consent
provisions did not violate the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . [48]                         
The issue in this case is whether it is the
court or the hospital that has the final say about when treatment shall
commence when faced with bed shortages.  Can a valid treatment order issue,
absent hospital consent as to the timing of the order?  The answer depends on
the scope of hospital consent required before a treatment order can be made
under Part XX.1 of the Code. [49]                         
The respondents, the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH), the Mental Health Centre Penetanguishene (MHCP), and the
Attorney General of Ontario, say that the hospital’s right to consent means
that it must agree to all the terms and conditions of the treatment order
before it can be issued.  When there are bed shortages, hospitals have
the right to determine when treatment will commence.  Orders for treatment to
start “forthwith” can result in overcrowding, compromising the safety of
patients and staff, and the priority of other patients.  Hospitals are in the
best position to triage patients, and they can withhold consent on that basis. [50]                         
The appellant, Mr. Conception, says that the
judge must have the final say as to when treatment will commence.  The hospital
would only be able to assess the medical interests of the accused, in relation
to other (waiting) patients, whereas the judge is able to consider all the
interests at stake, including the alternative detention or release arrangements
for the accused. [51]                         
For the reasons that follow, I conclude that the
hospital’s consent is not required to all the terms and conditions of the treatment
order.  When the consent requirement is read in its proper statutory context,
it is clear that hospital consent is required for the specified treatment.  The
hospital must be willing, on medical grounds, to administer the particular
treatment. [53]                         
I agree with the Court of Appeal that the order
in this case should not have been issued.  However, while the Court of Appeal
reasoned that consent is an “umbrella” term, requiring agreement with all
aspects of the treatment order, including timing, I conclude that consent is
focussed only on the specified treatment.  Because of my conclusions on the meaning
of “consent”, I need not consider the parties’ arguments regarding the Charter . II.          
History of the Proceedings [54]                         
Mr. Conception was arrested on a charge of
sexual assault after grabbing the breast of a staff
member at the CAMH while receiving treatment there.  He appeared in court on
April 13, 2010, the day after his arrest, and Hogan J. found him unfit to stand
trial.  Following the testimony of the CAMH forensic psychiatrist and the
recommendation of Crown counsel, the judge decided to issue a treatment order. [55]                         
Crown counsel raised the issues of bed
availability and safety.  The psychiatrist testified that treatment would be
more appropriate at MHCP because the accused’s charge related to a staff member
at CAMH.  Crown counsel then relayed the information, received from CAMH’s bed
coordinator, that a bed would be available at MHCP within six days.[1] [56]                         
The judge asked why she should leave it to
hospital administrators to determine priority.  Crown counsel submitted that
the result of ordering that the accused receive a bed today would be to
displace someone else on the waiting list.  Not persuaded, the judge noted: . . . I make
orders that people against . . . their will have drugs administered to them. 
That is extraordinarily serious and we do that because we feel it is absolutely
necessary and that means now, not a week from now and I understand that, as I
said, and I do not do it lightly when I do things like this, but I understand
it does create disruption.  But, you know, it would probably be better if he is
in a bed in the hall of a psychiatric hospital than if he is in the medical
unit [of a jail] not getting what I have been told is absolutely necessary
treatment for, you know, a week.  [A.R., vol. I, at pp. 8-9] [57]                         
The judge issued a treatment order which directed
that Mr. Conception “be taken directly from court to the designated hospital
and from hospital directly back to court.  Accused is not to be taken to a jail
or correctional facility under any circumstances.”[2]  Court Services
personnel delivered the appellant to MHCP and left him in a hallway. [58]                         
The hospitals, CAMH and MHCP, appealed the
treatment order pursuant to s. 672.72 of the Code.  The order was
automatically stayed when the appeal was launched, pursuant to s. 672.75 of the
Code.  The appellant was eventually treated starting April 26, 2010, and
his charges were stayed in June 2011.[3] 
While the validity of the treatment order is now moot, all parties agreed that
the underlying issues require resolution. [59]                         
In May 2012, the Ontario Court of Appeal allowed
the appeal and set aside the treatment order.[4] 
The court concluded that the judge did not have the jurisdiction to issue the
treatment order without the consent of the hospital and that the hospital had
the right to withhold consent to any term and condition including the
commencement of the treatment period. III.       
The Statutory Regime A.          
Part XX.1 of the Criminal Code [60]                         
Part XX.1 of the Code deals with persons
in the criminal justice system who are experiencing a mental health disorder. 
It authorizes courts to order assessments of accused persons who may be unfit
to stand trial, or not criminally responsible for an offence, and to make appropriate
dispositions in each case.  It gives courts or Review Boards oversight of
mentally ill accused who have been conditionally released or detained. B.           
Unfit to Stand Trial Regime [61]                         
The cognitive threshold for fitness to stand
trial is very low.  A person could be ill enough to require civil commitment,
but still be considered fit.[5] 
The treatment order regime in Part XX.1 is intended only to bring mentally ill
accused persons to the cognitive threshold required to proceed to trial. [62]                         
The issue of fitness may arise at any stage of
the proceedings if the court has reasonable grounds to believe the accused is
unfit to stand trial.  The court may order an assessment (ss. 672.11 and
672.12) to determine whether the accused is unfit to stand trial; subject to
some exceptions, the assessment must be completed within five days (s.
672.14).  Subsequent to the assessment, the court may direct a trial of the
accused’s fitness (s. 672.23). [63]                         
When an accused is found to be unfit to stand
trial, the court may make a treatment order under s. 672.58  to render the
accused fit for trial. C.           
Treatment Order Regime [64]                         
A court’s discretion under s. 672.58  to order
treatment to render an individual fit for trial is subject to stringent
safeguards and timelines. [65]                         
Given the potential for involuntary medical
treatment, one such safeguard is the requirement for hospital consent set out
in s. 672.62(1) (a).  Relevant provisions are as follows: 672.58 [Treatment disposition] Where a
verdict of unfit to stand trial is rendered and the court has not made a
disposition under section 672.54 in respect of an accused, the court may, on
application by the prosecutor, by order, direct that treatment of the accused
be carried out for a specified period not exceeding sixty days, subject to such
conditions as the court considers appropriate and, where the accused is not
detained in custody, direct that the accused submit to that treatment by the
person or at the hospital specified.  . . .  672.62 (1) [Consent of hospital required
for treatment] No court shall make a disposition under section 672.58  without
the consent of  (a) the person in charge of the hospital where the accused is
to be treated; or  (b) the person to whom responsibility for the treatment of
the accused is assigned by the court.  (2) [Consent of accused not required for treatment] The court may
direct that treatment of an accused be carried out pursuant to a disposition
made under section 672.58  without the consent of the accused or a person who,
according to the laws of the province where the disposition is made, is
authorized to consent for the accused.  672.63 [Effective date of disposition] A
disposition shall come into force on the day on which it is made or on any
later day that the court or Review Board specifies in it, and shall remain in
force until the Review Board holds a hearing to review the disposition and
makes another disposition. [66]                         
Pursuant to s. 672.1, both the person in charge of
the affected hospital and the accused are “party” to s. 672.58  treatment orders,
and may therefore appeal against a treatment order to the Court of Appeal (ss.
672.1 and 672.72).  Filing of such an appeal automatically suspends the
application of the order pending the determination of the appeal (s. 672.75). IV.       
The Broader Factual Context A.          
The 102 Court-CAMH System [67]                         
The 102 Court is a specialized Mental Health
Court in Toronto.  It applies the provisions of Part XX.1 of the Criminal
Code  to mentally disordered accused persons. [68]                         
Most unfit accused suffer from a psychotic
illness.  The treatment required to make an individual fit to stand trial is
generally antipsychotic medications provided in a safe context.[6] [69]                         
Toronto’s CAMH works cooperatively with 102
Court to admit and treat accused persons subject to treatment orders.  A
psychiatrist from CAMH attends 102 Court five afternoons per week to conduct
on-site assessments of mentally ill accused persons’ fitness to stand trial.  A
provincial forensic bed registry tracks the availability of beds and is
available to Crown counsel and the hospitals.  CAMH’s Court Liaison is usually
present in 102 Court to assist with locating bed placements and predicting wait
times,[7]
and has the delegated authority to give the hospital’s consent to the treatment
order, typically by stating the estimated day that the hospital will be able to
admit the person.[8] [70]                         
Concerned about mentally ill accused waiting in
jail until a treatment bed became available, some 102 Court judges began
issuing “forthwith” orders, ordering that the accused be sent to hospital
immediately without a stop-over in jail.[9] [71]                         
Despite substantial increases in the number of
forensic beds and reductions in wait times, bed shortages mean that the
hospitals are not always able to accommodate the needs of the criminal justice
system on the timelines expected by the courts. B.           
Current Consent Protocols [72]                         
CAMH’s Statement of Principles and Practices for
Admission Prioritization was introduced in October 2010, several months after
Mr. Conception’s treatment order was issued.[10]  It applies to all
admissions and is a response to the constraints of waitlists and frequent
over-capacity of inpatient units. [73]                         
The first Principle is “[n]o one waits who
cannot”.[11] 
This is explained: “If the accused is acutely mentally unwell and requires
immediate hospitalisation, or if the accused is subject to Court orders or
Dispositions of the [Ontario Review Board] which do not permit other placements,
admission is arranged expeditiously” (emphasis added).[12]  Under Principle 2,
“less seriously unwell persons” are generally admitted according to the date of
the order or request, “while allowing flexibility for clinical need”.[13] [74]                         
With respect to Principle 4, the Statement
says:  “It will be presumed by the court that [the hospitals] will consent to
treat (s.672.62) all accused who have been found ‘unfit to stand trial’” where
the criteria specified in the Code (under s. 672.59) are met.  Dr.
Simpson, the Person in Charge of CAMH, testified that this presumption of
consent is qualified, subject to bed availability.[14] [75]                         
However, Dr. Simpson also emphasized that
“clinical emergency trumps all other things”[15]
and “[n]o one waits who cannot”.[16] 
If there is no bed available for a clinical emergency, CAMH may use one of its
seclusion rooms, provided doing so does not endanger other patients.[17] C.           
Consequences of Delay:  Waiting in Jail [76]                         
In the 102 Court-CAMH system, where a forensic
bed is unavailable or is being held for another patient, unfit accused persons
awaiting treatment are usually remanded to wait in jail.[18] [77]                         
Mentally disordered patients do not typically
fare well as inmates.  They are frequently victims of intimidation and violence
and are more likely than the general prison population to attempt suicide,
self-harm, or self-destructive behaviour.  An experienced correctional officer
testified in this case that the mental health care needs of mentally ill
accused persons in provincial jail are frequently neglected due to lack of
special units and trained personnel.[19] 
Fewer than one-third of Ontario provincial jails have special units for inmates
with mental illness or developmental disability.[20]  Where there is no
special unit, or where the unit is full, mentally ill accused persons are
typically held in segregation cells.[21] V.          
Analysis A.          
Overview [78]                         
No court shall make a treatment order without
the consent of the treating hospital: s. 672.62(1) .  The dispute in this case
centers on the scope of that consent requirement.  In particular, which aspects
of a treatment order require hospital consent?  Can a valid treatment order be
issued absent hospital agreement to the specified start date? [79]                         
The respondent hospitals, as well as the
Attorneys General, say that the hospital’s consent is required for all aspects
of the treatment order.  For the order to be valid, the hospital must agree not
only to perform the treatment, but also to the timing and any other conditions
of the “disposition”.  A treatment order cannot issue without the hospital’s
agreement to all aspects of the order. [80]                         
The appellant says that the hospital’s consent
need only extend to its willingness to administer the specified treatment.  The
hospital cannot use the consent requirement to control the timing or other
conditions of treatment, particularly based on bed shortages and waiting lists. [81]                         
In my view, the hospital’s consent is required
only to the treatment itself, and cannot be withheld on the basis of efficient
management of hospital resources.  The hospital consent requirement must be
read in the context of Part XX.1 of the Criminal Code .  A contextual
reading makes clear that the consent provisions do not permit the hospitals to
make decisions about the timing of the treatment (and by extension, the timing
of the trial and the interim detention conditions of the accused) based on the
medical priority of an accused against other patients on the waiting list for a
bed.  In setting the start date for treatment, the judge will consider bed
shortages, but she does so along with the liberty, security and procedural
fairness interests of the accused, as well as assessing the impact of waiting
in jail and the delays to the trial. [83]                         
I will first explain why, in my view, the scope
of the consent requirement is limited to the treatment itself, and consent is
not required to the associated timing and conditions.  I will then discuss how
bed shortages are relevant to the treatment order.  Finally, I will outline an
efficient process for dealing with concerns about the timing of the treatment
order. B.           
The Scope of Consent [84]                         
The respondents say that because s. 672.62(1) 
directs that “[n]o court shall make a disposition under section 672.58 
without the consent of (a) the person in charge of the hospital where
the accused is to be treated”, and because the “disposition” under s. 672.58 
permits an order directing that “treatment of the accused be carried out for a
specified period not exceeding sixty days, subject to such conditions as the
court considers appropriate”, hospital agreement to all aspects of the
treatment order is required.  The hospital must agree not only to perform the
treatment, but also to the timing, duration, and any other conditions of the
“disposition”. [86]                         
There is no doubt that s. 672.62(1)  makes
hospital consent a prerequisite to any treatment disposition.  However, the
issue remains: to what does the consent relate?  Is consent required to all
terms and conditions of the “disposition”?  Or is consent merely required to the
specified treatment? [87]                         
I do not find the respondents’ submissions on
the language of s. 672.62 determinative.  Section 672.62(1)  does not provide
that the consent is required for all aspects of the disposition; rather, it
says that the disposition under s. 672.58 cannot be made without the consent of
the hospital or person treating the accused.  Further, the judge may fix the
timing of the disposition pursuant to s. 672.63.  The disposition under s.
672.58 is an order directing the treatment of the accused for a specified
period (a maximum duration of 60 days), together with any conditions the judge
considers appropriate.  Obviously, if consent to the treatment is not provided,
there can be no disposition ordering such treatment. [88]                         
In my view, the language of these provisions,
read in isolation, does not provide a clear answer to the scope of a hospital’s
discretion to withhold consent.  However, the modern rule of statutory
interpretation requires that “the words of an Act are to be read in their
entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with
the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament”:
E. A. Driedger, Construction of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983), at p. 87. 
Here, interpreting the provisions in light of (1) the purposes of Part XX.1,
the treatment order regime and the consent requirement, (2) the scheme of
strict judicial control and oversight with strict timelines, and (3) the appeal
and automatic stay provisions, leads to the conclusion that the requirement for
hospital consent relates only to a hospital’s willingness to deliver a
particular treatment.  It does not provide the hospital with a veto over the
terms and conditions of the treatment order, nor one that can be exercised for
any reason. (1)     
Legislative Purpose (a)      
Purpose of the Part XX.1 Regime; Protecting the
Interests at Stake [89]                         
This Court identified the purposes of Part XX.1
in Mazzei v. British Columbia (Director of Adult Forensic Psychiatric
Services), 2006 SCC 7, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 326: . . . the
new legislative scheme retains the former’s overall purpose and its emphasis on
the medical treatment of the NCR [not criminally responsible] accused as merely
an effect or an incident of Parliament’s primary objective of protecting the
public and managing an accused’s safety risk, pursuant to its criminal law
power.  The new element added in Part XX.1 is an assurance of procedural
fairness and dignity for the NCR accused, and a commitment to ensure that
the NCR accused’s liberty interests are to be infringed as minimally as
possible.  [Emphasis added; para. 27.] [90]                         
Consideration of the significant Charter -protected
s. 7  liberty interests at stake in the regime is “built into the [Part XX.1]
statutory framework” at “every step of the process”:  Penetanguishene Mental
Health Centre v. Ontario (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 20, [2004] 1 S.C.R.
498, at para. 53.  See also Winko v. British Columbia (Forensic Psychiatric
Institute), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 625, at paras. 16 and 42. [91]                         
When the Bill enacting Part XX.1 was under
discussion in the House of Commons, the Minister of Justice, Kim Campbell, in
describing the treatment order power, stated that “subject to stringent
safeguards, the bill permits a court to order involuntary treatment to
make the accused fit to stand trial, thereby avoiding a potentially lengthy
period of detention”.[22] [92]                         
Treatment orders serve at least two purposes. 
First, they seek to render the accused fit to stand trial, in order to protect
the rights to a timely trial and procedural fairness, as well as to safeguard
the public interest in accused persons standing trial.  Second, they serve to
ensure that the accused’s liberty is minimally impaired.  While the medical and
legal interests of accused persons are both at stake, the ultimate purpose of treatment
orders is to protect the legal interests of the accused. [94]                         
The interpretation of the consent requirement
advanced by the respondents, which gives the hospital control over timing and
other conditions, is difficult to reconcile with the purposes of the regime. 
Requiring consent to all terms of a treatment “disposition” would effectively
give the hospitals a broad veto over whether a treatment order could be issued,
and control over the timing of the treatment, without regard to the
accused’s legal interests. [96]                         
Therefore, it would not be consistent with the
purposes of Part XX.1 for hospitals to control the timing and conditions of a
treatment order.  Hospitals must continually manage for the most effective use
of their resources and patient intake protocols.  It is for a judge to weigh
the accused’s liberty, security and legal interests against the hospital’s
challenges in giving priority to the accused.  As I discuss later, the judge
will consider any bed shortages in setting the start date of any treatment. 
The purposes of Part XX.1 support a more limited scope for the consent
provision, focused on the hospital’s willingness to administer the specified
treatment. (b)     
Purpose of the Consent Provision [97]                         
Part XX.1 empowers judges to make various orders[23] requiring hospitals to
admit accused persons, without the hospital’s consent, even though they may
also cause administrative difficulties in immediately accommodating mentally
ill accused persons.  Thus, the scheme of the Code does not generally
require hospital consent simply because the treatment order makes demands on
hospital resources. [98]                         
Consent is required only under the treatment
order regime.  This is no coincidence, given that the treatment order provision
is also the only provision in Part XX.1 that permits a court to order medical
treatment without the consent of the accused. [99]                         
The reason hospital consent is required is to
protect the accused’s medical interests and to respect the hospital’s
professional right not to be forced to administer medical treatment.  It is one
of the “stringent safeguards” on court-ordered involuntary treatment of a
vulnerable accused. [100]                     
Limiting the power to withhold consent to
concerns about the medical appropriateness of the treatment itself respects the
professional judgment of the hospital as to whether it should administer the
particular treatment.  It also acts as a safeguard to ensure that the medical
interests of the accused are not compromised by a treatment to which he does
not consent.  At the same time, it permits the judge to protect the legal
interests of the vulnerable accused when setting the timing of the order.  This
interpretation safeguards procedural protections, judicial supervision of the
detention, and the purposes of Part XX.1. [101]                     
Thus, the consent requirement, examined
purposively in its legislative context, is limited to whether the hospital
would be willing to carry out the specified treatment.  It serves to ensure the
expert administration of medically appropriate treatment, rather than to
accommodate the hospital’s resource constraints. (2)     
Scheme of the Treatment Order Regime [102]                     
Through Part XX.1, Parliament sought to ensure
procedural fairness, and minimally infringe the liberty interests of the
accused, by setting detailed time limits and providing for judicial (or Review
Board) control and oversight of all aspects of the regime. [103]                     
Pursuant to these controls, a treatment order
has maximum duration of 60 days (ss. 672.58 and 672.59); several pre-conditions
must be met before the order can be granted, based upon the evidence and
opinion of a medical practitioner who has assessed the accused (s. 672.59); the
accused has the right to challenge the application (s. 672.6); certain
treatments cannot be prescribed under the order (s. 672.61); consent to the
order is required from the treating hospital or doctor, but not from the
accused (s. 672.62); and the court can specify the effective date of the order
(s. 672.63). [104]                     
If hospitals may refuse consent, or dictate the
timing of a treatment order, for any reason, including its internal operations
and wait lists, it would be a significant derogation from Part XX.1’s
comprehensive scheme of judicial controls and tight timelines. (3)     
Appeal and Stay Provisions [105]                     
A limited scope of the consent requirement also
gives effect to the appeal (s. 672.72) and the stay provisions (s. 672.75) in
the treatment order regime.  Section 672.75 provides for an automatic stay upon
appeal by any party. [107]                     
Conversely, a delay caused by the hospital
withholding consent to a future date cannot easily be challenged.  Although an
accused can appeal against the treatment order under s. 672.72(1), this is an
onerous challenge for an unfit accused and the appeal is unlikely to be heard
before the commencement date of the order.  Moreover, because the order usually
issues when the treatment is involuntary, the accused is unlikely to seek its
earlier implementation. [108]                     
In any event, the hospital’s decision would not
easily be susceptible to appellate review.  If consent can simply be withheld
by the hospital, there may well be little information before the court other
than a refusal to consent to an earlier date. [110]                     
Thus, the appeal and stay provisions are
consistent with a more limited consent requirement under Part XX.1:  consent
relates only to the hospitals’ willingness to deliver the particular treatment. C.           
The Role of Bed Shortages [111]                     
The respondent hospitals argue that bed
shortages directly affect their ability to carry out treatment.  However,
designated hospitals under Part XX.1 take on a forensic role and are
presumptively equipped to treat unfit accused persons. [112]                     
Usually, the management of bed shortages is more
closely tied to the efficient management of hospital resources.  The CAMH
Statement of Principles and Practices for Admission Prioritization suggests
that, barring medical emergency, priority is granted on a first come, first
served basis.  No doubt it is simpler to forecast bed availability in light of
the existing waiting list, subject only to medical emergencies.  But in the
context of Part XX.1, medical emergencies are not the only measure of urgency
or priority. [113]                     
Even where an unfit accused’s treatment is not
“medically urgent” according to hospital criteria, denial of immediate
treatment may nevertheless put his physical safety and life in jeopardy for
reasons that are wholly unknown to the hospital and that are impossible for the
hospital to assess.  Only judges will be able to assess the risks that would
flow from failing to immediately treat an unfit accused because many of the
greatest dangers will result not from the “medical urgency” of this treatment
as seen by hospitals, but rather from the risks that such an accused would face
in jail.  Medical triage and hospital priority protocols do not account for the
legal interests of the unfit accused. [114]                     
There may also be exceptional circumstances
where the lack of a bed means that the hospital cannot safely administer the
treatment, despite treating the accused as a priority.  Doctors should not be
ordered to provide treatment in circumstances that are unsafe to patients or
staff. [115]                     
However, the record suggests such situations
will be rare.  Hospitals find the means to deal with medical emergencies, under
the principle that “[n]o one waits who cannot”.[24]  Dr. Simpson testified
that when the hospital deems it truly necessary, it finds room.[25]  When a judge makes a
treatment order, the hospital must take it to indicate that treatment is
necessary as of that date. [116]                     
This may mean that the hospital will have to
move a less critical patient to a different ward, use emergency seclusion areas
or otherwise accommodate the accused, much as it would in order to accommodate
a medical emergency.  Under Part XX.1 of the Code, the designated
hospitals may have to accommodate the exigencies of the criminal justice
system. [117]                     
Sometimes bed shortages will affect the ability
of a hospital to carry out treatment safely; but this is distinct from whether
the treatment is otherwise medically suitable.  These are important but
separable concepts.  Thus, while bed shortages are not a basis for the hospital
to refuse consent, they are part of the circumstances in which the judge
exercises her discretion in deciding the start date of a treatment order. [118]                     
I would add this.  While the state must resource
its hospitals so as to accommodate a judge’s order under the Code, this
does not mean the courts can expect a perfect system, with treatment facilities
available immediately in all cases.  Nothing in the Code requires that
hospitals be resourced to ensure there is always an empty bed waiting.  If the
hospital is concerned about bed unavailability, or its ability to safely carry
out the treatment immediately, the discussion about triage can take place
before the judge.  The judge is in the best position to deal with the various
interests, in an informal and co-operative process. D.          
The Treatment Order:  A Collaborative Process [120]                     
Like all decisions of criminal court judges, the
decision to issue a treatment order must be reasonable, having regard to all
the circumstances.  The psychiatrist will have testified as to the need for
treatment.  The hospital, as a party to the proceedings, is entitled to
indicate its preferred timeline, to avoid disrupting other priority patients. 
The psychiatrist may give her opinion as to how the accused will fare in
prison, and whether his treatment prospects would be adversely affected by a
delay. [121]                     
However, the timeline proposed by the hospital
may not meet the needs of the criminal justice system.  For example, the mental
(or physical) health of the accused may be jeopardized by waiting in jail
before being transferred to hospital; or the required detention in jail may be
disproportionate to the actual charges against the accused.  In such cases, the
court may make further inquiries of the hospital.  The hospital may provide
information about the current capacity and waiting list of the hospital and
whether, if measures were taken to admit the accused on an urgent basis, it
could safely provide treatment. [122]                     
This enquiry is consistent with the judge’s role
under Part XX.1 and will not usually require a detailed examination of hospital
evidence, which would result in delays to treatment and trial.  An informal
exchange of information, as is current practice, should suffice.  This ensures
efficiency and is consistent with the direction under s. 672.5(2) of the Code,
which states that a hearing to make a disposition under Part XX.1 “may be
conducted in as informal a manner as is appropriate in the circumstances”. [123]                     
The judge will aim to craft a realistic
treatment order accounting for the hospital’s resource constraints, the
interests of the accused and the needs of the criminal process.  This is
consistent with the judge’s broad power to set the conditions of a disposition
under s. 672.58 and to set the effective date of the disposition under s.
672.63. [124]                     
Finally, if the court attaches what the hospital
considers to be unreasonable conditions to a treatment order (including for
example, where treatment cannot safely be provided), the hospital may, of
course, exercise its statutory right of appeal, and benefit from the automatic
stay.  The Court of Appeal is empowered to overturn a treatment order in such a
case. E.           
Conclusions [126]                     
Judges are charged under Part XX.1 with ensuring
procedural fairness and minimal infringement of the accused’s liberty.  The
judge can consider bed shortages, in light of the medical and legal interests
of the unfit accused.  It is the court, and not the hospital, that is tasked
with fulfilling the ultimate goal of the treatment regime.  That goal is to
make the accused fit to stand trial, thereby avoiding a potentially lengthy
period of detention. [127]                     
If there are exceptional circumstances at the
hospital such that, even if the accused is treated as a patient who “cannot
wait”, it would not be safe to admit and treat the accused, then the hospital
should bring that to the attention of the judge.  If the hospital is concerned
about the treatment order, its remedy is to launch an appeal, and receive an
automatic stay. VI.       
The Treatment Order Issued in This Case [128]                     
The validity of Hogan J.’s order is now moot. 
However, the parties agreed that the appeal should proceed. [129]                     
Obviously, all those involved were acting in
good faith.  Indeed, in many respects, the 102 Court-CAMH system is a good
example of co-operation among the various institutions involved in implementing
Part XX.1. [131]                     
I do not agree with the Court of Appeal that the
trial judge lacked jurisdiction to issue a treatment order in this case.  It is
obvious from the record that the hospital consented to provide the treatment,
subject to bed availability.  However, I conclude that the hearing judge’s
decision regarding the timing of the treatment order was not reasonable. [132]                     
It is clear that the hearing judge was concerned
generally about unfit accused waiting in jail, and the impact of the delay upon
their mental health.  However, she did not base her decision upon the specific
circumstances of this case in issuing a “forthwith” treatment order.  There was
no discussion of the impact on the offender’s treatment prospects resulting
from a delay; the holding conditions in the jail where he would likely be sent
to wait; or any possible alternatives to detention while waiting for a bed. 
And there was no information about whether the hospital could safely administer
treatment immediately, if so ordered, or when safe treatment could be provided,
if he was given priority.  These are relevant factors that could have assisted
the judge in the exercise of her discretion to issue a treatment order in this
case.  Like many others at the time, the judge made the treatment order in good
faith, but out of frustration with the mental health system’s inability to
immediately accommodate patients under treatment orders. [133]                     
As a result, I agree with the Court of Appeal
that the judge erred in issuing a “forthwith” treatment order.  I would dismiss
the appeal without costs. APPENDIX Relevant Statutory Provisions Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46                   672.1 (1)
[Definitions] In this Part, . . . “disposition”
means an order made by a court or Review Board under section 672.54 or an order
made by a court under section 672.58; . . .                   672.11 [Assessment
order] A court having jurisdiction over an accused in respect of an offence
may order an assessment of the mental condition of the accused, if it has
reasonable grounds to believe that such evidence is necessary to determine (a) whether the accused is unfit to stand trial; (b) whether the accused was, at the time of the commission of the alleged offence,
suffering from a mental disorder so as to be exempt from criminal
responsibility by virtue of subsection 16(1); (c) whether the balance of the mind of the accused was disturbed at the time of commission
of the alleged offence, where the accused is a female person charged with an
offence arising out of the death of her newly-born child; (d) the appropriate disposition to be made, where a verdict of not criminally responsible on
account of mental disorder or unfit to stand trial has been rendered in respect
of the accused; or (e) whether an order should be made under section 672.851 for a stay of proceedings,
where a verdict of unfit to stand trial has been rendered against the accused.                   672.46 (1) [Status quo pending Review Board
hearing] Where the court does not make a disposition in respect of the accused
at a disposition hearing, any order for the interim release or detention of the
accused or any appearance notice, promise to appear, summons, undertaking or
recognizance in respect of the accused that is in force
at the time the verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental
disorder or unfit to stand trial is rendered continues in force, subject to its
terms, until the Review Board makes a disposition.                   (2) [Variation of order] Notwithstanding
subsection (1), a court may, on cause being shown, vacate any order, appearance
notice, promise to appear, summons, undertaking or recognizance referred to in
that subsection and make any other order for the interim release or detention
of the accused that the court considers to be appropriate in the circumstances,
including an order directing that the accused be detained in custody in a
hospital pending a disposition by the Review Board in respect of the accused.                   672.54 [Dispositions that may be made] Where a
court or Review Board makes a disposition under subsection 672.45(2) or section
672.47 or 672.83, it shall, taking into consideration the need to protect the
public from dangerous persons, the mental condition of the accused, the
reintegration of the accused into society and the other needs of the accused,
make one of the following dispositions that is the least onerous and least
restrictive to the accused:  (a) where a verdict of not criminally responsible on account of mental disorder has
been rendered in respect of the accused and, in the opinion of the court or
Review Board, the accused is not a significant threat to the safety of the
public, by order, direct that the accused be discharged absolutely; (b) by order, direct that the
accused be discharged subject to such conditions as the court or Review Board considers appropriate; or (c) by order, direct that the accused be detained in custody in a hospital, subject to
such conditions as the court or Review Board considers appropriate.                   672.58 [Treatment disposition] Where a verdict of unfit to stand trial is
rendered and the court has not made a disposition under section 672.54 in
respect of an accused, the court may, on application by the prosecutor, by
order, direct that treatment of the accused be carried out for a specified period
not exceeding sixty days, subject to such conditions as the court considers
appropriate and, where the accused is not detained in custody, direct that the
accused submit to that treatment by the person or at the hospital specified.                   672.59 (1) [Criteria for disposition] No disposition may be made under
section 672.58 unless the court is satisfied, on the basis of the testimony of
a medical practitioner, that a specific treatment should be administered to the
accused for the purpose of making the accused fit to stand trial.                   (2)
[Evidence required] The testimony required by the court for the purposes of
subsection (1) shall include a statement that the medical practitioner has made
an assessment of the accused and is of the opinion, based on the grounds specified,
that (a) the accused, at the time of the assessment, was unfit to stand trial; (b) the psychiatric treatment and any other related medical treatment specified by the medical
practitioner will likely make the accused fit to stand trial within a period
not exceeding sixty days and that without that treatment the accused is likely
to remain unfit to stand trial; (c) the risk of harm to the
accused from the psychiatric and other related medical treatment specified is
not disproportionate to the benefit anticipated to be derived from it; and (d) the psychiatric and other
related medical treatment specified is the least restrictive and least intrusive treatment that could, in the circumstances, be specified for the
purpose referred to in subsection (1), considering the opinions referred to in
paragraphs (b) and (c).                   672.6 (1) [Notice required] The court shall not make a disposition under
section 672.58 unless the prosecutor notifies the accused, in writing and as
soon as practicable, of the application.                   (2)
[Challenge by accused] On receiving the notice referred to in subsection (1),
the accused may challenge the application and adduce evidence for that purpose.                   672.61 (1) [Exception] The court shall not direct, and no disposition made
under section 672.58 shall include, the performance of psychosurgery or
electro-convulsive therapy or any other prohibited treatment that is
prescribed.                   (2)
[Definitions] In this section, “electro-convulsive therapy” means a procedure for
the treatment of certain mental disorders that induces, by electrical
stimulation of the brain, a series of generalized convulsions; “psychosurgery” means any procedure that by
direct or indirect access to the brain removes, destroys or interrupts the
continuity of histologically normal brain tissue, or inserts indwelling
electrodes for pulsed electrical stimulation for the purpose of altering
behaviour or treating psychiatric illness, but does not include neurological
procedures used to diagnose or treat intractable physical pain, organic brain
conditions, or epilepsy, where any of those conditions is clearly demonstrable.                   672.62
(1) [Consent of hospital required for treatment] No
court shall make a disposition under section 672.58 without the consent of (a) the person in charge of
the hospital where the accused is to be treated; or (b) the person to whom responsibility for the treatment of the accused is assigned by the court.                   (2)
[Consent of accused not required for treatment] The court may direct that
treatment of an accused be carried out pursuant to a disposition made under
section 672.58 without the consent of the accused or a person who, according to
the laws of the province where the disposition is made, is authorized to
consent for the accused.                   672.63 [Effective date of disposition] A disposition shall come into force
on the day on which it is made or on any later day that the court or Review
Board specifies in it, and shall remain in force until the Review Board holds a
hearing to review the disposition and makes another disposition.                   672.72 (1) [Grounds for appeal] Any party may appeal against a disposition
made by a court or a Review Board, or a placement decision made by a Review
Board, to the court of appeal of the province where the disposition or
placement decision was made on any ground of appeal that raises a question of
law or fact alone or of mixed law and fact.                    (2)
[Limitation period for appeal] An appellant shall give notice of an appeal
against a disposition or placement decision in the manner directed by the
applicable rules of court within fifteen days after the day on which the
appellant receives a copy of the placement decision or disposition and the
reasons for it or within any further time that the court of appeal, or a judge
of that court, may direct.                   (3)
[Appeal to be heard expeditiously] The court of appeal shall hear an appeal
against a disposition or placement decision in or out of the regular sessions
of the court, as soon as practicable after the day on which the notice of
appeal is given, within any period that may be fixed by the court of appeal, a
judge of the court of appeal, or the rules of that court.                   672.75 [Automatic suspension of certain dispositions] The filing of a
notice of appeal against a disposition made under paragraph 672.54(a) or
section 672.58 suspends the application of the disposition pending the
determination of the appeal.                     Appeal
dismissed without costs.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Addario Law Group, Toronto; Burstein Bryant Barristers,
Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
respondent Her Majesty The Queen:  Attorney General of Ontario,
Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
respondent the Person in Charge of the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health:  Lax O’Sullivan Scott Lisus, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
respondent the Person in Charge of the Mental Health Centre Penetanguishene:  Bersenas
Jacobsen Chouest Thomson Blackburn, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Canada:  Attorney General of
Canada, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of Quebec:  Attorney General of
Quebec, Québec.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario:  Schreck
Presser, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Mental Health Legal Committee:  Fraser Advocacy,
Toronto.  [1]  Transcript of proceedings before Hogan J., A.R., vol. I, at p. 6. [2]  Treatment Order, A.R., vol. I, at p. 2. [3]  A.R., vol. I, at pp. 59-67. [4]  2012 ONCA 342, 111 O.R. (3d) 19, at para. 77. [5]  Cross-examination of Dr. Klassen, A.R., vol. IV, at p. 43. [6]  Affidavit of Dr. Simpson, A.R., vol. VI, at p. 130. [7]  Affidavit of Dr. Simpson, A.R., vol. VI, at pp. 133-34. [8]  Cross-examination of Dr. Simpson, A.R., vol. VIII, at pp. 30-31. [9]   See, for example, R. v. R.R., 2006 ONCJ 141 (CanLII); R.
v. Consuelo, Ont. Ct. J., Toronto, Nos. 10-10001715, 10-10004017,
10-70009469, September 14, 2010 (unreported); R. v. Procope, Ont. Ct.
J., Toronto, Nos. 10009107, 1200160, October 6, 2010 (unreported); Centre
for Addiction and Mental Health v. Al-Sherewadi, 2011 ONSC 2272, [2011]
O.J. No. 1755 (QL). [10]   Statement of Principles and Practices for Admission
Prioritization, A.R., vol. VII, at pp. 185-87. [11]  A.R., vol. VII, at p. 185. [12]  ibid. [13]  ibid. [14]  Cross-examination of Dr. Simpson, A.R., vol. VIII, at p. 64. [15]  A.R., vol. VIII, at p. 16. [16]  A.R., vol. VII, at p. 185. [17]  Cross-examination of Dr. Simpson, A.R., vol. VIII, at pp. 14-17,
41, 46, 56-58, 97 and 118. [18]   Court of Appeal decision, at para. 35. [19]   Affidavit of Eduardo Almeida, A.R., vol. II, at p. 2, and House
of Commons, Mental Health and Drug and Alcohol Addiction in the Federal
Correctional System:  Report of the Standing Committee on Public Safety and
National Security, 3rd Sess., 40th Parl., December 2010. [20]  Affidavit of Linda Ogilvie, A.R., vol. III, at p. 130; cross-examination
of Eduardo Almeida, ibid., at p. 19. [21]  Affidavit of Eduardo Almeida, A.R., vol. II, at pp. 2-3; cross-examination
of Linda Ogilvie, A.R., vol. III, at p. 234. [22]   House of Commons Debates, vol. 3, 3rd Sess., 34th Parl.,
October 4, 1991, at pp. 3297-98 (emphasis added). [23]  These include assessment orders under s. 672.13(1); warrants of
committal pursuant to s. 672.54(c); and various detention orders under ss.
672.29,  672.46(2) and 672.93. [24]  Statement of Principles and Practices for Admission
Prioritization, A.R., vol. VII, at p. 185. [25]  Cross-examination of Dr. Simpson, A.R., vol. VIII, at pp. 14-17.  