  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Hart, 2014 SCC 52, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 544 Date: 20140731 Docket: 35049  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant and Nelson
Lloyd Hart Respondent - and - Director
of Public Prosecutions of Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Directeur des poursuites
criminelles et pénales du Québec, Attorney General of British Columbia,
Association in Defence of the Wrongly Convicted, British Columbia Civil
Liberties Association, Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario, Canadian Civil
Liberties Association and Association des avocats de la défense de Montréal Interveners  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 151)  Concurring
  Reasons: (paras. 152 to 163)  Concurring
  Reasons: (paras. 164 to 243)  Moldaver J. (McLachlin C.J. and LeBel,
  Abella and Wagner JJ. concurring)  Cromwell J.   Karakatsanis J.     r. v. hart, 2014
SCC 52, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 544 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Nelson Lloyd Hart                                                                                       Respondent and Director of Public Prosecutions of
Canada, Attorney General of Ontario, Directeur des poursuites criminelles et
pénales du Québec, Attorney General of British Columbia, Association in Defence of the Wrongly
Convicted, British Columbia Civil Liberties
Association, Criminal Lawyers’ Association of
Ontario, Canadian Civil Liberties Association and Association des avocats de la
défense de Montréal                                    Interveners Indexed as:  R. v. Hart 2014 SCC 52 File No.:  35049. 2013:  December 3; 2014:  July 31. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Cromwell, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal
for newfoundland and labrador                     Criminal law — Evidence — Admissibility —
Confessions — “Mr. Big” confessions — Accused confessing to murdering his
two young daughters at end of lengthy Mr. Big operation — Whether new
common law rule of evidence should be developed to determine admissibility of Mr. Big
confessions — Whether accused’s confessions should be excluded.                     H’s
twin daughters drowned on August 4, 2002.  The police immediately suspected
that H was responsible for their deaths.  However, they lacked the evidence
needed to charge him.  As a result, two years after the drowning, undercover
officers began a “Mr. Big” operation by recruiting H into a fictitious
criminal organization.  At the time, H was unemployed and socially isolated —
he rarely left home and when he did, he was in the company of his wife.  After
he was recruited to the organization, H worked with the undercover officers and
was quickly befriended by them.  Over the next four months, H participated in
63 “scenarios” with the undercover officers and was paid more than $15,000 for
the work that he did for the organization.  As part of that work, H was also
sent on several trips across Canada — to Halifax, Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto and
Vancouver.  H often stayed in hotels and occasionally dined in expensive
restaurants during these trips, all at the fictitious organization’s expense. 
Over time, the undercover officers became H’s best friends and H came to view
them as his brothers.  According to one of the undercover officers, during this
time frame, H made a bald statement in which he confessed to having drowned his
daughters.                     The
operation culminated with a meeting akin to a job interview between H and “Mr. Big”,
the man purportedly at the helm of the criminal organization.  During their
meeting, Mr. Big interrogated H about the death of his daughters, seeking
a confession from him.  After initially denying responsibility, H confessed to
drowning his daughters.  Two days later, H went to the scene of the drowning
with an undercover officer and explained how he had pushed his daughters into
the water.  He was arrested shortly thereafter.                     At
trial, H’s confessions were admitted into evidence.  The trial judge denied H’s
request for permission to testify with the public excluded from the courtroom. 
A majority of the Court of Appeal allowed H’s appeal and ordered a new trial. 
The Court of Appeal unanimously held that the trial judge erred in refusing to
allow H to testify outside the presence of the public.  A majority of the court
also concluded that the Mr. Big operation had breached H’s right to
silence under s. 7 of the Charter.  The majority excluded two of
H’s confessions, the one to Mr. Big and the one to the undercover officer
at the scene of the drowning.  However, the majority concluded that H’s bald
confession was admissible and ordered a new trial.                     Held:
 The appeal should be dismissed.                     Per
McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Moldaver and Wagner JJ.: There
is agreement with the Court of Appeal that, in the circumstances of this case,
H should have been allowed to testify outside the presence of the public.                     The
Mr. Big technique is a Canadian invention.  Although a version of the
technique appears to have been used more than a century ago, its modern
use began in the 1990s and, by 2008, it had been used by police across Canada
more than 350 times.  The technique, used only in cases involving serious
unsolved crimes, has secured confessions and convictions in hundreds of cases. 
The confessions wrought by the technique are often detailed and confirmed by
other evidence.                     However,
the Mr. Big technique comes at a price.  Suspects confess to Mr. Big
during pointed interrogations in the face of powerful inducements and sometimes
veiled threats — and this raises the spectre of unreliable confessions. 
Unreliable confessions provide compelling evidence of guilt and present a clear
and straightforward path to conviction.  In other contexts, they have been
responsible for wrongful convictions — a fact we cannot ignore.                     Mr. Big
confessions are also invariably accompanied by evidence that shows the accused
willingly participated in “simulated crime” and was eager to join a criminal
organization.  This evidence sullies the accused’s character and, in doing so,
carries with it the risk of prejudice.                     Experience
in Canada and elsewhere teaches that wrongful convictions are often traceable
to evidence that is either unreliable or prejudicial.  When the two combine,
they make for a potent mix — and the risk of a wrongful conviction increases
accordingly.  Wrongful convictions are a blight on our justice system.  We must
take reasonable steps to prevent them before they occur.                     Mr. Big
operations also run the risk of becoming abusive.  Undercover officers provide
their targets with inducements, including cash rewards, to encourage them to
confess.  They also cultivate an aura of violence by showing that those who
betray the criminal organization are met with violence.  There is a risk these
operations may become coercive.  Thought must be given to the kinds of police
tactics we, as a society, are prepared to condone in pursuit of the truth.                     Under
existing law, Mr. Big confessions are routinely admitted under the party
admissions exception to the hearsay rule.  Attempts to extend existing legal
protections to Mr. Big operations have failed.  This Court has held that Mr. Big
operations do not engage the right to silence because the accused is not
detained by the police at the time he or she confesses.  And the confessions
rule — which requires the Crown to prove an accused’s statement to a person in
authority is “voluntary” — is inoperative because the accused does not know
that Mr. Big is a police officer when he confesses.                     In
sum, the law as it stands provides insufficient protection to accused persons
who confess during Mr. Big operations.  A two-pronged response is needed
to address the concerns with reliability, prejudice and police misconduct
raised by these operations.                     The
first prong requires recognizing a new common law rule of evidence.  Under this
rule, where the state recruits an accused into a fictitious criminal
organization and seeks to elicit a confession from him, any confession made by
the accused to the state during the operation should be treated as
presumptively inadmissible.  This presumption of inadmissibility is overcome
where the Crown can establish, on a balance of probabilities, that the
probative value of the confession outweighs its prejudicial effect.                     The
probative value of a Mr. Big confession is a function of its reliability. 
In assessing the reliability of a Mr. Big confession, courts must first
look to the circumstances in which the statement was made.  These circumstances
include — but are not strictly limited to — the length of the operation, the
number of interactions between the police and the accused, the nature of the
relationship between the undercover officers and the accused, the nature and
extent of the inducements offered, the presence of any threats, the conduct of
the interrogation itself, and the personality of the accused, including his or
her age, sophistication and mental health.  The question for the trial judge is
whether and to what extent the reliability of the confession has been called
into doubt by the circumstances in which it was made.                     After
considering the circumstances in which the confession was made, the court
should look to the confession itself for markers of reliability.  Trial judges
should consider the level of detail contained in the confession, whether it
leads to the discovery of additional evidence, whether it identifies any
elements of the crime that have not been made public, or whether it accurately
describes mundane details of the crime the accused would likely not know had he
or she not committed it.  Confirmatory evidence is not a hard and fast
requirement, but where it exists, it can provide a powerful guarantee of
reliability.  The greater the concerns raised by the circumstances in which the
confession was made, the more important it will be to find markers of
reliability in the confession itself or the surrounding evidence.                     Weighing
the prejudicial effect of a Mr. Big confession is a more straightforward
and familiar exercise.  Trial judges must be aware that admitting Mr. Big
confessions creates a risk of moral and reasoning prejudice.  With respect to
moral prejudice, the jury learns that the accused wanted to join a criminal
organization and committed a host of “simulated crimes” that he believed were
real.  Moral prejudice may increase with operations that involve the accused in
simulated crimes of violence, or that demonstrate the accused has a past
history of violence.  As for reasoning prejudice — defined as the risk that the
jury’s focus will be distracted away from the charges before the court — it too
can pose a problem depending on the length of the operation, the amount of time
that must be spent detailing it, and any controversy as to whether a particular
event or conversation occurred.  However, the risk of prejudice can be
mitigated by excluding certain pieces of particularly prejudicial evidence that
are unessential to the narrative, or by providing limiting instructions to the
jury.                     In
the end, trial judges must weigh the probative value and the prejudicial effect
of the confession at issue and decide whether the Crown has met its burden.  Because
trial judges, after assessing the evidence before them, are in the best
position to conduct this exercise, their decision to admit or exclude a Mr. Big
confession will be afforded deference on appeal.                     This
new common law rule of evidence goes a long way toward addressing the concerns
with reliability, prejudice, and police misconduct that are raised by Mr. Big
operations.  It squarely tackles the problems with reliability and prejudice.  In
addition, it takes account of police misconduct both by placing the admissibility
onus on the Crown and by factoring the conduct of the police into the
assessment of a Mr. Big confession’s probative value.  However, the common
law rule of evidence I have proposed does not provide a complete response to
the problems raised by Mr. Big operations.  On its own, it might suggest
that abusive police conduct will be forgiven so long as a demonstrably reliable
confession is ultimately secured.                     The
second prong of the response fills this gap by relying on the doctrine of abuse
of process.  The doctrine of abuse of process is intended to guard against
state misconduct that threatens the integrity of the justice system and the
fairness of trials.                     Trial
judges must be aware that Mr. Big operations can become abusive.  It is of
course impossible to set out a precise formula for determining when a Mr. Big
operation will reach that threshold.  But there is one guideline that can be
suggested.  In conducting an operation, the police cannot be permitted to
overcome the will of the accused and coerce a confession.  This would almost
certainly amount to an abuse of process.  While violence and threats of
violence are two forms of unacceptable coercion, operations can become abusive
in other ways.  Operations that prey on an accused’s vulnerabilities, such as
mental health problems, substance addictions, or youthfulness, can also become
unacceptable.                     Unsurprisingly,
the trial judge did not apply this two pronged framework in determining the
admissibility of H’s confessions.  Nor did the parties address it in the courts
below or before this Court.  Nonetheless, this Court is in a position to decide
whether the respondent’s confessions were properly admitted.  Although a new
rule has emerged, the issues have not changed: the reliability of H’s
confessions, their potential for prejudice, and the conduct of the police in
carrying out this Mr. Big operation have been in issue from the outset.  The
parties have addressed these issues, and there is a substantial record before
us.  These proceedings have also been difficult and protracted.  More than a
decade has passed since H’s daughters died.  Ordering a new trial and leaving
the admissibility of H’s confessions to be determined by a new trial judge
would be tantamount to sending this case back to square one.  That would not be
in the interests of justice.                     Applying
the new common law rule to the three confessions attributed to H, it is
apparent that their probative value does not outweigh their prejudicial
effect.  At the time the operation began, H was unemployed and socially
isolated.  The operation had a transformative effect on his life, lifting him
out of poverty and providing him with illusory friendships.  These financial
and social inducements provided H with an overwhelming incentive to confess —
either truthfully or falsely.                     Nor
do the confessions themselves contain any markers of reliability that are
capable of restoring faith in their reliability.  The confessions contain
internal contradictions, and there is no confirmatory evidence capable of
verifying any of the details contained within the confessions.  When the
circumstances in which the respondent’s confessions were made are considered
alongside their internal inconsistencies and the lack of any confirmatory
evidence, their reliability is left in serious doubt.                     On
the other hand, these confessions — like all Mr. Big confessions — carried
with them an obvious potential for prejudice.  The jury heard extensive
evidence that for four months H devoted himself to trying to join a criminal organization
and that he repeatedly participated in what he thought were criminal acts.  It
is easy to see how the jury could come to view H with disdain.  Here was a man
who bragged about killing his three-year-old daughters to gain the approval of
criminals.  The potential for prejudice in these circumstances was significant.                     On
balance, the Crown has not met its onus.  The probative value of H’s
confessions does not outweigh their prejudicial effect.  Put simply, these
confessions are not worth the risk they pose.  It would be unsafe to rest a
conviction on this evidence.  It is accordingly unnecessary to decide whether
the police conduct amounted to an abuse of process.                     Having
excluded H’s confessions from evidence, it is doubtful whether any admissible
evidence remains upon which a jury, properly instructed and acting reasonably,
could convict H of murder.  However, the final decision on how to proceed rests
with the Crown.                     Per Cromwell J.: There
is agreement with the majority’s analysis of the legal framework that ought to
apply to statements obtained from accused persons as a result of Mr. Big
operations.  However, the admissibility of H’s statements to the undercover
officers ought to be determined at a new trial where the judge and the parties
would have the benefit of the new framework set out in the majority’s reasons.                     Per Karakatsanis J.:
Confessions to state agents raise particular dangers for the criminal justice
system.  The very structure of Mr. Big operations creates
circumstances that (1) compromise the suspects’ autonomy, (2) undermine
the reliability of confessions, and (3) raise concerns about abusive state
conduct.  Yet, Mr. Big confessions are not caught by the
traditional rules governing confessions to the state, such as the confessions
rule or the right to silence.  The common law rule proposed by the majority
fails to consistently take into account broader concerns that arise when state
agents generate a confession at a cost to human dignity, personal autonomy and
the administration of justice.  The principle against self-incrimination, under
s. 7 of the Charter, provides comprehensive and flexible protection
in such circumstances.                     The
principle against self-incrimination provides the appropriate analytical
framework for several reasons.  First, Mr. Big operations directly engage
the individual privacy, autonomy and dignity interests that the principle is
meant to protect.  Second, this approach draws on existing jurisprudence
concerning the principle against self-incrimination, making it unnecessary to
create a new rule.  Third, the principle provides an opportunity to
weigh intertwined concerns about reliability, autonomy and state conduct
together in a nuanced way.  Finally, it addresses suspects’ rights both during
the operation and at trial.                     In
R. v. White, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 417, this Court identified four factors for
determining whether the principle against self-incrimination has been violated
by the production or use of a suspect’s statements: adversarial relationship;
coercion; reliability; and abuse of state power.  While these factors should be
considered together, each emphasizes a particular legal interest.                     The
onus will be on the accused to establish a prima facie breach of the
principle against self-incrimination.  To do so, the accused must show that
concerns about autonomy, reliability, and police conduct exist, as they will in
nearly every Mr. Big operation.  In such circumstances, the burden will
shift to the Crown to establish that there is no breach.                     As
concerns the first factor, the relationship between H and the state was
adversarial.  As in any Mr. Big operation, the police deliberately set out
to obtain a confession from him.                     As
for the second factor, coercion is primarily concerned with the autonomy and
dignity of the suspect and asks whether the suspect had a choice to speak to
the authorities.  There will almost always be some degree of coercion in a Mr. Big
operation.  The court should consider: the magnitude and duration of the
operation, any explicit or implied threats used, any financial, social or
emotional inducements applied, and the characteristics of the suspect,
including any mental, physical, social or economic disadvantages.  This
approach protects the autonomy of the suspect.                     In
this case, the trial judge concentrated on the lack of violent coercion during
the operation, but did not consider the effect of the financial and social
inducements on H.  These inducements were significant by anyone’s measure, but must
be viewed as more seriously infringing H’s autonomy interests, given his extreme
poverty and social isolation as well as his lack of education.  The deceit employed
was extensive.  By preying on his vulnerabilities to such a degree, the police
deprived H of meaningful choice about whether to give an incriminating
statement to Mr. Big.                     The
reliability enquiry focuses on the trustworthiness of any statement obtained. 
The court must execute a gatekeeper function in assessing the risk of a false
confession and corroborating evidence will usually be a prerequisite to
admission.  This function is important because juries often struggle to
properly assess the ultimate reliability of Mr. Big confessions.  They
find it difficult to believe that someone would confess to a crime that he or
she did not commit and are loath to disregard a confession even where it is
known to be coerced.  This danger is compounded by the criminal propensity
evidence generated during a Mr. Big investigation.  An accused must either
let the confession stand or explain that he or she made it to continue their
new criminal lifestyle.  Thus, confessions made to Mr. Big are
particularly hazardous and the judge must evaluate their threshold reliability to
satisfy the principle against self-incrimination.  Generally, an
uncorroborated, unverified confession will not be sufficiently reliable and
will be inadmissible.  However, the inverse does not necessarily hold.  The
principle against self-incrimination is not solely concerned with ensuring
reliable statements; even true statements may be excluded if they were obtained
through coercion that overrode the suspect’s autonomy interest.                     In
this case, H had every incentive to confess, whether he committed the crime or
not.  Not only was his final confession uncorroborated, but it contained
inconsistencies with the other known facts of the case.  Likewise, H’s April 10
confession carries many of the same reliability concerns.                     Under
the fourth and final factor, the conduct of the state is examined with a view
to determining whether the authorities used their position of power in an
unfair, abusive, or shocking manner.  State conduct throughout a Mr. Big
operation must be scrutinized to determine whether it unfairly, unnecessarily
or disproportionately manipulated the suspect.  This inquiry will also consider
other objectionable police tactics such as involving the suspect in dangerous
conduct or exposing him or her to physical or psychological harm.  The
entrapment doctrine assists by identifying factors which may be considered in
examining the conduct of the state.                     In
this case, the police conduct was egregious and this factor especially weighs
in favour of exclusion.  The extreme lengths to which the police went to pursue
H, exploiting his weaknesses in this protracted and deeply manipulative
operation, is troubling.  This was not the usual undercover investigation where
police join an existing criminal organization to witness criminals in action.  This
case is more akin to entrapment.                     The
court should consider these factors collectively,
attaching weight to them, depending on the degree to which they are present in
the individual case.  The four factors above clearly point
to a s. 7 violation.  Statements obtained in violation of the principle
against self-incrimination will almost always be excluded under s. 24(2). 
This case is no exception; both the risk of a miscarriage of justice and the
abusive police conduct call for exclusion.                     The
abuse of process doctrine always
remains independently available to provide a remedy where the conduct of the
state rises to such a level that it risks undermining the integrity of the judicial
process.  In this case, the threshold is met. Cases Cited By Moldaver J.                     Distinguished:
R. v. White, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 417; referred to: Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. v. New Brunswick (Attorney General), [1996] 3
S.C.R. 480; R. v. Todd (1901), 4 C.C.C. 514; R. v. Hathway, 2007
SKQB 48, 292 Sask. R. 7; R.
v. Copeland, 1999 BCCA
744, 131 B.C.A.C. 264; R.
v. Bates, 2009 ABQB 379,
468 A.R. 158; R. v. Evans, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 653; R. v. Osmar, 2007
ONCA 50, 84 O.R. (3d) 321; R. v. McIntyre, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 480; R. v.
Hebert, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 151; R. v. Grandinetti, 2005 SCC 5, [2005] 1
S.C.R. 27; R. v. Creek, 1998 CanLII 3209; R. v. Oickle, 2000 SCC
38, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 3; R. v. Handy, 2002 SCC 56, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 908; R.
v. Hodgson, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 449; R. v.
Harrer, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 562; R.
v. Mohan, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 9; R. v. McIntyre, 1993 CanLII 1488; R.
v. Abbey, 2009 ONCA 624, 97 O.R. (3d) 330; R. v. Humaid (2006), 81
O.R. (3d) 456; R. v. Blackman, 2008 SCC 37, [2008] 2 S.C.R. 298; R.
v. Khelawon, 2006 SCC 57, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 787; R. v. Bonisteel, 2008
BCCA 344, 259 B.C.A.C. 114; R. v. Mack, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 903; R. v.
Babos, 2014 SCC 16, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 309; R. v. Fliss, 2002 SCC 16,
[2002] 1 S.C.R. 535; R. v. Singh, 2013 ONCA 750, 118 O.R. (3d) 253; RWDSU
v. Dolphin Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573; Rothman v. The Queen,
[1981] 1 S.C.R. 640; R. v. Jones, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 229; R. v. S.
(R.J.), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 451; British Columbia Securities Commission v.
Branch, [1995] 2 S.C.R. 3. By Karakatsanis J.                     Referred
to:  R. v. McIntyre, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 480, aff’g (1993), 135
N.B.R. (2d) 266; R. v. Hodgson, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 449; R. v.
Grandinetti, 2005 SCC 5, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 27; R. v. Hebert, [1990] 2
S.C.R. 151; R. v. Oickle, 2000 SCC 38, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 3; R. v. White, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 417; R. v. Jones, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 229; R. v. P. (M.B.), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 555; Re B.C. Motor
Vehicle Act, [1985] 2
S.C.R. 486; Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v. Canada (Director of Investigation and
Research, Restrictive Trade Practices Commission), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 425; R. v. Harrer, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 562; Rothman v. The Queen, [1981] 1
S.C.R. 640; R. v. S. (R.J.), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 451; R. v. Khelawon,
2006 SCC 57, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 787; R. v. Youvarajah, 2013 SCC 41, [2013]
2 S.C.R. 720; R. v. Osmar, 2007 ONCA 50, 84 O.R. (3d) 321, leave to
appeal refused, [2007] 2 S.C.R. vii; R. v. Bonisteel, 2008 BCCA 344, 259
B.C.A.C. 114; R. v. Mack, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 903; R. v. O’Connor, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 411; R.
v. Babos, 2014 SCC 16, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 309; R. v. Therens, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 613; R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC 32, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353. Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 7 , 10 (b), 11 (d), 24 . Authors Cited Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th ed.  St.
Paul, Minn.:  West, 1990, “coercion”. Dawson, Wendy E.  “The Use of ‘Mr. Big’ in Undercover
Operations”, in Criminal Law:  Special Issues, Paper 5.2.  Vancouver: 
Continuing Legal Education Society of British Columbia, 2011. Garrett, Brandon L.  “The Substance of False Confessions”
(2010), 62 Stan. L. Rev. 1051. Keenan, Kouri T., and Joan Brockman.  Mr. Big: 
Exposing Undercover Investigations in Canada.  Halifax:  Fernwood
Publishing, 2010. Martin, G. A.  “The Admissibility of Confessions and
Statements” (1963), 5 Crim. L.Q. 35. Moore, Timothy E., Peter Copeland and Regina A. Schuller. 
“Deceit, Betrayal and the Search for Truth:  Legal and Psychological
Perspectives on the ‘Mr. Big’ Strategy” (2009), 55 Crim. L.Q. 348. Paciocco, David M., and Lee Stuesser.  The Law of Evidence,
6th ed.  Toronto:  Irwin Law, 2011. Stewart, Hamish.  Fundamental Justice:  Section 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Toronto:  Irwin Law, 2012.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Newfoundland and Labrador Court of Appeal (Green
C.J.N.L. and Harrington and Barry JJ.A.), 2012 NLCA 61, 327 Nfld.
& P.E.I.R. 178, 1015 A.P.R. 178, 267 C.R.R. (2d) 29, 97 C.R. (6th) 16,
[2012] N.J. No. 303 (QL), 2012 CarswellNfld 400, setting aside the
accused’s convictions for first degree murder and ordering a new trial.  Appeal
dismissed.                     Frances J. Knickle, Q.C., and Elaine Reid, for the appellant.                     Jamie Merrigan and Robby D.
Ash, for the respondent.                     James C. Martin
and Natasha A. Thiessen, for the intervener the Director of Public
Prosecutions of Canada.                     Michael Bernstein,
for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario.                     Pierre L. Bienvenue, for the
intervener Directeur des poursuites criminelles et pénales du Québec.                     Lesley A. Ruzicka, for the intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia.                     Russell Silverstein and Michael
Dineen, for the intervener the Association in Defence of the Wrongly
Convicted.                     Michael Sobkin, for
the intervener the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association.                     Philip Campbell and Jonathan
Dawe, for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario.                     Written submissions only by Frank
Addario and Megan Savard, for the intervener the Canadian
Civil Liberties Association.                     François Dadour and Harout Haladjian,
for the intervener Association des avocats de la défense de Montréal.                     Marie Henein and Matthew Gourlay, for the amicus curiae.                     The judgment of McLachlin
C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Moldaver and Wagner JJ. was delivered by                     Moldaver J. — I.             
Introduction [1]                             
When conventional investigations fail to solve
serious crimes, police forces in Canada have sometimes used the “Mr. Big”
technique.  A Mr. Big operation begins with undercover officers luring their
suspect into a fictitious criminal organization of their own making.  Over the
next several weeks or months, the suspect is befriended by the undercover
officers.  He is shown that working with the organization provides a pathway to
financial rewards and close friendships.  There is only one catch.  The crime
boss — known colloquially as “Mr. Big” — must approve the suspect’s membership
in the criminal organization. [2]                             
The operation culminates with an interview-like
meeting between the suspect and Mr. Big.  During the interview, Mr. Big brings
up the crime the police are investigating and questions the suspect about it. 
Denials of guilt are dismissed, and Mr. Big presses the suspect for a
confession.  As Mr. Big’s questioning continues, it becomes clear to the
suspect that by confessing to the crime, the big prize — acceptance into the
organization — awaits.  If the suspect does confess, the fiction soon unravels
and the suspect is arrested and charged. [3]                             
This case provides us with an opportunity to
take an in-depth look at Mr. Big confessions and the principles that should
govern their admissibility.  While such operations have a long history in this
country, courts have yet to create a legal framework that addresses the unique
issues which accompany such confessions.  As we undertake that task in this
case, we must strive to achieve a just balance — one which guards against the
risk of wrongful convictions that stem from false confessions but which ensures
the police are not deprived of the opportunity to use their skill and ingenuity
in solving serious crimes. [4]                             
To be sure, the Mr. Big technique has proven to
be an effective investigative tool.  It has produced confessions and secured
convictions in hundreds of cases that would otherwise have likely gone
unsolved.  The confessions elicited are often detailed and confirmed by other
evidence.  Manifestly, the technique has proved indispensible in the search for
the truth. [5]                             
But the technique comes with a price.  Suspects
confess to Mr. Big during pointed interrogations in the face of powerful
inducements and sometimes veiled threats — and this raises the spectre of
unreliable confessions. [6]                             
Unreliable confessions present a unique danger. 
They provide compelling evidence of guilt and present a clear and
straightforward path to conviction.  Certainly in the case of conventional
confessions, triers of fact have difficulty accepting that an innocent person
would confess to a crime he did not commit.  And yet our experience with
wrongful convictions shows that innocent people can, and do, falsely confess. 
Unreliable confessions have been responsible for wrongful convictions — a fact
we cannot ignore. [7]                             
The concern about Mr. Big confessions does not
end there.  The confessions are invariably accompanied by evidence that shows
the accused willingly participated in “simulated crime” and was eager to join a
criminal organization.  This evidence sullies the accused’s character and, in
doing so, carries with it the risk of prejudice.  It also creates credibility
hurdles that may be difficult to overcome for an accused who chooses to
testify. [8]                             
Experience in Canada and elsewhere teaches that
wrongful convictions are often traceable to evidence that is either unreliable
or prejudicial.  When the two combine, they make for a potent mix — and the
risk of a wrongful conviction increases accordingly.  Wrongful convictions are
a blight on our justice system and we must take reasonable steps to prevent
them before they occur. [9]                             
Finally, Mr. Big operations run the risk of
becoming abusive.  Undercover officers provide their targets with inducements,
including cash rewards, to encourage them to confess.  They also cultivate an
aura of violence by showing that those who betray the criminal organization are
met with violence.  Thought must be given to the kinds of police tactics we, as
a society, are prepared to condone in pursuit of the truth. [10]                         
Against that background, I am of the view that a
principled rule of evidence is required to assess the admissibility of Mr. Big
confessions.  For reasons that follow, I would propose that where the state
recruits an accused into a fictitious criminal organization of its own making
and seeks to elicit a confession from him, any confession made by the accused
to the state during the operation should be treated as presumptively
inadmissible.  This presumption of inadmissibility will be overcome where the
Crown can establish, on balance, that the probative value of the confession
outweighs its prejudicial effect.  In this context, the confession’s probative
value is a function of its reliability.  Its prejudicial effect stems from the
harmful character evidence that necessarily accompanies its admission.  If the
Crown is unable to demonstrate that the accused’s confession is admissible, the
rest of the evidence surrounding the Mr. Big operation becomes irrelevant. [11]                         
Trial judges must also carefully scrutinize the
conduct of the police to determine if an abuse of process has occurred.  No
matter how reliable the confession, the courts cannot condone state conduct —
such as physical violence — that coerces the target of a Mr. Big operation into
confessing.  Where an accused establishes that an abuse of process has
occurred, the court can fashion an appropriate remedy, including the exclusion
of the confession or a stay of proceedings. [12]                         
In this case, at the end of a lengthy Mr. Big
operation, the respondent confessed to murdering his two young daughters.  At
trial, his confessions were admitted into evidence.  A majority of the
Newfoundland Court of Appeal concluded that two of the three confessions should
have been excluded, but allowed a third confession to be introduced and, on
that basis, ordered a new trial. [13]                         
Applying the framework I propose here, I would
exclude all three of the respondent’s confessions.  Each of them came about in
the face of overwhelming inducements.  This calls into question their
reliability — and there is no confirmatory evidence capable of restoring our
faith in them.  As such, they carry little if any probative value.  On the
other hand, the bad character evidence accompanying the confessions carries
with it an obvious and serious potential for prejudice.  In these
circumstances, the prejudicial effect of the respondent’s confessions outweighs
their probative value. [14]                         
Accordingly, I would dismiss the appeal. II.          
Background Facts [15]                         
The facts in this case are important.  I propose
to review them in some detail. A.          
The Deaths of Karen and Krista Hart [16]                         
The respondent’s three-year-old twin daughters —
Karen and Krista Hart — drowned on August 4, 2002.  Their deaths triggered a
three-year-long investigation that culminated with the respondent confessing to
their murder at the end of a protracted Mr. Big operation. [17]                         
The respondent was the last person to see his
daughters alive.  On the morning of August 4, 2002, he took them to play on the
swings at a park near their home in Gander, Newfoundland.  There was a lake
adjacent to the park.  According to his wife, the respondent returned home 30
to 45 minutes later, in a panic, and told her that Krista had fallen into the
water.  When his wife asked where Karen was, the respondent claimed to have
forgotten her at the park. [18]                         
The respondent and his wife raced back to the
park and an ambulance was
called.  First responders found Karen and Krista floating in the lake several
hundred meters apart from each other.  By then, it was too late to save their
lives. [19]                         
The respondent’s unusual behaviour provoked the
suspicion of the police.  They questioned him that evening.  The respondent
said that when he got to the park and removed his daughters from their car
seats, they ran onto a dock and Krista fell into the water.  The respondent
said he panicked because he could not swim, so he ran back to his car and drove
home to get his wife, forgetting Karen on the dock.  The police remained
unconvinced and asked the respondent why he did not call for help using either
of the cell phones that were found in his car.  The respondent explained that
his phone did not have any minutes on it, and that the other phone did not
belong to him.  He also said that he never thought of stopping at a
nearby restaurant or hospital for help instead of driving all the way home to
get his wife.  When the police confronted him directly, the respondent denied
that he had drowned his daughters. [20]                         
The police were convinced that the respondent
killed his daughters and lied to them during his first interview.  They
questioned him again on September 12, 2002.  During the interrogation, which
lasted approximately eight hours, the police told the respondent they had no
doubt about his guilt and urged him to confess.  The respondent stood firm. [21]                         
Two weeks later, however, the respondent changed
his story.  He contacted the police and volunteered that he had not been
truthful in his previous statements.  He told the police that he had a seizure
at the park after he removed his daughters from the car.  When the seizure
passed and he “[came] to”, he was “dopey” but he could see one of his daughters
“in the water”.  His only thought was to drive home to his wife.  He explained
that he had lied in his earlier statements because he did not want to lose his
driver’s licence.  The respondent suffers from epilepsy and his licence
has been suspended on previous occasions because of his condition. [22]                         
The police remained convinced of the
respondent’s guilt, but they did not have sufficient evidence to charge him. 
The investigation went cold. B.           
The Mr. Big Operation [23]                         
Two years later, the police rekindled the investigation
after deciding to target the respondent in a Mr. Big operation.  The
preliminary stages of the undercover operation began in December 2004 when
officers conducted several weeks of “lifestyle” surveillance on the
respondent.  The surveillance revealed that the respondent was on social
assistance and that he was socially isolated — he rarely left home, and when he
did he was accompanied by his wife. [24]                         
Undercover officers made their first move in
February 2005.  An officer, whom I will call “Jim”, approached the respondent
outside of a convenience store.[1] 
Jim asked the respondent to help him look for his missing sister.  The
respondent obliged and was paid $50.  During the day, Jim told the respondent
that he owned a trucking company and that he needed a driver.  The respondent
volunteered for the job. [25]                         
The goal of the operation over the next several
weeks was to develop a relationship between the respondent and the undercover
officers.  The respondent worked for Jim and drove truckloads of goods for him from
one location to another.  He was introduced to another undercover officer, whom
I will call “Paul”, whose role was to work with him and become his “best
friend”.[2] 
Initially, the respondent sought to bring his wife with him when he did
deliveries, but early on, Jim and Paul forbade him from doing so. [26]                         
Around the same time, Jim and Paul revealed that
they were part of a criminal organization and that there was a “boss” who
headed up their operations.  Thereafter, the respondent participated in
simulated criminal activity with the officers, delivering trucks that
purportedly contained smuggled alcohol and packages with stolen credit cards. [27]                         
The financial rewards that flowed from working
with the organization quickly became apparent.  In February and March, the
respondent travelled to St. John’s and Halifax, spending several nights in
hotels paid for by his benefactors and enjoying frequent dinners with Jim and
Paul.  In the two month period, he was paid approximately $4,470 for his work. [28]                         
By the beginning of April, the respondent was
fully immersed in his new fictitious life.  The respondent would “constant[ly]”
tell Jim that he loved him.  At a dinner with Jim and Paul, he told both
officers that they were “brothers” to him and that there was nowhere else in the
world he would rather be.  He raised a toast to the boss. [29]                         
On April 10, 2005, according to Jim, the
respondent confessed to murdering his daughters.  That night, the respondent
had dinner with Jim.  Jim told the respondent that their organization was involved
with prostitution in Montreal, and that if prostitutes were dishonest, the
organization had to deal with them.  Jim claimed that he had assaulted a
prostitute himself, and that bad things sometimes had to be done.  The
respondent informed Jim that he had no problem getting his hands dirty.  He too
had done terrible things in the past.  At that point, he produced a picture of
his daughters from his wallet and told Jim that they were both dead.  He
confided that he had planned their murder and carried it out.[3] [30]                         
The operation continued over the next two
months.  Jim and Paul constantly preached the importance of trust, honesty and
loyalty within the organization.  Those who were not trustworthy were met with
violence.  On one occasion, Jim slapped another undercover officer across the
face in front of the respondent, ostensibly because he had spoken to others
about their business dealings. [31]                         
In the middle of May 2005, the operation began
building towards the climatic meeting with Mr. Big.  During a trip to Vancouver,
Jim told the respondent that there was a “big deal” coming in the future that
would “set [the respondent] financially”.  The respondent was told he would be
paid between $20,000 and $25,000 if he participated.  Later on, while on a trip
to Toronto, the respondent was shown $175,000 in cash.  The money was said to
be a down payment toward the impending deal. [32]                         
Jim informed the respondent that he would only
be allowed to participate in the deal if Mr. Big gave his approval.  Jim took
the respondent’s licence and social insurance number so the organization could
perform a background check to see if he had any “heat” on him or was a “rat”. 
In early June, while in Montreal, Jim told the respondent that Mr. Big had
checked into him and that he had found a problem.  The respondent would not be
allowed to work with the organization until the issue was resolved.  The
respondent did not know what the problem was, but he became very concerned that
he would not be involved in the impending deal. [33]                         
The respondent met with Mr. Big on June 9,
2005.  Jim told the respondent that Mr. Big was going to question him about the
problem that had been uncovered during his background check.  Jim urged the
respondent to be honest with Mr. Big. [34]                         
At the beginning of the meeting, the respondent
expressed his gratitude to Mr. Big, telling him that his life had turned around
since he started working for the organization.  Mr. Big shifted the topic of
the conversation to the death of the respondent’s daughters.  He told the respondent
that there might be some “heat” coming regarding their deaths and he asked the
respondent why he killed his daughters.  The respondent replied that he had
suffered a seizure, implying that their deaths were accidental.  Mr. Big
dismissed this explanation and told the respondent not to “lie” to him. [35]                         
After some further prodding by Mr. Big, the
respondent confessed to killing his daughters.  He explained that he had done
so because he feared Child Welfare was going to take his daughters from him and
place them with his brother.  When the respondent was asked how he killed his
daughters, he said that they “fell” over the wharf at the park.  Mr. Big
pressed the respondent for more details, and the respondent explained that he
“struck” his daughters with his shoulder and that they fell over the wharf into
the water. [36]                         
Two days later, on June 11, 2005, the respondent
returned with Jim to the park where his daughters drowned.  Jim had the
respondent re-enact how the drowning occurred.  During the re-enactment, Jim
knelt down and the respondent demonstrated how he pushed his daughters into the
water by nudging Jim with his knee. [37]                         
On June 13, the respondent was arrested and
charged with two counts of first degree murder.  The police allowed the
respondent to make a phone call, and his first call for help went to Jim. [38]                         
The respondent’s arrest came four months after
the Mr. Big operation began and nearly three years after his daughters died. 
During the course of the Mr. Big operation, the respondent participated in 63
“scenarios” with the undercover officers.  The operation saw him travel to
Halifax, Montreal, Ottawa, Toronto and Vancouver, where he stayed in hotels and
dined frequently in some of the country’s finest restaurants.  In total, the
respondent was paid $15,720 for his work.  The police also paid an unknown
amount for the respondent’s hotels, room service, dinners, trips to the casino,
and transportation.  The total cost of the operation was $413,268. [39]                         
At trial, the confessions the respondent made
during the Mr. Big operation were admitted into evidence and he was convicted
by a jury of two counts of first degree murder. III.       
Proceedings Below A.         
Supreme Court of Newfoundland and Labrador Trial
Division, 2007 NLTD 74, 265 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 266 (1)     The Admissibility of the Mr. Big Confessions [40]                         
The respondent moved at trial to have the
confessions he made during the Mr. Big operation excluded from evidence.  The
respondent argued that the intimidating and threatening conduct of the officers
throughout the Mr. Big operation was oppressive and led to a “fundamental
breach” of his rights under s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms  (para. 43).  He also argued that this same conduct rendered
his confessions inadmissible under the principled approach to the rule against
hearsay, as the threatening police conduct made his confessions unreliable. 
The respondent testified on the voir dire and explained that he worked
for the fictitious criminal organization because he was making good money and
he was afraid of Jim and Paul.  He denied confessing to Jim on April 10, 2005
and said that he had lied in his confessions on June 9 and 11, 2005 because he
was afraid of Mr. Big. [41]                         
The trial judge denied the respondent’s
application.  He rejected the respondent’s evidence that he felt threatened and
intimidated by the undercover operatives.  Instead, he found that the
respondent had bonded with them and continually sought more work from them.  In
addition, the trial judge found that the respondent was given a number of
chances to leave the operation but he made no effort to do so. (2)     Testifying With the Public Excluded From the Courtroom [42]                         
Towards the end of his trial, the respondent
brought an application requesting that he be allowed to testify with the public
excluded from the courtroom.  A voir dire was held and the respondent
gave evidence.  He explained that he wanted the public excluded during his
testimony because he had never been good at “talk[ing] in front of a crowd”.  He
said he would get “frustrated”, “confused”, and “all tangled up”.  He worried
that the pressure of testifying in front of a courtroom full of people would
cause him to have a seizure. [43]                         
The trial judge denied the respondent’s
application.  The trial judge commented that he was “reluctant” to prevent the
public from “hear[ing]” the respondent’s evidence.  In his view, “stress” was
an insufficient reason for excluding the public from the courtroom.  He also
noted that the respondent had already given evidence in front of the public on
the voir dire into the admissibility of his confessions and at his bail
hearing. B.          
Supreme Court of Newfoundland and Labrador,
Court of Appeal, 2012 NLCA 61, 327 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 178 (1)     The Admissibility of the Mr. Big Confessions [44]                         
At the Court of Appeal, the respondent argued
that the confessions he made during the Mr. Big operation ought to have been
excluded because they were obtained in breach of his right to silence under s.
7  of the Charter .  Green C.J., writing for himself and Harrington J.A.,
allowed the appeal on this ground. [45]                         
The majority held that the protection afforded
by the right to silence could be extended beyond situations where an individual
had been detained by the state.  In the majority’s view, the question was not
whether the respondent was “det[ained]” at the time of his confession to Mr.
Big, but whether he was under “state control” (para. 198).  In so concluding,
the majority borrowed from the test articulated by this Court in R. v. White,
[1999] 2 S.C.R. 417, to determine if a breach of his s. 7  right to silence had
occurred. [46]                         
On the facts, the majority found that the
respondent was clearly under state control when he confessed to Mr. Big.  After
considering the factors from White, the majority concluded a breach of
s. 7  had occurred.  As a result, the majority turned to s. 24(2)  of the Charter 
and concluded that admitting the respondent’s June 9 and 11, 2005 confessions
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. [47]                         
Barry J.A. dissented on the issue of the
admissibility of the respondent’s confessions.  In his view, the respondent’s
right to silence was not triggered prior to detention.  Moreover, the trial
judge’s finding that the respondent had numerous chances to leave the operation
but made no effort to do so were findings of fact entitled to considerable
deference on appeal.  Even if the “state control” test was applicable, Barry
J.A. would not have found a s. 7  violation. (2)     Testifying With the Public Excluded From the Courtroom [48]                         
The Court of Appeal unanimously found that the
trial judge unreasonably denied the respondent’s application to testify with
the public excluded from the courtroom.  Barry J.A., with whom the majority
agreed, held that fairness in this case required that the respondent have the
opportunity to present his evidence as “clearly as possible” (para. 125).  The
respondent’s history with seizures, his evidence that he became confused and
had difficulty thinking straight in front of a crowd, the importance of any
explanation he could provide regarding his confessions to Mr. Big, and the
prejudice that would result if he resiled from his commitment made in the
presence of the jury that he planned to testify, all weighed in favour of
granting his request. IV.       
Issues [49]                         
The Crown was granted leave to appeal on the
following two issues: (1)                 
Did the trial judge err in admitting the
confessions made by the respondent during the Mr. Big operation?  (2)              
Did the trial judge err in precluding the
respondent from testifying with the public excluded from the courtroom? V.          
Analysis [50]                         
While the crux of this appeal involves the
respondent’s confessions during the Mr. Big operation, I begin with his request
to testify with the public excluded from the courtroom.  That aspect of the
appeal is straightforward and can be dealt with briefly. A.         
Testifying With the Public Excluded From the
Courtroom [51]                         
While the importance of the open court principle
cannot be doubted, s. 486(1)  of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 ,
provides trial judges with a discretion to exclude the public from the
courtroom in several circumstances, including where such an order is in the
interests of “the proper administration of justice”.  In Canadian
Broadcasting Corp. v. New Brunswick (Attorney General), [1996] 3 S.C.R.
480, this Court set out three factors trial judges are to consider in making
such an order: (1) the availability of reasonable and effective alternatives;
(2) whether the order is limited as much as possible; and (3) the importance of
the order’s objectives and its probable effects when weighed against the
importance of openness and the particular expression that will be limited. [52]                         
In this case, the trial judge denied the
respondent’s request, noting that “stress” was an insufficient reason for
excluding the public from the courtroom.  In consequence, the respondent did
not testify. [53]                         
A trial judge’s decision under s. 486(1)  is
entitled to deference and “should not lightly be interfered with” (Canadian
Broadcasting Corp., at para. 78).  Here, however, I am respectfully of the
view that the trial judge erred in refusing the respondent’s request.  The
trial judge’s error lay at the third stage of the test.  To begin, the
respondent’s testimony was critically important in the circumstances of this
case.  If he was to be acquitted, the jury would have to believe, or at least
have a reasonable doubt, that the confessions he made during the Mr. Big
operation were false.  Testifying in order to disavow them was a near tactical
necessity for the respondent.  The respondent sought to testify outside of the
presence of the public in part because he was concerned that the stress of
testifying in front of a full courtroom would cause him to have a seizure.  It
was incumbent on the trial judge, in the unique circumstances of this case, to
take reasonable steps to accommodate the respondent’s disability and to
facilitate his testimony. [54]                         
Unfortunately, the trial judge mistook the
nature of the respondent’s request, as is apparent from his comment that he was
reluctant to prevent the public from “hear[ing]” the respondent’s evidence. 
The respondent was not asking that the public be completely foreclosed from
hearing his evidence.  Rather, he simply wanted to testify outside of
their physical presence.  As such, his evidence could have been made available
to the public, while granting his request, by broadcasting his testimony into
another courtroom on closed circuit television.  In the particular circumstances
of this case, granting the accommodation sought would not, in my view, have
undermined the open court principle. [55]                         
As a result, I agree with the conclusion of the
Court of Appeal.  This error alone necessitates a new trial. B.           
The Admissibility of the Mr. Big Confessions (1)     Mr. Big Operations in Canada [56]                         
The Mr. Big technique is a Canadian invention. 
Although a version of the technique appears to have been used by the police as
far back as 1901, its modern use began in the 1990s and has continued
since then (see R. v. Todd (1901), 4 C.C.C. 514 (Man. K.B.), at p.
523).  According to the B.C. RCMP, the technique has been used across Canada on
more than 350 occasions as of 2008.[4] [57]                         
The technique tends to follow a similar script
in each case.  Undercover officers conduct surveillance on a suspect in order
to gather information about his or her habits and circumstances.  Next, they
approach the suspect and attempt to cultivate a relationship.  The suspect and
the undercover officers socialize and begin to work together, and the suspect
is introduced to the idea that the officers work for a criminal organization
that is run by their boss — “Mr. Big”.  The suspect works for the criminal
organization and is assigned simple and apparently illegal tasks — serving as a
lookout, delivering packages, or counting large sums of money are common
examples.  As occurred in this case, this stage of the operation can last for
several months.  See T. E. Moore, P. Copeland and R. A. Schuller, “Deceit,
Betrayal and the Search for Truth: Legal and Psychological Perspectives on the
‘Mr. Big’ Strategy” (2009), 55 Crim. L.Q. 348, at pp. 351-52; K. T.
Keenan and J. Brockman, Mr. Big: Exposing Undercover Investigations in
Canada (2010), at p. 19. [58]                         
As the operation wears on, the suspect is
offered increasing responsibility and financial rewards.  By flying the suspect
across the country, putting him up in hotels, and taking him to expensive
restaurants, undercover officers show the suspect that working with the group
provides a life of luxury and close friendships.  All the while, the suspect is
constantly reminded that his or her ultimate acceptance into the group depends
on Mr. Big’s approval (see Keenan and Brockman, at p. 20). [59]                         
Throughout the operation, the suspect is also
told that the organization demands honesty, trust and loyalty from its
members.  An aura of violence is cultivated to reinforce these values. 
Officers teach the suspect that those who betray the trust of the organization
are met with violence.  They do this by telling the suspect that the
organization kills “rats”, or by exposing him to simulated acts of violence
perpetrated by members of the organization against other undercover officers as
punishment for imagined betrayals (see, e.g., Moore, Copeland and Schuller, at
pp. 356-57).  R. v. Hathway, 2007 SKQB 48, 292 Sask. R. 7 , provides a
stark example.  In that case, undercover officers simulated an assault on a
woman who had crossed the criminal organization.  During the beating, officers
threatened to kill the woman, her husband, and her infant child.  The accused
watched as undercover officers threw the bloodied woman into the trunk of a
car. [60]                         
Once the stage is set, the operation culminates
in a meeting, akin to a job interview, between the suspect and Mr. Big.  Invariably
during these meetings, Mr. Big expresses concern about the suspect’s criminal
past and the particular crime under investigation by the police.  As the
meeting unfolds, it becomes clear that confessing to the crime provides a
ticket into the criminal organization and safety from the police.  Suspects may
be told that Mr. Big has conclusive evidence of their guilt and that denying
the offence will be seen as proof of a lack of trustworthiness.  In another
variation, suspects are told that Mr. Big has learned from contacts within the
police that a prosecution for the offence is imminent based on new evidence. 
The organization offers to protect the target through a variety of means — by
offering to eliminate a witness or by having someone else confess to the crime
— if the suspect confesses to Mr. Big.  Throughout the interrogation, any
denials of guilt are dismissed as lies, and Mr. Big presses for a confession
(see, e.g., C.L.A. factum, at paras. 7-8; Keenan and Brockman, at pp. 19-21). [61]                         
As indicated, the technique has proved valuable
and has been used to secure convictions in hundreds of cases (see, e.g., R.
v. Copeland, 1999 BCCA 744, 131 B.C.A.C. 264, where a confession elicited
through a Mr. Big operation led the police to the victim’s previously
undiscovered body). [62]                         
To date, there are no established wrongful
convictions stemming from its use.  However, in 1992, Kyle Unger was convicted
of murder based in part on a confession elicited through a Mr. Big operation,
as well as forensic evidence found at the scene of the crime.  In 2004, the
forensic evidence was called into question by a review committee.  The Minister
of Justice ordered a review of the conviction, and the Crown ultimately
withdrew the charges after determining it did not have sufficient evidence to
proceed with a new trial (see also R. v. Bates, 2009 ABQB 379, 468 A.R.
158, where an accused, though properly convicted of manslaughter, overstated
his involvement by falsely confessing to Mr. Big that he was the person who
shot a rival drug dealer). (2)     Do We Need a Test
for Determining the Admissibility of Mr. Big Confessions? [63]                         
In cases where the Mr. Big technique has been
used, the ensuing confessions have typically been received at trial.  Under the
existing case law, they have been admitted under the party admissions exception
to the hearsay rule (see R. v. Evans, [1993] 3 S.C.R. 653, at p. 664;
R. v. Osmar, 2007 ONCA 50, 84 O.R. (3d) 321, at para. 53).  The
admissibility of party admissions flows from the adversarial nature of our
trial system, and the belief that “what a party has previously stated can be
admitted against the party in whose mouth it does not lie to complain of the
unreliability of his or her own statements” (Evans, at p. 664). [64]                         
Attempts to extend existing legal protections to
Mr. Big operations have failed.  This Court has held that Mr. Big operations do
not engage the right to silence because the accused is not detained by the
police at the time he or she confesses (see R. v. McIntyre, [1994] 2
S.C.R. 480; R. v. Hebert, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 151).  And the confessions
rule — which requires the Crown to prove an accused’s statement to a person in
authority is “voluntary” — is inoperative because the accused does not know
that Mr. Big is a police officer when he confesses (see R. v. Grandinetti,
2005 SCC 5, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 27). [65]                         
Under existing law, it appears that defence
counsel have only two options for challenging the admissibility of these
confessions: under the doctrine of abuse of process, or under a trial judge’s
overriding discretion to exclude evidence that is more prejudicial than
probative.  Trial judges have only rarely excluded Mr. Big confessions under
either of these doctrines.  Indeed, the parties could find no case in which a
Mr. Big confession was excluded as an abuse of process, and only one case in
which a confession was excluded on the basis that its prejudicial effect
exceeded its probative value (see R. v. Creek, 1998 CanLII 3209
(B.C.S.C.)). [66]                         
A threshold issue raised by this appeal is
whether the existing framework adequately protects the rights of those subject
to Mr. Big investigations.  The Crown contends that no further protections are
needed and that the law as it stands strikes a proper balance between the
accused’s rights and the need for effective policing.  By contrast, the
respondent and amicus curiae submit that Mr. Big confessions present
unique dangers that must be addressed by placing a filter on their
admissibility. [67]                         
I agree with the respondent and amicus curiae. 
In my view, the law as it stands today provides insufficient protection to
accused persons who confess during Mr. Big operations.  Three concerns lead me
to this conclusion. (a)     The Danger of Unreliable Confessions [68]                         
First, because of the nature of Mr. Big
operations, concerns arise as to the reliability of the confessions they
produce.  The purpose of these operations is to induce confessions, and they
are carefully calibrated to achieve that end.  Over a period of weeks or
months, suspects are made to believe that the fictitious criminal organization
for which they work can provide them with financial security, social acceptance,
and friendship.  Suspects also come to learn that violence is a necessary part
of the organization’s business model, and that a past history of violence is a
boast-worthy accomplishment.  And during the final meeting with Mr. Big — which
involves a skillful interrogation conducted by an experienced police officer —
suspects learn that confessing to the crime under investigation provides a
consequence-free ticket into the organization and all of the rewards it
provides. [69]                         
It seems a matter of common sense that the
potential for a false confession increases in proportion to the nature and
extent of the inducements held out to the accused.  Unsurprisingly, this view
is supported by academic literature (see R. v. Oickle, 2000 SCC 38,
[2000] 2 S.C.R. 3, at paras. 39 and 44; S. M. Kassin et al.,
“Police-Induced Confessions: Risk Factors and Recommendations” (2010), 34 Law & Hum. Behav. 3,
at pp. 14-15). [70]                         
The common law confessions rule serves to
illustrate the importance of a trial judge’s role in assessing reliability. 
The confessions rule has long concerned itself with the dangers posed by
unreliable confessions (see, e.g., G. A. Martin, “The Admissibility of
Confessions and Statements” (1963), 5 Crim. L.Q. 35, at p. 35).  Under
the confessions rule, we recognize that unreliable confessions made by
an accused pose particular dangers, as juries often attach great weight to the
accused’s own words.  When an accused falsely confesses to a crime, the risk of
a wrongful conviction becomes acute.  This Court recognized as much in Oickle,
when it noted that false confessions have played an “important role” in cases where wrongful convictions have
occurred (para. 36).  Subsequent research has confirmed that risk.  In 40 of
the first 250 DNA exonerations in the United States, for example, the accused
was found to have falsely confessed to the crime (see B.
L. Garrett, “The Substance of False Confessions” (2010), 62 Stan. L. Rev.
1051). [71]                         
The confessions rule thus guards against the
danger of unreliable confessions by requiring the Crown to prove to a judge
beyond a reasonable doubt that an accused’s statement was voluntarily made. 
Where the Crown is unable to do so, the accused’s statement is rendered
inadmissible. [72]                         
But as the law stands today, unlike our approach
with the confessions rule, we have failed to adopt a consistent approach to
assessing the reliability of Mr. Big confessions before they go to the jury. 
This is so despite the obvious nature of the inducements these operations
create.  In my view, it would be dangerous and unwise to assume that we do not
need to be concerned about the reliability of Mr. Big confessions simply
because the suspect does not know that the person pressuring him to confess is
a police officer.  And although it will be easier for a jury to understand why
an accused would falsely confess to Mr. Big than to the police during a
conventional interrogation (because of the more obvious nature of the inducements
and the accused’s belief that it is in his self-interest to confess), this does
not provide a complete answer to the reliability concerns raised by these
confessions.  Under the confessions rule, we do not abandon our concern for
reliability in cases where a confession is the product of clear threats or
inducements, on the assumption that the jury will have an easier time
understanding why it is unreliable. (b)     The Prejudicial Effect of Mr. Big Confessions [73]                         
The second concern with Mr. Big confessions — and
one that distinguishes them from confessions made in other contexts — is that
they are invariably accompanied by prejudicial facts regarding the accused’s
character.  Putting these confessions into evidence requires showing the jury
that the accused wanted to join a criminal organization and that he
participated in “simulated” crimes that he believed were real.  The absence of
a consistent approach in assessing the admissibility of these confessions sits
uneasily with the general rule that bad character evidence is presumptively
inadmissible for the Crown.  This centuries-old rule prohibits the Crown from
leading evidence of misconduct engaged in by the accused that is unrelated to
the charges before the court, unless it can demonstrate that its probative
value outweighs its prejudicial effect (see R. v. Handy, 2002 SCC 56,
[2002] 2 S.C.R. 908). [74]                         
Bad character evidence causes two kinds of
prejudice.  It causes “moral prejudice” by marring the character of the accused
in the eyes of the jury, thereby creating a risk that the jury will reason from
the accused’s general disposition to the conclusion that he is guilty of the
crime charged, or that he is deserving of punishment in any event (Handy,
at para. 31).  And it causes “reasoning prejudice” by distracting the jury’s
focus away from the offence charged, toward the accused’s extraneous acts of
misconduct (ibid.).  As this Court held in Handy, the “poisonous
potential” of bad character evidence cannot be doubted (para. 138). [75]                         
When a Mr. Big confession is admitted, the
character evidence that accompanies it places the accused in a difficult
situation.  In these cases, the accused is often obliged, as a tactical
necessity, to testify in order to explain why he falsely confessed to Mr Big. 
The character evidence that has already been admitted is damaging in this
context because it shrouds the accused with an aura of distrust before he or
she steps into the witness box.  This distrust is compounded when the accused
asks the jury to disregard his confession because he was lying when he gave
it.  And all of this furnishes the Crown with ample fodder for a forceful
attack on the accused’s credibility in cross-examination. [76]                         
Despite the well-established presumption that
bad character evidence is inadmissible, it is routinely admitted in Mr. Big
cases because it provides the relevant context needed to understand how the
accused’s pivotal confession came about.  Indeed, even the accused comes to
depend on this evidence in order to show the nature of the inducements he faced
and the reason his confession should not be believed. [77]                         
In my view, the prejudicial effect of Mr. Big
confessions is a substantial concern, especially since these confessions may
also be unreliable.  Putting evidence before a jury that is both unreliable and
prejudicial invites a miscarriage of justice.  The law must respond to these
dangers.  The fact that there are no proven wrongful convictions in cases
involving Mr. Big confessions provides little comfort.  The criminal justice
system cannot afford to wait for miscarriages of justice before taking
reasonable steps to prevent them. (c)     Police Misconduct [78]                         
Finally, Mr. Big operations create a risk that
the police will resort to unacceptable tactics in their pursuit of a
confession.  As mentioned, in conducting these operations, undercover officers
often cultivate an aura of violence in order to stress the importance of trust
and loyalty within the organization.  This can involve — as it did in this case
— threats or acts of violence perpetrated in the presence of the accused.  In
these circumstances, it is easy to see a risk that the police will go too far,
resorting to tactics which may impact on the reliability of a confession, or in
some instances amount to an abuse of process. [79]                         
At present, however, these operations are
conducted in a legal vacuum.  The legal protections afforded to accused
persons, which are often intended at least in part to place limits on the
conduct of the police in their investigation and interrogation of accused
people, have no application to Mr. Big operations.  The confessions rule, for
example, is intended not only to guard against the risk of unreliable
confessions, but also to prevent abusive state conduct (see R. v. Hodgson,
[1998] 2 S.C.R. 449, at para. 20).  Yet its protection does not apply because
the accused does not know the person he is speaking to is a person in
authority.  Other protections — like the right to counsel under s. 10 (b)
of the Charter  — are rendered inapplicable because the accused is not
“det[ained]” by the police while the operation is ongoing.  And the doctrine of
abuse of process — intended to protect against abusive state conduct — appears
to be somewhat of a paper tiger.  To date, it has never operated to exclude a
Mr. Big confession, nor has it ever led to the stay of charges arising from one
of these operations. [80]                         
In my view, the lack of an effective mechanism
for monitoring the conduct of the undercover officers who engage in these
operations is problematic.  The law must enable trial judges to respond effectively
to police misconduct in this context. (3)     How Should the Law
Respond to the Problems Posed by Mr. Big Confessions? [81]                         
Having determined that the law must respond to
the risks inherent in Mr. Big confessions, the more difficult question is what
form that response should take.  Mr. Big operations raise three distinct
concerns — reliability, prejudice, and the potential for police misconduct —
and we must ensure that trial judges have the tools they need to address all
three of these issues. [82]                         
The parties and interveners have provided a long
list of options for dealing with the problems raised by Mr. Big confessions. 
They include affirming the Court of Appeal’s extension of the s. 7  right to
silence, expanding the common law confessions rule to apply to Mr. Big
operations, subjecting Mr. Big confessions to the principled approach that now
governs hearsay evidence, or assessing the reliability of Mr. Big confessions
before admitting them into evidence as a means of ensuring an accused’s right
to a fair trial under ss. 7  and 11 (d) of the Charter .  Rather
than pointing to a clear solution, the diversity of the options provided
reflects the difficulty of the task that confronts us. [83]                         
In searching for a response to the concerns
these operations raise, we must proceed cautiously.  To
be sure, Mr. Big operations can become abusive, and they can produce
confessions that are unreliable and prejudicial.  We must seek a legal
framework that protects accused persons, and the justice system as a whole,
against these dangers.  On the other hand, Mr. Big operations are not necessarily
abusive, and are capable of producing valuable evidence, the admission of which
furthers the interests of justice.  We ought not forget that the Mr. Big
technique is almost always used in cold cases involving the most serious
crimes.  Put simply, in responding to the dangers posed by Mr. Big confessions,
we should be wary about allowing serious crimes to go unpunished. (a)     Summary of a Proposed Solution [84]                         
In this section, I propose a solution that, in
my view, strikes the best balance between guarding against the dangers posed by
Mr. Big operations, while ensuring the police have the tools they need to
investigate serious crime.  This solution involves a two-pronged approach that
(1) recognizes a new common law rule of evidence, and (2) relies on a more
robust conception of the doctrine of abuse of process to deal with the problem
of police misconduct. [85]                         
The first prong recognizes a new common law rule
of evidence for assessing the admissibility of these confessions.  The rule
operates as follows:  Where the state recruits an accused into a fictitious
criminal organization of its own making and seeks to elicit a confession from
him, any confession made by the accused to the state during the operation
should be treated as presumptively inadmissible.  This presumption of
inadmissibility is overcome where the Crown can establish, on a balance of
probabilities, that the probative value of the confession outweighs its
prejudicial effect.  In this context, the confession’s probative value turns on
an assessment of its reliability.  Its prejudicial effect flows from the bad
character evidence that must be admitted in order to put the operation and the
confession in context.  If the Crown is unable to demonstrate that the
accused’s confession is admissible, the rest of the evidence surrounding the
Mr. Big operation becomes irrelevant and thus inadmissible.  This rule, like
the confessions rule in the case of conventional police interrogations,
operates as a specific qualification to the party admissions exception to the
hearsay rule.[5] [86]                         
As regard the second prong, I would rely on the
doctrine of abuse of process to deal with the problem of police misconduct.  I
recognize that the doctrine has thus far proved less than effective in this
context.  While the problem is not an easy one, I propose to provide some
guidance on how to determine if a Mr. Big operation crosses the line from
skillful police work to an abuse of process. [87]                         
The purposes of this two-pronged approach are to
protect an accused’s right to a fair trial under the Charter , and
to preserve the integrity of the justice system.  Those are the ends that must
ultimately be achieved.  This approach strives to reach them by ensuring that
only those confessions that are more probative than prejudicial, and which do
not result from abuse, are admitted into evidence. [88]                         
However, it must be remembered that trial judges
always retain a discretion to exclude evidence where its admission would
compromise trial fairness (see R. v. Harrer, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 562).  This
is because “the general principle that an accused is entitled to a fair trial
cannot be entirely reduced to specific rules” (ibid., at para. 23).  It
is impossible to predict every factual scenario that could present itself.  As
such, I do not foreclose the possibility that, in an exceptional case, trial
fairness may require that a Mr. Big confession be excluded even where the
specific rules I have proposed would see the confession admitted. [89]                         
In practice, this two-pronged approach will
necessitate that a voir dire be held to determine the admissibility of
Mr. Big confessions.  The Crown will bear the burden of establishing that, on
balance, the probative value of the confession outweighs its prejudicial
effect, and it will be for the defence to establish an abuse of process.  Trial
judges may prefer to begin their analysis by assessing whether there has been
an abuse of process.  A finding of abuse makes weighing the probative value and
prejudicial effect of the evidence unnecessary. [90]                         
Against this backdrop, I will now elaborate on
the main features of this two-pronged solution. (b)     Why Does the Crown
Bear the Onus of Establishing That the Probative Value of a Mr. Big Confession
Outweighs Its Prejudicial Effect? [91]                         
The common law rule of evidence I have proposed
creates a presumption that Mr. Big confessions are inadmissible, and places the
onus of demonstrating that they ought to be received on the Crown.  The onus is
justified because of the central role played by the state in creating these
confessions.  It is the state that designs and implements these operations,
expending significant resources and acting as puppeteer in the production of
the accused’s ultimate confession.  The state creates the potent mix of a potentially
unreliable confession accompanied by prejudicial character evidence.  Given its
pivotal role, the state should bear the responsibility of showing that the
confession it has orchestrated and produced warrants admission into evidence. [92]                         
Placing the onus on the Crown also works to
address concerns with abusive state conduct.  Confronted by the reality that
the Crown will ultimately bear the burden of justifying reception of a Mr. Big
confession, the state will be strongly encouraged to tread carefully in how it
conducts these operations.  As I will explain, the conduct of the police is a
factor to be taken into account in assessing the reliability of a Mr. Big
confession.  This creates a strong incentive for the state to conduct these
operations with restraint. [93]                         
The onus has the added benefit of encouraging
the creation of a more thorough record of the operation.  At present, many of
the key interactions between undercover officers and the accused are
unrecorded.  This is problematic.  Where it is logistically feasible and would
not jeopardize the operation itself or the safety of the undercover officers,
the police would do well to record their conversations with the accused.  With
the onus of demonstrating reliability placed on the Crown, gaps in the record
may undermine the case for admissibility, which will encourage better record
keeping.[6] (c)     How Is Probative Value Assessed? [94]                         
Determining whether the probative value of an
item of evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect requires engaging in a “cost benefit
analysis” (R. v. Mohan, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 9, at p. 21).  That is, trial
judges must assess “whether [the evidence’s] value is worth what it costs” (ibid.). 
The first step in conducting this exercise, then, is to assess the value of the
proposed evidence. [95]                         
How are trial judges to assess the value of
evidence?  This requires more than asking whether the evidence is logically
relevant; it necessitates some weighing of the evidence.  After all, probative
means “tending to prove an issue” and “questionable evidence will have less of
that tendency” (R. v. McIntyre, 1993 CanLII 1488 (Ont. C.A.), at p. 2).  It
would be “artificial” and “self-defeating” for trial judges to ignore defects
in the evidence during the assessment of its value (D. M. Paciocco and L. Stuesser,
The Law of Evidence (6th ed. 2011), at p. 38).  Generally, what this
weighing exercise requires will vary depending on the specific inferences
sought to be drawn from a piece of evidence. [96]                         
As one example, trial judges are routinely
called upon to determine the admissibility of expert evidence.  Part of the
admissibility inquiry involves taking stock of the probative value of the
proposed evidence.  This requires weighing the evidence and assessing its
reliability: When one looks to potential
probative value, one must consider the reliability of the evidence. Reliability
concerns reach not only the subject matter of the evidence, but also the
methodology used by the proposed expert in arriving at his or her opinion, the
expert’s expertise and the extent to which the expert is shown to be impartial
and objective.  (R.
v. Abbey, 2009 ONCA 624, 97 O.R. (3d) 330, at para. 87, per Doherty
J.A.) [97]                         
Similarly, in R. v. Humaid (2006), 81
O.R. (3d) 456 (C.A.), Doherty J.A. held that otherwise admissible hearsay evidence
may be excluded on the basis that its prejudicial effect outweighs its
probative value.  This can occur in circumstances where “the credibility or
reliability of the narrator of the out-of-court statement is so deficient that
it robs the out-of-court statement of any potential probative value” (para.
57).  This Court endorsed that approach in R. v. Blackman, 2008 SCC 37,
[2008] 2 S.C.R. 298, at para. 51. [98]                         
Undoubtedly, weighing evidence in this way
thrusts trial judges into a domain that is typically reserved for the jury. 
The jury, as the trier of fact, is ultimately responsible for weighing evidence
and drawing conclusions from it.  The overlap of roles cannot be avoided, but
this is not problematic as long as the respective functions of the trial judge,
as gatekeeper, and the jury, as finder of fact, are fundamentally respected. 
In conducting this weighing exercise, the trial judge is only deciding the
threshold question of “whether the evidence is worthy of being heard by the
jury” and not “the ultimate question of whether the evidence should be accepted
and acted upon” (Abbey, at para. 89; see also Paciocco and Stuesser, at
p. 38). [99]                         
Returning to Mr. Big confessions, their
probative value derives from their reliability.  A confession provides powerful
evidence of guilt, but only if it is true.  A confession of questionable
reliability carries less probative force, and in deciding whether the probative
value of a Mr. Big confession outweighs the prejudicial effect of the character
evidence that accompanies it, trial judges must examine its reliability. [100]                     
What factors are relevant in assessing the
reliability of a Mr. Big confession?  A parallel can perhaps be drawn between
the assessment of “threshold reliability” that occurs under the principled
approach to hearsay.  Under the principled approach, hearsay becomes admissible
where it is both necessary and reliable.  Reliability can generally be
established in one of two ways: by showing that the statement is trustworthy,
or by establishing that its reliability can be sufficiently tested at trial (R.
v. Khelawon, 2006 SCC 57, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 787, at paras. 61-63). 
The latter route to reliability is often met through an opportunity to
cross-examine the hearsay declarant, but this has no application in the present
context because the accused is not a compellable witness. [101]                     
However, the factors used to demonstrate the
trustworthiness of a hearsay statement are apposite.  In assessing the
trustworthiness of a hearsay statement, courts look to the circumstances in
which the statement was made, and whether there is any confirmatory evidence (Khelawon,
at paras. 62 and 100). [102]                     
Confessions derive their persuasive force from
the fact that they are against the accused’s self-interest.  People do not
normally confess to crimes they have not committed (Hodgson, at para.
60).  But the circumstances in which Mr. Big confessions are elicited can
undermine that supposition.  Thus, the first step in assessing the reliability
of a Mr. Big confession is to examine those circumstances and assess the extent
to which they call into question the reliability of the confession.  These
circumstances include — but are not strictly limited to — the length of the
operation, the number of interactions between the police and the accused, the nature
of the relationship between the undercover officers and the accused, the nature
and extent of the inducements offered, the presence of any threats, the conduct
of the interrogation itself, and the personality of the accused, including his
or her age, sophistication, and mental health. [103]                     
Special note should be taken of the mental
health and age of the accused.  In the United States, where empirical data on
false confessions is more plentiful, researchers have found that those with
mental illnesses or disabilities, and youth, present a much greater risk of
falsely confessing (Garrett, at p. 1064).[7] 
A confession arising from a Mr. Big operation that comes from a young person or
someone suffering from a mental illness or disability will raise greater reliability
concerns. [104]                     
In listing these factors, I do not mean to
suggest that trial judges are to consider them mechanically and check a box
when they apply.  That is not the purpose of the exercise.  Instead, trial
judges must examine all the circumstances leading to and surrounding the making
of the confession — with these factors in mind — and assess whether and to what
extent the reliability of the confession is called into doubt. [105]                     
After considering the circumstances in which the
confession was made, the court should look to the confession itself for markers
of reliability.  Trial judges should consider the level of detail contained in
the confession, whether it leads to the discovery of additional evidence,
whether it identifies any elements of the crime that had not been made public
(e.g., the murder weapon), or whether it accurately describes mundane details
of the crime the accused would not likely have known had he not committed it
(e.g., the presence or absence of particular objects at the crime scene). 
Confirmatory evidence is not a hard and fast requirement, but where it exists,
it can provide a powerful guarantee of reliability.  The greater the concerns
raised by the circumstances in which the confession was made, the more
important it will be to find markers of reliability in the confession itself or
the surrounding evidence. (d)    How Is Prejudicial Effect Measured? [106]                     
Weighing the prejudicial effect of a Mr. Big
confession is a more straightforward and familiar exercise.  Trial judges must
be aware of the dangers presented by these confessions.  Admitting these
confessions raises the spectre of moral and reasoning prejudice.  Commencing
with moral prejudice, the jury learns that the accused wanted to join a
criminal organization and committed a host of “simulated crimes” that he
believed were real.  In the end, the accused is forced to argue to the jury
that he lied to Mr. Big when he boasted about committing a very serious crime
because his desire to join the gang was so strong.  Moral prejudice may increase
with operations that involve the accused in simulated crimes of violence, or
that demonstrate the accused has a past history of violence.[8]  As for reasoning
prejudice — defined as the risk that the jury’s focus will be distracted away
from the charges before the court — it too can pose a problem depending on the
length of the operation, the amount of time that must be spent detailing it,
and any controversy as to whether a particular event or conversation occurred. [107]                     
On the other hand, the risk of prejudice can be
mitigated by excluding certain pieces of particularly prejudicial evidence that
are unessential to the narrative.  Moreover, trial judges must bear in mind
that limiting instructions to the jury may be capable of attenuating the
prejudicial effect of this evidence. (e)     How Are Probative Value and Prejudicial Effect Compared? [108]                     
In the end, trial judges must weigh the
probative value and the prejudicial effect of the confession at issue and
decide whether the Crown has met its burden.  In practice, the potential for
prejudice is a fairly constant variable in this context.  Mr. Big operations
are cut from the same cloth, and the concerns about prejudice are likely to be
similar from case to case.  As a result, trial judges will expend much of their
analytical energy assessing the reliability of the confessions these operations
generate. [109]                     
Determining when the probative value of a Mr.
Big confession surpasses its potential for prejudice will never be an exact
science.  As Justice Binnie observed in Handy, probative value and
prejudicial effect are two variables which “do not operate on the same plane”
(para. 148).  Probative value is concerned with “proof of an issue”, while
prejudicial effect is concerned with “the fairness of the trial” (ibid.). 
To be sure, there will be easy cases at the margins.  But more common will be
the difficult cases that fall in between.  In such cases, trial judges will
have to lean on their judicial experience to decide whether the value of a
confession exceeds its cost. [110]                     
Despite the inexactness of the exercise, it is
one for which our trial judges are well prepared.  Trial judges routinely weigh
the probative value and prejudicial effect of evidence.  And as mentioned, they
are already asked to examine the reliability of evidence in a number of
different contexts, as well as the prejudicial effect of bad character
evidence.  They are well positioned to do the same here.  Because trial judges,
after assessing the evidence before them, are in the best position to weigh the
probative value and prejudicial effect of the evidence, their decision to admit
or exclude a Mr. Big confession will be afforded deference on appeal. (f)     What Is the Role of the Doctrine of Abuse of Process? [111]                     
The rule of evidence I have proposed goes a long
way toward addressing all three of the concerns raised by Mr. Big operations. 
It squarely tackles the problems they raise with reliability and prejudice. 
And it takes significant account of the concern regarding police misconduct
both by placing the admissibility onus on the Crown, and by factoring the
conduct of the police into the assessment of a Mr. Big confession’s probative
value. [112]                     
I should not, however, be taken as suggesting
that police misconduct will be forgiven so long as a demonstrably reliable
confession is ultimately secured.  That state of affairs would be unacceptable,
as this Court has long recognized that there are “inherent limits” on the power
of the state to “manipulate people and events for the purpose of . . .
obtaining convictions” (R. v. Mack, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 903, at p. 941). [113]                     
In my view, this is where the doctrine of abuse
of process must serve its purpose.  After all, the doctrine is intended to
guard against state conduct that society finds unacceptable, and which
threatens the integrity of the justice system (R. v. Babos, 2014 SCC 16,
[2014] 1 S.C.R. 309, at para. 35).  Moreover, the doctrine provides trial
judges with a wide discretion to issue a remedy — including the exclusion of
evidence or a stay of proceedings — where doing so is necessary to
preserve the integrity of the justice system or the fairness of the trial (ibid.,
at para. 32).  The onus lies on the accused to establish that an abuse of
process has occurred. [114]                     
I acknowledge that, thus far, the doctrine has
provided little protection in the context of Mr. Big operations.  This may be
due in part to this Court’s decision in R. v. Fliss, 2002 SCC 16, [2002]
1 S.C.R. 535, where Binnie J., writing for the majority, described the Mr. Big
technique as “skillful police work” (para. 21).  But the solution, in my view,
is to reinvigorate the doctrine in this context, not to search for an
alternative framework to guard against the very same problem.  The first step
toward restoring the doctrine as an effective guard against police misconduct
in this context is to remind trial judges that these operations can become
abusive, and that they must carefully scrutinize how the police conduct them. [115]                     
It is of course impossible to set out a precise
formula for determining when a Mr. Big operation will become abusive.  These
operations are too varied for a bright-line rule to apply.  But there is one
guideline that can be suggested.  Mr. Big operations are designed to induce
confessions.  The mere presence of inducements is not problematic (Oickle,
at para. 57).  But police conduct, including inducements and threats, becomes
problematic in this context when it approximates coercion.  In conducting these
operations, the police cannot be permitted to overcome the will of the accused
and coerce a confession.  This would almost certainly amount to an abuse of
process. [116]                     
Physical violence or threats of violence provide
examples of coercive police tactics.  A confession derived from physical
violence or threats of violence against an accused will not be admissible — no
matter how reliable — because this, quite simply, is something the community
will not tolerate (see, e.g., R. v. Singh, 2013 ONCA 750, 118 O.R. (3d)
253). [117]                     
Violence and threats of violence are two forms
of unacceptable coercion.  But Mr. Big operations can become coercive in other
ways as well.  Operations that prey on an accused’s vulnerabilities — like
mental health problems, substance addictions, or youthfulness — are also highly
problematic (see Mack, at p. 963). Taking advantage of these
vulnerabilities threatens trial fairness and the integrity of the justice
system.  As this Court has said on many occasions, misconduct that offends the
community’s sense of fair play and decency will amount to an abuse of process
and warrant the exclusion of the statement. [118]                     
While coercion is an important factor to
consider, I do not foreclose the possibility that Mr. Big operations can become
abusive in other ways.  The factors that I have outlined, while not identical,
are similar to those outlined in Mack, with which trial judges are
well-familiar (p. 966).  At the end of the day, there is only so much guidance
that can be provided.  Our trial judges have long been entrusted with the task
of identifying abuses of process and I have no reason to doubt their ability to
do the same in this context. (g)     Why Use This Two-Pronged Approach? [119]                     
As we have seen, Mr. Big operations raise three
interrelated concerns — reliability, prejudice, and police misconduct.  I have
proposed two separate tests that, taken together, address all three. [120]                     
The reason for this lies in the analytically
distinct problems that the three concerns raise.  Reliability and prejudice are
fundamentally evidentiary issues.  They are concerned with the quality of the
evidence these operations produce.  Indeed, they do not emerge as problems at
all until a Mr. Big confession is admitted at trial.  The concern that the
police may engage in misconduct, by contrast, is focused on the behaviour of the
state in eliciting the evidence.  To be sure, there is significant overlap
between the concerns.  Police misconduct is more likely to produce an
unreliable confession.  But the overlap is not perfect.  For example, a
confession elicited during a Mr. Big operation where there has been no
misconduct may still turn out to be unreliable and prejudicial.  Similarly, a
confession that is the product of misconduct may turn out to be
reliable.  Thus, in order to take complete account of both issues, two legal
tools are required — one that looks directly at the evidence, and one that
serves as a check on the conduct of the police. [121]                     
I have turned to a common law rule of evidence
to address the concerns these confessions raise with reliability and
prejudice.  Without question, unreliable and prejudicial evidence implicate
rights under the Charter , including the right to a fair trial and the
presumption of innocence.  But our common law rules of evidence are, and must
be, capable of protecting the constitutional rights of the accused.  It is
axiomatic that the common law must be developed in a manner consistent with the
fundamental values enshrined in the Charter  (see RWDSU v. Dolphin
Delivery Ltd., [1986] 2 S.C.R. 573, at p. 603).  Our rules of evidence have
embraced this constitutional imperative and have evolved into principled,
flexible tools that are “highly sensitive to the due process interests of the
accused” (D. Paciocco, “Charter Tracks: Twenty-Five Years of Constitutional
Influence on the Criminal Trial Process and Rules of Evidence” (2008), 40 S.C.L.R.
(2d) 309, at p. 311).  The common law rule of evidence I have proposed fits
comfortably with this Court’s approach in the post-Charter  era. [122]                     
To deal with the concern regarding police
misconduct, I have turned to the doctrine of abuse of process.  Doing so makes
good sense because, as mentioned, the doctrine is intended to guard against
state misconduct that threatens the integrity of the justice system and the
fairness of trials.  Moreover, a form of abuse of process has long provided a
residual protection against unfair police tactics in the context of
conventional police interrogations (see Oickle, at paras. 65-67; Rothman
v. The Queen, [1981] 1 S.C.R. 640, at p. 697).  The doctrine is therefore
well suited to providing a check against police misconduct in this context. [123]                     
The two-pronged approach I have articulated is
also consistent with the demands of the principle against self-incrimination. 
The principle against self-incrimination has two purposes: protecting against
abusive state conduct, and guarding against unreliable confessions (Hebert,
at p. 175; R. v. Jones, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 229, at p. 250).  These
protections flow from “the value placed by Canadian society upon individual
privacy, personal autonomy and dignity” (White, at para. 43). However,
the principle does not act as a free-standing legal protection.  Rather, the
principle is a “general organizing principle of criminal law from which
particular rules can be derived” (Jones, at p. 249).  Where its
underlying rationale suggests that legal protection is needed in a specific
context, but the law provides for none, the principle can be used to fashion a
“contextually-sensitive” new rule to address the gap in the law (White,
at para. 45).[9] 
In my view, the common law rule of evidence I have proposed acts, along with
the abuse doctrine, as yet another specific legal protection that derives from
the general principle and its underlying rationale. [124]                     
Unlike my colleague Karakatsanis J., I would not
respond to the concerns Mr. Big confessions raise by subjecting them to an
assessment under the framework developed by this Court in White.  It is
true that the White test was used to determine whether admitting a class
of statements made by an accused under statutory compulsion would offend the
principle against self-incrimination.[10] 
But White did not transform the principle against self-incrimination
from a general organizing principle into a freestanding legal rule.  To the
contrary, the Court was careful to note that the principle provided only
“residual protections” in the absence of “specific common law and Charter 
rules”, whether existing or new (paras. 44-45).  In that regard, the Court in White
observed that the principle “demands different things at different times”
and that the task in each case is “to determine exactly what the principle
demands, if anything, within the particular context at issue” (ibid.). [125]                     
Thus the general factors identified in White are
best understood as serving to illustrate that Mr. Big operations raise concerns
with the principle against self-incrimination.   But White does not tell
us what the principle demands in this context, nor does it assist in fashioning
an appropriate response.  That task can only be accomplished — as White
itself contemplated — by tailoring the two-pronged approach of a common law
evidentiary rule and the doctrine of abuse of process, to address the
particular concerns raised by Mr. Big operations.  This is how the confessions
rule and the right to silence operate to address the concerns with
self-incrimination that arise during conventional police interrogations and
upon detention.  And it is how my two-pronged approach addresses the challenges
posed by Mr. Big operations. (4)     Application to the Facts (a)     The Admissibility of the Respondent’s Confessions [126]                     
During the Mr. Big operation, the respondent
confessed on three separate occasions: on April 10, June 9, and June 11, 2005. 
These confessions — and in particular the June 9 and 11 confessions — were the
heart of the Crown’s case against the respondent at trial.  Guided by the legal
framework I have proposed, I must decide whether these confessions were
properly admitted into evidence. [127]                     
At the outset, I acknowledge that these reasons
recast the test for determining the admissibility of Mr. Big confessions. 
Unsurprisingly, the trial judge did not apply this test in determining the
admissibility of the respondent’s confessions.  In addition, the arguments in
the courts below, and before this Court, did not squarely address whether the
respondent’s confessions ought to be admitted under this framework. [128]                     
Nonetheless, I am of the view that this Court is
in a position to decide whether the respondent’s statements were properly
admitted — and that we ought to do so.  Although the precise test for
determining the admissibility of Mr. Big confessions has changed, the issues
have not.  The reliability of the respondent’s confessions, their potential for
prejudice, and the conduct of the police in carrying out this Mr. Big operation
have been in issue from the outset.  The parties have addressed these issues,
and there is a substantial record before us. [129]                     
Nor does applying this test require overturning
the trial judge’s findings of fact.  The details of the Mr. Big operation that
was conducted in this case are not in dispute.  In assessing the admissibility
of the respondent’s confessions, the trial judge’s reasons focused on the
threatening and intimidating conduct of the undercover officers.  The trial
judge found that the respondent was not threatened by the officers (see, e.g.,
para. 65).  Assessing the admissibility of the respondent’s confessions simply
requires analyzing the uncontroversial facts through a different lens — that of
the common law rule of evidence I have proposed. [130]                     
Moreover, these proceedings have been difficult
and protracted.  Nearly a decade has passed since the respondent was arrested
and charged with the murder of his daughters.  Concerns with the respondent’s
mental health prompted the appointment of amicus curiae at this Court
and at the Court of Appeal.  Ordering a new trial and leaving the admissibility
of the respondent’s confessions to be determined by a new trial judge would be
tantamount to sending this case back to square one.  In my view, that would not
be in the interests of justice. (i)      The June 9 and June 11, 2005 Confessions [131]                     
The June 9 confession was elicited by Mr. Big
during his meeting with the respondent.  The June 11 confession is a brief
re-enactment of how the drowning occurred.  As mentioned, these confessions
were critical to the Crown’s case against the respondent.  Because the
re-enactment followed from the respondent’s confession to Mr. Big, these
confessions are intertwined, and I will consider their admissibility together. [132]                     
The first step is to take stock of the probative
value of these confessions, which hinges on an assessment of their
reliability.  This requires considering the circumstances in which the
confessions were made, and whether the confessions contain any markers of
reliability. [133]                     
Turning first to the circumstances in which
these confessions were made, I am of the view that the circumstances cast
serious doubt on the reliability of the respondent’s confessions.  At the time
the Mr. Big operation began, the respondent was socially isolated, unemployed,
and living on welfare.  Over the next four months, the Mr. Big operation
transformed the respondent’s life, becoming its focal point.  The respondent
participated in 63 “scenarios” in which he worked with undercover officers.  He
also had near daily phone contact with two of these officers, Jim and Paul, who
became his closest friends.  Even when the respondent was not working with the
undercover officers, much of his time was devoted to the work doled out to him
by the fictitious organization.  He spent long hours driving across
Newfoundland, spending nights in hotels, as he delivered mysterious packages
and cargo.  By all accounts, this was a lengthy and intense operation. [134]                     
With this transformation of the respondent’s
life came powerful inducements.  Financially, the Mr. Big operation lifted the
respondent out of poverty.  Undercover officers paid the respondent over
$15,000 in cash for his work.  And they promised him much greater financial
rewards in the future if he was admitted into the organization; the undercover
officers had him count hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash, and told him a
$25,000 pay day was coming if he was allowed to participate in an upcoming “big
job”.  There was a corresponding change in the respondent’s lifestyle.  Dinners
at expensive restaurants became common.  Paul bought the respondent new clothes
to wear, and the respondent relied on Paul to teach him how to behave during
their dinners, as dining at expensive restaurants was “all new to him” and he
often felt uncomfortable. [135]                     
The respondent attested to the powerful impact
of these financial inducements at the outset of his meeting with Mr. Big,
telling the crime boss that his life had been “really rough” before he started
working for the organization, and that he had been unable to afford even a bed
to sleep on.  He told Mr. Big that he had come from having “nothing”, that
working for the organization had lifted him out of those dire circumstances,
and that he would “never ever forget” how good they had been to him. [136]                     
At least as enticing as the financial
inducements held out to the respondent was the promise of friendship that came
with working for the criminal organization.  The undercover officers — aware of
the respondent’s social isolation — sought to become his “best friend”.  At the
outset of the operation, the officers plotted to separate the respondent from
his wife, telling him that she was not allowed to accompany him as he traveled
across the country working for the organization. [137]                     
With remarkable ease, the officers quickly and
deeply engrained themselves in the respondent’s life.  By early April, less
than two full months into the operation, the respondent told Jim and Paul that
they were like brothers to him and that he loved them — a sentiment he would
repeat throughout the rest of the operation.  Indeed, the respondent preached
that loyalty to this “family” was more important to him than money. [138]                     
The depth of the respondent’s commitment to the
organization and the undercover officers can hardly be exaggerated.  The
respondent would constantly call his friends — Jim and Paul — looking for work,
and he would anxiously await their planned meetings.  He told the officers he
was planning to leave Newfoundland so he could work for the organization full
time.  He even purported a willingness to leave his wife if that is what it
would take to join the organization.  And when he was finally arrested on June
13, the respondent’s first call for help was naturally placed to Jim. [139]                     
It was in these circumstances that the
respondent confessed to Mr. Big and participated in the re-enactment.  When he
entered their June 9 meeting, the respondent knew that his ticket out of
poverty and social isolation was at stake.  Jim implored him to be “honest”
with the boss.  Early on in the interrogation, Mr. Big drove home the
importance of honesty, telling the respondent that “the minute the trust is
gone . . . everything is gone”.  The conversation quickly turned to the death
of the respondent’s daughters, and Mr. Big immediately asserted that the
respondent had killed them.  When the respondent denied it and claimed to have
had a seizure, Mr. Big perfunctorily dismissed this explanation as a lie: “No
don’t lie to me . . . don’t go with the seizure stuff . . . [y]ou’re lying to
me on this okay.” [140]                     
The circumstances left the respondent with a
stark choice: confess to Mr. Big or be deemed a liar by the man in charge of
the organization he so desperately wanted to join.  In my view, these
circumstances, considered as a whole, presented the respondent with an
overwhelming incentive to confess — either truthfully or falsely. [141]                     
Having determined that the circumstances in
which these confessions were made cast serious doubt on the reliability of the
respondent’s confessions, the next question is whether these confessions
contain any indicators of reliability.  In my view, they do not. [142]                     
In the first place, the respondent’s description
of how the crime was committed is somewhat inconsistent.  In his meeting with
Mr. Big, the respondent started off by denying that he killed his daughters. 
Later, he said that they “fell” into the water.  After further pressing by Mr.
Big, the respondent claimed that he pushed his daughters into the water by
striking them with his shoulder.  But when he participated in the re-enactment
with Jim two days later, his explanation changed again.  When Jim knelt down
next to the respondent and asked him to demonstrate how he pushed his
daughters, the respondent nudged him with his knee.  He had to use his knee
because Jim, kneeling down, was not tall enough for the respondent to shove
with his shoulder.  The same would undoubtedly have been true for his small
children. [143]                     
More important than these inconsistencies is the
complete lack of confirmatory evidence.  Given the peculiar circumstances of
the case, this is unsurprising.  The issue has always been whether the
respondent’s daughters drowned accidentally or were murdered.  There was never
any question that the respondent was present when his daughters entered the
water.  All of the objectively verifiable details of the respondent’s
confession (e.g., his knowledge of the location of the drowning) flow from his
acknowledged presence at the time the drowning occurred. [144]                     
When the circumstances in which the respondent’s
confessions were made are considered alongside their internal inconsistencies
and the lack of any confirmatory evidence, their reliability is left in serious
doubt, and I am forced to conclude that their probative value is low. [145]                     
On the other hand, these confessions — like all
Mr. Big confessions — carried with them an obvious potential for prejudice. 
The jury heard extensive evidence that — for four months — the respondent
devoted his entire life to trying to join a criminal gang.  They heard that he
repeatedly participated in what he thought were criminal acts, including
transporting stolen property and smuggling alcohol.  On one occasion, he and
Jim, wearing balaclavas, broke into a car to steal a package from it.  The jury
was repeatedly told that the respondent had described himself as having “no
limits”, and that he would do anything “as long as the trust was there”.  And
it is easy to see how the jury could come to view the respondent with disdain. 
Here was a man who bragged about killing his three-year-old daughters to gain
the approval of a group of criminals.  The potential for moral prejudice in
these circumstances was significant. [146]                     
Comparing the probative value and prejudicial
effect of these confessions leads me to conclude that their limited probative
value is outweighed by their prejudicial effect.  Put simply, these confessions
are not worth the risk they pose.  In my view, it would be unsafe to rest a
conviction on this evidence. (ii)     The April 10 Confession [147]                     
I reach the same conclusion with respect to the
respondent’s alleged April 10 confession.  This confession also suffers from
serious reliability concerns.  Although unprompted, it came about during a
conversation in which the respondent and Jim were bragging about their
willingness to engage in violence.  By this time, the respondent was already
under the spell of powerful financial and social inducements.  The confession
came after two months and more than 30 scenarios with undercover officers, at a
time when the respondent had already begun professing his love for Jim and
Paul.  Importantly, the confession itself contains no details — it amounts to a
bald assertion by the respondent that he killed his daughters and that he
“planned it”.  Finally, the confession was not recorded and the respondent
denies making it, which only makes it harder to assess its probative value.  On
the other hand, admitting this confession into evidence carries with it all of
the attendant prejudice I have already discussed.  In my view, the probative
value of this confession does not outweigh its prejudicial effect. (b)     Abuse of Process [148]                     
Given my conclusion that the respondent’s
confessions must be excluded under the common law, it is not necessary to
consider whether the police conduct in this case amounted to an abuse of
process.  But there is no denying that this was an extremely intensive Mr. Big
operation, and one that preyed upon the respondent’s poverty and social
isolation.  In addition, the respondent had a seizure in front of an undercover
officer.  The respondent’s past seizures had caused his licence to be suspended
to protect against the risk that a seizure would cause him to have an accident
while driving.  However, the operation continued after this seizure, and
undercover officers continued to send the respondent long distances over public
roads in order to make deliveries for the fictitious criminal organization. 
The respondent submits that this placed his and the public’s safety at risk,
and that this conduct warrants excluding the confessions. [149]                     
Without question, the police conduct in this
case raises significant concerns, and might well amount to an abuse of
process.  However, this is not how the issue was presented at trial.  At trial,
the respondent took issue with the threatening and intimidating conduct of the
officers, and the trial judge rejected those arguments.  Given this, and the
fact that there is no need to decide the matter, I do not believe this is an
appropriate case to decide whether an abuse of process has been established. VI.       
Disposition [150]                     
The Court of Appeal excluded the respondent’s
June 9 and 11 confessions and quashed his convictions.  It ordered a new trial
on the basis that the respondent’s April 10 confession was admissible, and that
it provided a “sliver” of evidence upon which a jury could convict the
respondent of murder (para. 258). [151]                     
I have concluded that the April 10 confession
must also be excluded.  As such, it is doubtful whether any admissible evidence
remains upon which a jury, properly instructed and acting reasonably, could
convict.  However, the final decision on how to proceed rests with the Crown. 
In the result, I would dismiss the appeal.                     The
following are the reasons delivered by [152]                     
Cromwell J. — I agree with my colleague Moldaver J.’s
analysis of the legal framework that ought to apply to statements obtained from
accused persons as a result of “Mr. Big” operations. I also agree with his
analysis of the question of whether the trial judge erred in law in his
approach to the respondent’s request that he be allowed to testify with the
public excluded from the courtroom. My only point of disagreement with my
colleague is with respect to whether this Court should decide the question of
whether Mr. Hart’s statements to the undercover officers are admissible. In my view,
we should not. I would therefore uphold the Court of Appeal’s order for a new
trial, but leave the question of admissibility of the statements to the trial
judge, to be decided in accordance with the framework set out in Moldaver J.’s
reasons. I reach this conclusion for four reasons. [153]                     
First, we have in this record three versions
from Mr. Hart himself of what happened to the children. One is that he
panicked. This is the version that he doggedly maintained under extensive and
challenging police interrogation.  The second is that he had an epileptic
seizure. Mr. Hart contacted the police, told them that he had not been truthful
with them in his earlier interrogations and recounted this version of events.
The third version is that he deliberately killed them, the version that Mr.
Hart told to the undercover officers — allegedly twice — during the Mr. Big
operation. [154]                     
In my view, it is in the interests of the proper
administration of justice that Mr. Hart’s involvement, if any, in the death of
these helpless children should be determined at a trial, applying the correct
legal framework, which we have now established. [155]                     
Second, the Court today sets out, for the first
time, a comprehensive framework for dealing with the admissibility of
statements obtained in the course of Mr. Big operations. This framework is
significantly different from the one advanced on behalf of Mr. Hart at trial
and considered by the trial judge and also from the approach adopted by the
majority of the Court of Appeal. In my respectful view, it is fundamentally
unfair for an appellate court to apply this new legal framework to the
evidentiary record developed at trial, a record developed to address markedly
different legal issues. The Crown submitted, and not at all implausibly, that
if the issue of vulnerability, for example, had been advanced at trial, the
Crown would have adduced additional and different evidence: transcript, at pp.
32-34. [156]                     
Third, although the legal issues in relation to
the admissibility of Mr. Hart’s statements are different in light of our
holding in this case, the findings made by the trial judge nonetheless convince
me that it would be unwise for this Court to attempt to apply this new
framework to the existing record. [157]                     
At trial, Mr. Hart maintained that he was “intimidated,
scared and felt trapped in his ability to get out” and that his motive to lie
about having murdered his children was “the money, the friendships he created
with undercover operators, the lifestyle and the chance to get out of
Newfoundland”: trial judge’s voir dire reasons, 2007 NLTD 74, 265 Nfld.
& P.E.I.R. 266, at para. 33.  Mr. Hart argued at trial that his statements
resulted from implied threats, coercions and psychological coercion: ibid.,
at para. 42. [158]                     
The trial judge, who had the advantage of seeing
and hearing the witnesses, including Mr. Hart, flatly rejected these
contentions as having no foundation in fact. The trial judge found as a fact
that Mr. Hart was offered the opportunity to stop his involvement at any time:
“[h]e had numerous chances to leave the operation, but made no effort to do so”
(voir dire reasons, at para. 61). In fact, Mr. Hart, according to the
trial judge, “continued to show his willingness to become more involved and to
take greater risks.  . . . Mr. Hart wanted to work and continually
pressured [the undercover officers] for more work outside of Newfoundland”: ibid.,
at paras. 59 and 61. [159]                     
The trial judge also considered Mr. Hart’s
position that his statements should be excluded because they did not meet the
threshold requirements of reliability. The statements, argued Mr. Hart, were
the result of implied threats and intimidation and occurred in the context of
paying him to perform illegal activities. In light of all these circumstances,
the statements did not meet the required threshold reliability for admission. [160]                     
The trial judge rejected these submissions: voir
dire reasons, at paras. 136-42.  He referred to his earlier findings that
there was no intimidation or coercion. He also found that the motive to lie
advanced by Mr. Hart did not make sense. Why would Mr. Hart risk being caught
in his own lie to the “boss” in an attempt to gain the confidence of the
organization, after being warned of what the consequences of lying would be
shortly before the interview (para. 138)?.  As the trial judge explained: It is true that Mr. Hart
wanted into the organization and he did have a motive to lie, but there was
reason for him to come clean with the “boss”, especially when coming clean
meant any potential problem Mr. Hart may have had could be eliminated by
the very person he was telling the problem to. It is interesting to note that
Mr. Hart actually went to a WalMart store and stood in front of a video camera
to have his photo taken at a designated time. This designated time was supposed
to be the time when a particular individual who witnessed the drowning was
supposed to have been taken care of by one of the crime gang members.       The purpose of the picture
was to provide an alibi for Mr. Hart as it related to taking care of the
individual that supposedly had seen Mr. Hart commit the crime. [paras. 140-41] [161]                     
Finally, there is evidence that about mid-way through
the Mr. Big operation, Mr. Hart, in order to establish his ability to do what
might be required of him, told an undercover officer that he had deliberately
killed his daughters. This is the April 10, 2005 statement. The evidence was
that Mr. Hart showed the officer a picture of the twins and said that they were
his own blood but that he had killed them and had planned it: 2012 NLCA 61, 327
Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 178, per Barry J.A., at para. 10. Mr. Hart denied
making this statement in his voir dire evidence. It is not clear to me
that this statement would inevitably be excluded at a new trial on the
framework governing admissibility established in Moldaver J.’s reasons. Of
course, if ruled admissible, it would be for the jury to decide whether Mr.
Hart made this statement and what weight, if any, to give it. The Court of
Appeal refused to exclude this statement, leaving its admissibility to be
determined at a new trial: para. 258.  I agree with that conclusion. [162]                     
In my respectful view, the admissibility of the
respondent’s statements to the undercover officers ought to be determined at a
new trial where the parties and the trial judge will have the benefit of the
new framework established in Moldaver J.’s reasons and will be able to focus
their evidence and arguments accordingly. [163]                     
In the result, I would dismiss the appeal.                     The  following are the
reasons delivered by                     Karakatsanis J.  — I.             
Introduction [164]                     
The Mr. Big technique is a Canadian innovation
that has proven effective in resolving intractable criminal investigations. 
During a typical Mr. Big operation, undercover police officers befriend the
suspect and induct him into a fictional criminal organization.  Over time, they
secure his loyalty and trust.  Ultimately, they introduce the target to the
leader of the organization, who requires him to admit his involvement in the
offence the police are investigating. [165]                     
However, Mr. Big operations entail significant
dangers.  The detailed artificial reality created by the operation is
purposively manipulative and can compromise the autonomy and human dignity of
the suspect.  Moreover, the technique generates a significant risk of false
confessions, as an individual who is pressured to confess may do or say
anything to please Mr. Big and avoid losing his new life.  The technique
entangles the target in a web of prejudicial evidence that may undermine trial
fairness.  Finally, the unrestricted use of this tactic risks abusive state
conduct, as the police devote substantial resources to manipulating suspects
who are presumed to be innocent. [166]                     
Mr. Big confessions are not caught by the
traditional rules governing confessions to the state, such as the confessions
rule or the right to silence.  My colleague Moldaver J. would therefore address
the admissibility of Mr. Big confessions by creating a new rule of evidence
under the common law.  Under this rule, Mr. Big confessions are inadmissible
unless the Crown establishes that the probative value of the confession
(factoring in its reliability) outweighs its prejudicial effect.  He would
leave concerns about state conduct to the abuse of process doctrine. [167]                     
I fear that the proposed common law rule fails
to consistently take into account broader concerns that arise when state agents
generate a confession at a cost to human dignity, personal autonomy and the
administration of justice.  These concerns are recognized in our jurisprudence
dealing with confessions to the state and lie at the root of the principle
against self-incrimination. [168]                     
In my view, the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms  provides the appropriate analytical framework to regulate Mr.
Big operations because of the state’s central role in generating the
confession.  These operations raise three vital concerns:  the reliability of
the evidence generated, the autonomy of suspects, and the potential for abuse
of state power.  In addition, the technique creates criminal propensity
evidence that can undermine trial fairness.  The principle against
self-incrimination, under s. 7  of the Charter , provides
comprehensive and flexible protection in such circumstances. [169]                     
In this case, the respondent, Mr. Hart, was
suspected of drowning his daughters.  Over two years later, the police
undertook an intensive months-long operation in which they exploited his
poverty and social isolation by offering him novel experiences:  lucrative
employment, friendship and a sense of self-worth.  The respondent was led to
believe that for this life to continue, he must confess to “Mr. Big”.  The
investigation and resulting confession demonstrate the serious risks of these
operations.  The police used their overwhelming power and resources to create
an alternate reality and to obtain a confession of dubious reliability through
an operation with a devastating impact on the accused.  In doing so, they
violated the principle against self-incrimination under s. 7  of the Charter . [170]                     
I agree with Moldaver J.’s decision to exclude
the confessions.  However, I would reach that conclusion through the analytical
lens of the principle against self-incrimination. II.          
Framework for Admissibility of State-Induced
Confessions A.          
The Dangers Inherent to Confessions to the State [171]                     
Confessions to state agents raise special concerns for the criminal
justice system.  Over the centuries, our common law tradition has responded to
these dangers.  The jurisprudence recognizes that individuals sometimes make
false confessions that can result in miscarriages of justice, affirms that
respect for human dignity and free choice means that individuals should not be
coerced by the state to provide self-incriminating evidence, and discourages
the state from conducting criminal investigations in a way that offends our
sense of fair play or compromises the integrity of the administration of
justice.  Recognizing that particular vigilance is required to protect against
miscarriages of justice caused by unreliable confessions, the law has developed
specialized rules that respect both fairness to the individual and the societal
interest in investigating crime and seeking the truth at trial. [172]                     
Mr. Big operations have procured confessions when
traditional investigative techniques have failed.  Indeed, that is their sole
purpose.  These operations, often costly and complex, create elaborate
false realities for their targets in which they are valued and rewarded. 
Threats and inducements are tailored to exploit suspects’ vulnerabilities, and
confessing becomes necessary for their new lives to continue.  The very
structure of Mr. Big operations creates circumstances that (1) compromise the
suspects’ autonomy, (2) undermine the reliability of confessions, and (3) raise
concerns about abusive state conduct.  In addition, Mr. Big operations create
prejudicial evidence of criminal propensity which has the potential to
compromise accused persons’ ability to make full answer and defence,
undermining the fairness of the trial. [173]                     
Despite these dangers, the Mr. Big technique has
not been extensively reviewed by this Court.  In R. v. McIntyre, [1994]
2 S.C.R. 480, the Court upheld the admissibility of the Mr. Big statements
obtained in that case in a brief oral judgment, finding that “the tricks used
by the police were not likely to shock the community” (p. 481).  But McIntyre
was very different from this case:  the operation lasted for only 10 days, the
police officers posing as criminals immediately revealed the illegal nature of
their activities, and the “job” offer they made to McIntyre at the outset
required him to prove he was capable of killing (see R. v. McIntyre
(1993), 135 N.B.R. (2e) 266 (C.A.)). [174]                     
Existing safeguards that govern confessions made
to the state are rooted in traditional investigative techniques and fail to
properly regulate Mr. Big operations.  The confessions rule does not apply in a
Mr. Big operation because the suspect is not aware that he is speaking to a
person in authority (R. v. Hodgson, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 449, at paras.
24-29; R. v. Grandinetti, 2005 SCC 5, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 27), nor does
the right to silence, which arises only upon a suspect’s detention (R. v.
Hebert, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 151, at p. 184; McIntyre).  Thus, Mr. Big
confessions fall into the gaps between the traditional rules. [175]                     
The Court cannot countenance this void.  The
existing rules assist in identifying the interests affected and dangers
generated by Mr. Big operations and in structuring a principled and responsive
legal framework.  The confessions rule guards against unreliable
confessions and regulates state conduct to protect basic fairness in the
criminal process (R. v. Oickle, 2000 SCC 38, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 3, at
paras. 68-69).  The right to silence focuses on autonomy, choice and fairness
by protecting detained persons’ “right to choose whether to speak to the
authorities or to remain silent” (Hebert, at p. 180).  More
broadly, the principle against self-incrimination from which these protections
stem is based upon respect for an individual’s autonomy and human dignity,
which give that individual the right to choose whether to incriminate herself.  The
principle serves “at least two key purposes, namely to protect against
unreliable confessions, and to protect against abuses of power by the state” (R.
v. White, [1999] 2 S.C.R. 417, at para. 43;
see also R. v. Jones, [1994] 2 S.C.R. 229, at p. 250). B.           
The Principle Against Self-Incrimination [176]                     
Mr. Big confessions engage the constitutional principle against
self-incrimination protected under s. 7  of the Charter .  Section 7  
reads: Everyone has the right to life,
liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof
except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. [177]                     
In R. v. P. (M.B.), [1994] 1 S.C.R. 555,
Lamer C.J. described the principle against self-incrimination as follows: Perhaps
the single most important organizing principle in criminal law is the right of
an accused not to be forced into assisting in his or her own prosecution . . .
.  The
broad protection afforded to accused persons is perhaps best described in terms
of the overarching principle against self-incrimination, which is firmly rooted
in the common law and is a fundamental principle of justice under s. 7  of the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms .  As a majority of this Court suggested in Dubois
v. The Queen, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 350, the presumption of innocence and the
power imbalance between the state and the individual are at the root of this
principle and the procedural and evidentiary protections to which it gives rise. 
[Emphasis added; pp. 577-78.] [178]                     
Section 7 has a well-recognized residual role
with respect to the principles of fundamental justice, of which ss. 8 to 14 are
examples (Re B.C. Motor Vehicle Act, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 486, at pp.
502-3 and 512).  The principle against self-incrimination manifests itself in
specific protections such as the s. 7 right to silence recognized in Hebert,
the s. 10 (b) right to counsel, the s. 11 (c) rule of
non-compellability and the s. 13  privilege against self-incrimination
(see Jones, at pp. 251-56; H. Stewart, Fundamental
Justice: Section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (2012),
at pp. 8-9).  However, in considering the scope of the
principle, in Thomson Newspapers Ltd. v.
Canada (Director of Investigation and Research, Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission), [1990]
1 S.C.R. 425, Lamer J. (dissenting, but not on this point), agreed with the
majority that “the specific
enumerations in ss. 11 (c) and 13  of the Charter  are not
necessarily exhaustive of the protection afforded by s. 7 , and do not prevent
residual content being given to s. 7 ” (p. 442). [179]                     
The principle against
self-incrimination is, therefore, a robust and dynamic concept which
addresses the dangers that arise from confessions made to state agents.  It provides a principled approach to dealing
with confessions to the state.[11] 
In my view, the principle provides the appropriate
response to Mr. Big cases, for several reasons. [180]                     
First, Mr. Big operations deploy significant
state resources to create a new world, where the target often feels that there
is no choice but to confess.  They directly engage the individual privacy,
autonomy and dignity interests that the principle against self-incrimination is
meant to protect.  The principle against self-incrimination acknowledges the
tremendous power of the state and protects the individual’s freedom to choose
whether to make a statement to the police.  The right not to be
compelled to incriminate oneself has deep roots.  It is an overarching
organizing principle in our criminal justice system, of which the confession
rule and the right to silence are emanations (Hebert, at p.
175).  It makes sense to rely upon this foundational principle in responding to
confessions that are generated by and made to state agents. [181]                     
Second, this approach draws on existing jurisprudence concerning the
principle against self-incrimination, making it unnecessary to create a new
rule.  The scope of s. 7’s protection
against self-incrimination is to be “determined on a case-by-case basis” (Jones,
at p. 257). [182]                     
Third, the principle against self-incrimination
provides an opportunity to weigh concerns about reliability, autonomy and state
conduct together in a nuanced way.  These concerns are factually and
conceptually intertwined.  For example, if the police overreach in their
reliance on threats and inducements, this will be relevant to determining
whether the operation was unduly coercive, may undermine the reliability of the
confession, and will raise the spectre of abuse. [183]                     
Finally, the principle against self-incrimination addresses
suspects’ rights both during the Mr. Big operation and at trial; a rule for
addressing these operations must regulate both.  A fair trial cannot be based
on evidence obtained through fundamentally unfair state tactics.  That being
so, trial fairness and investigative fairness should not be addressed in
freestanding inquiries.  As the Court explained in White, “[i]n every
case, the facts must be closely examined to determine whether the principle
against self-incrimination has truly
been brought into play by the production or use of the declarant’s
statement” (para. 48 (emphasis added)). [184]                     
Consistent with Charter  jurisprudence,
the onus is on the accused to establish a prima facie breach of the
principle against self-incrimination.  To do so, the accused must show that
concerns about autonomy, reliability, and police conduct exist, as they will in
nearly every Mr. Big operation.  In such circumstances, the burden will shift
to the Crown to establish that there is no breach.  Consequently, the Crown
should always be prepared to demonstrate the admissibility of the resulting
evidence.  This will encourage the police to give careful consideration to the
constitutionality of the operation and will incentivize recording of the Mr.
Big “scenarios” where possible.  Given that the entire operation, not just the
final meeting, is relevant to the admissibility of any evidence obtained,
thorough records would make it easier for the court to assess the investigation
and would allow the police to defend against allegations of undue coercion or
state misconduct. [185]                     
The principle against self-incrimination also
works to secure trial fairness, which is a principle of fundamental justice
recognized under ss. 7  and 11 (d) of the Charter .  Trial fairness
may be compromised whenever there are concerns about how police have obtained
self-incriminating evidence, where such evidence is of dubious reliability, and
where juries have difficulty evaluating the truthfulness of confessions.  There
is scope to consider all of these factors under the principle against
self-incrimination. C.           
Applying the Principle Against
Self-Incrimination to Mr. Big Cases [186]                     
The Court applied the principle against
self-incrimination in White.  The White framework deals
directly with three interrelated concerns which ground the traditional rules
respecting confessions to the state:  autonomy, reliability, and state
conduct.  As the Court explained, [t]he
definition of the principle against self-incrimination as an assertion of human
freedom is intimately connected to the principle’s underlying rationale. As
explained by the Chief Justice in Jones, supra, at pp. 250-51, the
principle has at least two key purposes, namely to protect against unreliable
confessions, and to protect against abuses of power by the state.  There is
both an individual and a societal interest in achieving both of these
protections.  Both protections are linked to the value placed by Canadian
society upon individual privacy, personal autonomy and dignity: see, e.g., Thomson
Newspapers, supra, at p. 480, per Wilson J.; Jones, supra,
at pp. 250-51, per Lamer C.J.; and Fitzpatrick, supra, at
paras. 51-52, per La Forest J.  [Emphasis added; para. 43.] [187]                     
The Court identified four factors which help to
determine whether the principle against self-incrimination has been violated by
the production or use of a suspect’s statements: (1)              
whether there was an adversarial relationship
between the accused and the state at the time the statements were obtained;  (2)              
whether there was coercion by the state in
obtaining the statements;  (3)              
whether there was a risk of unreliable
confessions as a result of any compulsion; and  (4)              
whether permitting the use of the statements
would lead to an increased risk of abusive state conduct. (White, at
paras. 53-66) [188]                     
While these factors are interrelated, in the Mr.
Big context, each emphasizes a particular legal interest or principle.  The
coercion factor is primarily concerned with the autonomy and dignity of the
suspect and asks whether the suspect had a choice to speak to the authorities. 
The reliability enquiry focuses on the trustworthiness of any statement
obtained.  Finally, the conduct of the state is examined with a view to
determining whether the authorities used their position of power in an unfair,
abusive, or shocking manner.  Although each factor underscores a particular
concern, specific facts or tactics may implicate more than one danger, and
therefore may be considered under more than one part of the analysis. 
Ultimately, these factors are intertwined and should be considered together. [189]                     
This approach does not identify prejudice as a factor to be considered
under the principle against self-incrimination.  However, the prejudice created
by the evidence of criminal propensity is indirectly relevant to reliability
and state conduct.  Moreover, the trial judge retains the residual power to
exclude evidence on the basis of trial fairness (see R. v. Harrer, [1995]
3 S.C.R. 562, at paras. 24 and 41) or when its probative value is outweighed by
its prejudicial effect. [190]                     
When applying this principled approach to
state-induced confessions, the courts should apply the test in a way that
protects the fundamental interests at stake and responds to the dangers raised
by the particular circumstances. (1)    Adversarial Relationship [191]                     
The principle against self-incrimination is directly
applicable where individuals are in adversarial relationships with the state. 
In a Mr. Big operation, the state deliberately sets out to obtain a confession
from the suspect.  By definition, the relationship is adversarial.  Thus, this
factor does not add to the analysis where there is a confession to Mr. Big. (2)    Coercion [192]                     
A confession is coerced when the accused is deprived of a free choice
whether to admit, deny, or refuse to answer (Black’s Law Dictionary (6th
ed. 1990), at p. 258).  In the context of a Mr. Big operation, a confession is
coerced when the suspect is deprived of any reasonable alternative to
confessing.  While there will almost always be some degree of
coercion in a Mr. Big operation, the issue at this stage is the extent
of that constraint.  Coercion is not a binary.  This means that even if the
suspect had some alternative to confessing, the degree to which
his free choice was compromised must be examined. [194]                     
In determining the degree of coercion, the court should
consider the magnitude and duration of the operation, any explicit or implied
threats used, any financial, social, or emotional inducements applied, and the
characteristics of the suspect, including any mental, physical, social, or
economic disadvantages. [195]                     
By way of example, when financial inducements are
offered to a person of means, it will be difficult to argue that he or she had
no reasonable choice but to confess.  On the much more serious end of the
spectrum are operations which exploit individuals’ particular weaknesses, such
that they feel obliged to make a self-incriminating statement.  Of course,
sufficient pressure may cause even well-situated individuals to feel the force
of coercion. [196]                     
This approach protects the autonomy of the
suspect, a cardinal concern of the confessions rule (where it is also expressed
as voluntariness) and the principle against self-incrimination more broadly. 
In Hodgson, for example, Cory J. (quoting L. Herman, “The
Unexplored Relationship Between the Privilege Against Compulsory
Self-Incrimination and the Involuntary Confession Rule (Part I)” (1992), 53 Ohio
St. L.J. 101, at p. 153, citing Sir G. Gilbert, The Law of Evidence
(1769)) noted that the common law “will not force any Man to accuse himself”,
and held  that “from its very inception, the confessions rule was designed not
only to ensure the reliability of the confession, but also to guarantee
fundamental fairness in the criminal process” (para. 18 (emphasis deleted)). [197]                     
Although the concern for autonomy interweaves
with the goals of obtaining reliable evidence and curbing offensive state
conduct, it exists in our adversarial legal system as an idea with its own
normative force, namely, “a basic distaste for self-conscription” (R. v. S.
(R.J.), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 451, at para. 83).  As this Court has explained,
“proper rules of battle between government and individual require that the
individual . . . not be conscripted by his opponent to defeat himself” (White,
at para. 42, citing Wigmore on Evidence, vol. 8 (McNaughton rev.
1961), § 2251, at p. 318). [198]                     
In S. (R.J.), the Court described the
principle against self-incrimination as “the principle of sovereignty embodied
in the idea that individuals should be left alone in the absence of
justification, and not conscripted by the state to promote a self-defeating
purpose” (para. 81). [199]                     
While there will almost always be some
degree of coercion in a Mr. Big operation, this does not mean that any
resulting confession will automatically be excluded.  The police must have
leeway to employ the Mr. Big technique up to a certain point.  However, if the
coercion was so great that the suspect was made to believe that he had no
alternative but to confess, the statement will have been obtained
unconstitutionally.  Barring such extreme cases, the court must weigh the nature
and severity of coercion alongside the reliability of any resulting
statement and the conduct of the state, two factors I delineate below. (3)    Reliability [200]                     
False confessions can cause miscarriages of
justice, condemn innocent individuals, and result in failures to convict the
truly guilty (Oickle, at para. 32).  Concern for reliability rightly
underpins numerous protections against self-incrimination.  Under the
“reliability” analysis, the court will execute a robust gatekeeper function in
assessing the risk of a false confession, and corroborating or supporting
evidence will usually be a prerequisite to admission. [201]                     
This appraisal is of paramount importance because juries often
struggle to properly assess the ultimate reliability of Mr. Big confessions. 
Juries generally find it difficult to believe that someone
would confess to a crime she did not commit (Oickle, at para. 34), and
are loath to disregard a confession even where it is known to be coerced (S. M.
Kassin et al., “Police-Induced Confessions:  Risk Factors and Recommendations”
(2010), 34 Law & Hum. Behav. 3, at p. 24).  This danger is
compounded by the criminal propensity evidence generated during a Mr. Big
investigation.  An accused who falsely confessed is in a catch-22 situation;
his only course to explain away his statement is to admit that it was made to
preserve his criminal lifestyle. [203]                     
However, traditional indicia of reliability
often cannot be relied upon in a Mr. Big operation.  The confession of
an accused is generally considered to be admissible hearsay, in part because it is a “statement against interest” and therefore
more likely to be reliable.  But statements to Mr. Big are not
“against” the accused’s interest at all:  the target has been made to feel safe
from legal consequences, and confessing is a precondition to membership in the
organization, access to work, or some other benefit.  Confessions are also
treated as admissible hearsay because the
accused, a party to the case, can testify that the confession was false (see R.
v. Osmar, 2007 ONCA
50, 84 O.R. (3d) 321, leave to appeal refused, [2007] 2 S.C.R. vii; R. v.
Bonisteel, 2008 BCCA 344,
259 B.C.A.C. 114).  However, by design, the Mr. Big operation creates prejudicial
evidence of criminal propensity.  The accused must either let the confession
stand or explain that he made it in order to continue his new criminal
lifestyle. [204]                     
Thus, confessions made to Mr. Big are particularly
hazardous, and the judge must evaluate their threshold reliability in order to
satisfy the principle against self-incrimination. [205]                     
In order to find that a confession was constitutionally obtained,
supporting evidence will usually be required.  Under the confessions
rule, corroborative evidence cannot salvage an involuntary statement.  That
rule is not concerned with the reliability of the particular confession, but
with the manner in which it was obtained.  This is because “if the state were
left with the option of simply corroborating forced confessions, there would be
little incentive to refrain from reprehensible investigative measures” (Hodgson,
at para. 20).  However, under the self-incrimination framework, coercion
and state conduct are independently considered under other factors, so there is
no need to use reliability as a proxy for these concerns, and corroborative
evidence may be considered. [206]                     
Moreover, corroborative evidence compensates for the reliability
concerns inherent to a Mr. Big operation.  Such tactics involve powerful
inducements:  the suspect is promised financial rewards, membership in an organization, legal protection, approval and friendship, or some
combination of these in exchange for simply admitting to the commission of the
crime.  At the same time, the suspect has usually been warned
about the consequences of
failing to behave as the organization expects, and the “truth” that Mr. Big
wants to hear has already been made very clear. (4)    Abuse of Power/Police Misconduct [209]                     
The state must conduct its law enforcement
operations in a manner that is consonant with the community’s underlying sense
of fair play and decency.  It cannot manipulate suspects’ lives without limit,
turning their day-to-day existence into a piece of theatre in which they are
unwitting participants.  Such an approach does violence to the dignity of
suspects and is incompatible with the proper administration of justice. [210]                     
I agree with my colleague Moldaver J. that the abuse of process
doctrine recognized under s. 7  remains independently available to provide a
remedy for state misconduct in the Mr. Big context.  However, the high
threshold for its application means that conduct may tend to undermine the
integrity of the administration of justice, yet fail to warrant a remedy under
this doctrine.  The need to restrain
state misconduct is one of the rationales for the principle against
self-incrimination (as well as the confessions rule and the right to silence). 
Therefore, police conduct in Mr. Big operations must be
considered, even when it does not rise to the level of abuse of process. [211]                     
State conduct throughout a Mr. Big
operation must be scrutinized to determine whether the police unfairly,
unnecessarily or disproportionately manipulated the suspect.  This inquiry
will also consider other objectionable police tactics such as involving the
suspect in dangerous conduct or exposing him to physical or
psychological harm. [212]                     
A certain degree of trickery is, of course, inherent to many
effective and appropriate police tactics.  But the more
disreputable the police tactics become, and the less they comport with the
responsibility to conduct a fair prosecution which respects the dignity of the
suspect, the more likely it is that s. 7  has been violated. 1.                 
the type of crime being
investigated and the availability of other techniques for the police detection
of its commission;  2.                 
the strength of the
evidence causing the police to target the suspect;  3.                 
the types and strength of inducements used by the police, including deceit, fraud, trickery or
reward;  4.                 
the duration of the operation and
the number of interactions between the police and the suspect;  5.                 
whether the police
conduct involved an exploitation of human characteristics such as the emotions
of compassion, sympathy and friendship;  6.                 
whether the police appear to have
exploited a particular vulnerability of the suspect such as mental, social, or
economic vulnerabilities or substance addiction;  7.                 
the degree of
harm to the suspect that the police caused or risked;  8.                 
the existence and
severity of any threats, implied or express, made to the suspect by the police
or their agents, including threats made to third parties where those threats
carry an indirect threat to
the accused;  9.                 
whether an average
person, with both strengths and weaknesses, in the position of the suspect
would be induced to falsely confess;  10.             
the persistence and
number of attempts made by the police before the suspect agreed to confess. [214]                     
My intention is not to
create a formalistic checklist or to overcomplicate the analysis.  These
factors are simply examples which may help the court to determine whether the
conduct of the police in obtaining a confession has contravened our society’s
basic expectations of fair play or undermined the reputation of the justice
system.  More abusive state conduct makes it more likely that the confession
was obtained in a manner incompatible with the principle against
self-incrimination. (5)    Weighing the Contextual Factors D.          
Probative Value Versus Prejudicial Effect [217]                     
My colleague Moldaver J. is, of course,
correct that trial judges should exclude evidence where its probative value is
exceeded by its prejudicial effect.  This rule is a principle of
fundamental justice which safeguards trial fairness. [219]                     
My colleague’s rule, including the presumption
of inadmissibility, only applies if the police employ a Mr. Big investigation. 
As such, it may inspire a threshold debate about the boundaries of the Mr. Big
tactic.  By contrast, an approach that responds to the dangers of
state-induced confessions applies regardless of the label attached to the
tactic.  It is the threats to which the rule responds that call it to action. [220]                     
This is not to diminish the trial judge’s
responsibility to exclude evidence that is more prejudicial than probative. 
Highly prejudicial evidence that is unnecessary to explain the context in which
the confession was made, such as details of the suspect’s involvement in
egregious fake crimes, should continue to be edited or excised completely. 
Additionally, jury instructions must warn against impermissible reasoning based
upon criminal propensity. III.       
Application to This Case A.          
Was the Principle Against Self-Incrimination
Violated? (1)    Coercion [221]                     
The Mr. Big operation in this case lasted for
four months and involved 63 staged “scenarios”.  The deceit employed was
extensive.  The police deliberately exploited the accused’s particular
vulnerabilities to ensure he had no realistic option but to give Mr. Big the
confession he demanded. [222]                     
In the first several scenarios, the operatives
went to considerable lengths to show Hart that the trucking business owned by
“Jim” was legitimate.  Although Hart accepted remuneration under the table, he
was only introduced to artificial criminality after 14 “scenarios” had been
completed, when he was already hooked into the manufactured reality of
lucrative employment and close friendship. [223]                     
The trial judge found that violence was not used
or directly threatened against Mr. Hart (2007 NLTD 74, 265 Nfld. & P.E.I.R.
266, at paras. 58 and 63-65).  However, the police created an aura of
violence.  The respondent was told that sometimes bad deeds had to be done and
was led to believe that one of the operatives had assaulted a sex worker in
retaliation for betrayal.  The operatives also described the Hell’s Angels as
“flunkies” compared to the boss.  As the officer leading the investigation
testified, the purported violence of the organization went “hand in hand with
portraying ourselves to be criminals”.  “Paul” boasted to Hart that he could
kill rats and that “if he ever ratted on me there would be no turning back, it
would be a one way street”. [224]                     
The trial judge found that Hart was motivated by a desire to take a
cut of the profits.  For this he had to take greater risks and gain the trust
of the “boss” (para. 62).  The financial
inducements were significant by anyone’s measure.  But for someone who was
known to live in poverty so extreme that he did not even have a bed to sleep on, they were life
changing: generous wages and per diems, visits to expensive restaurants,
train trips and flights to new cities.  At the voir dire, Hart
explained, “[y]ou know, it was almost like a
new life.”  Given his poverty, it is easy to understand why he did not turn down the opportunity to make such money. [225]                     
The evidence also makes
it clear that, for the respondent, the friendships he believed he had gained were at least as important as the money.  The operatives deliberately separated the respondent from his wife in the
early days of the operation.  They created an alternate reality for the
respondent, intentionally disorienting him to the point that in the final interview
with Mr. Big, he was persuaded that incriminating himself was the only route to
take.  Hart’s fear of losing his new “family” was palpable.  Mr. Hart would
have viewed losing these friendships, around which his life had been totally
restructured, as no choice at all. [226]                     
The trial judge concentrated on the lack of
violent coercion in the operation, but did not consider the effect of the
financial and social inducements on Mr. Hart.  The extent of the deceit and the
inducements used must be viewed as more seriously infringing the respondent’s
autonomy interests, given his known characteristics:  his extreme poverty and
social isolation, and his lack of education and sophistication.  I conclude
that by preying on these vulnerabilities to such a degree, the police deprived
the respondent of meaningful choice about whether to give an incriminating
statement to Mr. Big. (2)    Reliability [227]                     
The incentives for Mr. Hart to have falsely
confessed are very substantial. It was made clear to him that his friendships,
his wages, and his membership in the organization (essentially his new family)
were dependent on telling Mr. Big what he wanted to hear.  In short, he had
every incentive to confess, whether he committed the crime or not. 
Nevertheless, he protested his innocence until it was apparent that only a
confession would be accepted.  Hart testified at the voir dire that the boss “kept saying, don’t lie to me, you are lying to me
Nelson, don’t lie to me.  What was I suppose[d] to do, stay there all day and
go on like that[?]” [230]                     
 The “confession” of April 10 described by the
officers carries many of the same concerns.  The confession was allegedly made
during the 29th scenario, just before the initial 90-day deadline for the
operation (compare, for instance, to McIntyre, where a confession was
obtained after only 10 days).  While at dinner, Jim told Hart that the
organization controlled 70 percent of the prostitution in Montreal and that he
had had to “deal with” two prostitutes who had been dishonest with him.  He
told Hart that sometimes “bad things need to be done”.  Hart responded that he
had “no problem getting his hand dirty”; the two boasted about the skeletons in
their closets; and Hart then allegedly confessed to having killed his
daughters.  Clearly the same reliability concerns arise:  Hart had every reason
to lie, given his desire to impress a member of the organization.  Moreover,
the statement was not recorded, making it impossible to rely on body tone or
language.  Finally, the respondent explicitly denied the April 10 confession,
both during his final “confession” to Mr. Big, when he repeatedly stated that
Mr. Big was the first person he had told about it, and on the voir dire. (3)    Abuse of Power [231]                     
In my view, the state conduct in this case was egregious, and
this factor weighs heavily in favour of exclusion. [232]                     
The police led Mr. Hart through the looking glass into a parallel
universe where, for many months, they employed extensive state resources to
prey on his lack of education, intellect, and life experience, his social
isolation, and his extreme poverty.  The undercover operatives fostered the
respondent’s emotional dependency on them; as Jim noted, it was a “constant
thing” for Hart to tell them he loved them.  Mr. Hart’s beloved friends
gradually involved him in an increasingly serious world of criminality,
beginning with dealing in supposedly stolen goods and eventually portraying the
organization as a violent international group with a boss who made the Hell’s
Angels look like “flunkies”.  As Hart involved himself in more dangerous and
illegal activity, his pay increased. [233]                     
The degree of harm caused by the Mr. Big
operation is also relevant.  The respondent was so thoroughly enmeshed
in his make-believe world that upon his arrest, his first reaction was
to call his supposed “friend”, Jim.  It should have come as no surprise,
particularly to the officers who knew him so well, that Hart was devastated to
learn that his new life, where he had felt valued and respected, had all been a
carefully constructed illusion.  He had no friends.  He had not been employed
because he was “smart”:  rather, he was thoroughly duped.  The respondent
developed paranoia, believing that everyone was part of the “sting” against
him, and was unable to trust his lawyers and even his own wife.[12] 
He was eventually committed to a psychiatric hospital, and amicus curiae made
submissions on his behalf at the appeal.  Such an emotional collapse is by no
means a prerequisite to a finding of abusive state conduct.  However, this kind
of psychological manipulation by state agents harms not only the suspect but
the integrity of the justice system. [234]                     
This was not the usual undercover investigation where police join
an existing criminal organization in order to witness criminals in action.  As
explained above, such strategies tend not to be particularly coercive or
abusive, and therefore are unlikely to violate the principle against
self-incrimination. [235]                     
This case is more akin to entrapment.  The police employed the
power of the state to create an elaborate invented reality, designed to exploit
a vulnerable person, introduce him to criminality, and force him to incriminate
himself.  In addition, the police witnessed the
respondent suffering seizures both before the investigation began and during
the operation itself.  Yet, the undercover operatives continued to send him on
driving assignments. [236]                     
Mr. Big operations are a creative and sometimes useful law
enforcement technique, but the courts must carefully police their boundaries
lest they stray from being useful strategies into ploys that allow the state to
manipulate and destroy the lives of individuals who are presumed to be
innocent. [237]                     
I am greatly troubled by the extreme lengths to
which the police went to pursue the respondent, exploiting his weaknesses in
this protracted and deeply manipulative operation.  The abuse of process
doctrine always remains independently available to provide a remedy where the
conduct of the state rises to such a level that it risks undermining the
integrity of the judicial process (R. v. O’Connor, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 411,
at para. 73; R. v. Babos, 2014 SCC 16, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 309, at para.
31).  In my view, as will be clear from my discussion of the state conduct in
this case, that threshold is met.  To condone the actions of the police would
“leave the impression that the justice system condones conduct that offends
society’s sense of fair play and decency” (Babos, at para. 35). 
However, given the outcome of this appeal, it is not necessary to discuss this
issue further. (4)    Conclusion on Contextual Factors [238]                     
The factors considered above clearly point to a
s. 7  violation.  The accused’s liberty interests were obviously engaged.  The
police procured a confession by preying on the respondent’s particular
vulnerabilities in a complex sting.  Despite going to these lengths, the
confession is of dubious reliability and is unsupported by any corroborative
evidence or detail.  Ultimately, to countenance such a ploy would give the
police carte blanche to engage in unfair, manipulative, and coercive
investigations. B.           
Remedy [239]                     
In White, the Court excluded the
compelled accident report under s. 24(1)  of the Charter  on the basis
that its admission at trial would violate s. 7 .  The acquisition
of the compelled accident report was not impugned.  But where, as in this case,
evidence is obtained in breach of the Charter , s. 24(2)  is the
mechanism for exclusion (R. v. Therens, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 613). [240]                     
Under s. 24(2), the court must determine
whether, in all the circumstances, admitting evidence obtained in breach of the
Charter  would bring the administration of justice into disrepute. [241]                     
In R. v. Grant, 2009 SCC 32, [2009] 2 S.C.R. 353, McLachlin C.J. and Charron J. noted that statements by the accused
engage the cornerstone principle against self-incrimination (at para. 89) and concluded that, while not an absolute
rule, “as a matter of practice, courts have tended to
exclude statements obtained in breach of the Charter , on the ground that
admission on balance would bring the administration of justice into disrepute”
(para. 91). [243]                     
As a result, I agree
with my colleague Moldaver J.’s conclusion that the evidence obtained in the operation must be excluded, and I would dismiss the
appeal.                     Appeal dismissed.                     Solicitor for the appellant:  Attorney General of
Newfoundland and Labrador, St. John’s.                     Solicitors
for the respondent:  Poole Althouse, Corner Brook, Newfoundland and
Labrador.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Director of Public Prosecutions of
Canada:  Public Prosecution Service of Canada, Halifax.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Ontario:  Attorney General
of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the intervener Directeur des poursuites criminelles et
pénales du Québec:  Directeur des poursuites criminelles et pénales
du Québec, Québec.                     Solicitor for the
intervener the Attorney General of British Columbia:  Attorney
General of British Columbia, Victoria.                     Solicitors for the intervener the Association in Defence of the
Wrongly Convicted:  Russell Silverstein & Associate, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the intervener the British
Columbia Civil Liberties Association:  Sugden, McFee & Roos,
Vancouver; Michael Sobkin, Ottawa.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of
Ontario:  Lockyer Campbell Posner, Toronto.                     Solicitors
for the intervener the Canadian Civil Liberties Association:  Addario
Law Group, Toronto.                     Solicitors for the intervener Association des avocats de la défense
de Montréal:  Poupart, Dadour, Touma et Associés, Montréal.                     Solicitors appointed by the Court as amicus
curiae:  Henein Hutchison, Toronto. [1] The officer’s name is protected by a publication ban. [2] This officer’s name is also protected by the publication ban. [3] This conversation was not recorded.  The respondent denied that
this confession occurred. [4]
“Undercover Operations”, B.C. RCMP (online). [5] This rule targets Mr. Big operations in their present form. 
A change in the way the police use undercover operations to elicit confessions
may escape the scope of this rule.  However, it is not for this Court to anticipate
potential developments in policing.  To do so would be speculative.  Time will
tell whether, in a future case, the principles that underlie this rule warrant
extending its application to another context. [6]   It appears that the RCMP have already adopted the practice
of recording a substantial number of the interactions between the accused and
undercover officers in British Columbia (see W. E. Dawson, “The Use of ‘Mr. Big’
in Undercover Operations”, in Criminal Law: Special Issues (2011), Paper
5.2, at p. 5.2.44). [7]   This study relates to incidents of false confessions arising from
conventional police interrogations.  In my view, the groups of people that
present the greatest danger of falsely confessing during conventional
interrogations warrant enhanced scrutiny in the context of Mr. Big operations. [8]   For
example, in R. v. Bonisteel, 2008 BCCA 344, 259 B.C.A.C. 114, admitting
the accused’s confession to Mr. Big also required admitting evidence that the
accused had committed two unrelated, violent sexual assaults.  This evidence
had to be admitted because it was “inextricably interwoven with the undercover
confession” (para. 29).  Obviously, this sort of evidence increases the moral
prejudice that accompanies an accused’s confession. [9]   See, e.g., R. v. S. (R.J.), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 451, where
this Court recognized that witnesses enjoy a protection against the use of
“derivative evidence” discovered as a result of their compelled testimony (at
paras. 165-202), and British Columbia Securities Commission v. Branch,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 3, where this Court recognized that a witness ought to be
exempted from a compulsion to testify where the witness can establish that the
state’s predominant purpose for compelling his testimony is to seek
incriminating evidence against him (paras. 5-12).  [10] Four factors were used to decide whether the principle had been
breached: (1) the existence of coercion; (2) the
existence of an adversarial relationship between the accused and the state; (3)
the prospect that an unreliable confession would be given; and (4) a concern
that admitting the statement would increase the likelihood of abusive conduct
by the state. [11] While these reasons concentrate on its
application to the Mr. Big context, I see no reason why the principle cannot be
adapted to govern other innovative police tactics designed to elicit
confessions. [12] See various case management endorsements at the Court of Appeal: R.
v. Hart, 2011 NLCA 64, 312 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 44; 2011 NLCA 37 (CanLII);
2011 NLCA 29 (CanLII); 2010 NLCA 33, 298 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 152; 2009 NLCA
10, 282 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 346.  