   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Riesberry, 2015 SCC 65, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 1167 Date: 20151218 Docket: 36179  Between: Derek
Riesberry Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent   Coram: Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner, Gascon, Côté and
Brown JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 34)  Cromwell J. (Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
  Wagner, Gascon, Côté and Brown JJ. concurring) Appeal heard and
Judgment rendered: October 13, 2015  Reasons delivered: December
18, 2015    R.
v. Riesberry,
2015 SCC 65, [2015] 3 S.C.R. 1167 Derek Riesberry                                                                                              Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent Indexed as: R. v. Riesberry 2015 SCC 65 File No.: 36179. Hearing and
judgment: October 13, 2015. Reasons delivered: December 18, 2015. Present: Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner, Gascon, Côté and
Brown JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                     R
tried to rig two horse races. He was caught drugging one horse and trying to
sneak syringes with drugs into the track for the purpose of doing the same
thing to another. Bets in excess of $5,000 had been placed on both races. R was
charged with cheating while playing a game, defrauding the public, and
attempting to commit the same offences. At trial, he was acquitted. The Court
of Appeal allowed an appeal and set aside the acquittals. It ordered a new
trial on the cheating counts and entered convictions on the fraud counts.                     Held:
The appeal should be dismissed.                     The
Court of Appeal was correct to order a new trial on the charges of cheating
while playing a game. “Game” is defined as “a game of chance or mixed chance and
skill” in s. 197(1)  of the Criminal Code . The Crown had to
establish that a horse race is a game with a systematic resort to chance to
determine outcomes. There was evidence that post position is determined at
random and that certain post positions are more advantageous than others. The
trial judge failed to consider this evidence upon which a trier of fact could
find that there was systematic resort to chance which made the race a game of
mixed chance and skill. Whether the evidence actually establishes this will be
for the trier of fact at the new trial to determine.                     Fraud
consists of dishonest conduct that results in at least a risk of deprivation to
the victim. Fraudulent conduct for the purposes of a fraud prosecution is not
limited to deception, such as misrepresentations of fact. Rather, fraud
requires proof of deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means. The term “other
fraudulent means” encompasses all other means which can properly be stigmatized
as dishonest. Where the alleged fraudulent act is not in the nature of deceit
or falsehood, the causal link between the dishonest conduct and the deprivation
may not depend on showing that the victim relied on or was induced to act by
the fraudulent act. R’s conduct constituted other fraudulent means because it can
properly be stigmatized as dishonest conduct that caused a risk of deprivation
to the betting public. There is a direct causal relationship between R’s
conduct and a risk of financial deprivation to the betting public. The trial
judge erred in law by finding that the betting public was not put at risk of
deprivation and that any risk of deprivation was too remote.                     The
trial judge made the necessary findings of fact to support the fraud convictions
entered by the Court of Appeal, including in relation to both required aspects
of the required mens rea of fraud. The trial judge found that R knew
that his acts were dishonest and, in the context of the cheating while playing
a game charges, that he knew that his dishonest conduct put bettors at risk of
deprivation. That, after all, is what cheating is. Cases Cited                     Distinguished:
Harless v. United States, 1 Morris 169 (1843); referred to: Ross,
Banks and Dyson v. The Queen, [1968] S.C.R. 786; R. v. Graveline,
2006 SCC 16, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 609; R. v. Théroux, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 5; R.
v. Zlatic, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 29; R. v. Olan, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 1175; Scott
v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, [1975] A.C. 819; Vézina and Côté v.
The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 2; R. v. Cassidy, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 345. Statutes and Regulations Cited Ontario. Racing Commission. Rules of Standardbred Racing, 2008,
r. 10.01.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Simmons, Rouleau and Tulloch
JJ.A.), 2014 ONCA 744, 122 O.R. (3d) 594, 316 C.C.C. (3d) 527, 325 O.A.C. 351,
[2014] O.J. No. 5094 (QL), 2014 CarswellOnt 14907 (WL Can.), setting aside
the accused’s acquittals and ordering a new trial. Appeal dismissed.                     Gregory Lafontaine, for the appellant.                     Michael Kelly and Matthew Asma, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     Cromwell J. — I.             
Introduction [1]                             
This appeal was heard and dismissed, with
reasons to follow, on October 13, 2015. These are the reasons. [2]                             
The appellant, Mr. Riesberry, tried to rig two
horse races by drugging two horses. The question at the bottom of this appeal
is whether the provisions of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 ,
under which he was charged can apply to this conduct. [3]                             
Mr. Riesberry was a licensed trainer of
Standardbred horses. He was caught on video drugging one horse, and caught
trying to sneak syringes with drugs into the track for the purpose of doing the
same thing to another.  For the drugging caught on tape, he was charged with
cheating while playing a game (a horse race) with the intent to defraud the
public wagering money on its outcome (s. 209  of the Criminal Code ) and
with defrauding the public of money wagered on the outcome of a horse race (s.
380(1) ).  For trying to sneak the drugs into the track, he was charged with
attempting to commit the same offences. At trial, he was acquitted. However,
the Ontario Court of Appeal allowed the Crown’s appeal, set aside the
acquittals on all four counts, ordered a new trial on the cheating and
attempted cheating counts (“cheating counts”) and entered convictions on the
fraud and attempted fraud counts (“fraud counts”): 2014 ONCA 744, 122 O.R. (3d)
594. [4]                             
Mr. Riesberry appeals the fraud convictions as
of right and the order for a new trial by leave of the Court. There are four
main issues before us, two concern the cheating counts and two the fraud
counts. [5]                             
With respect to the cheating counts, the main
questions are (i) whether the trial judge made a legal error in his interpretation
of what constitutes a “game”; and (ii) whether there was any evidence that
could establish that a horse race is a “game” as defined in s. 197  of the Criminal
Code  for these offences.  I agree with the Court of Appeal that the trial
judge erred in this respect and that there was evidence that could establish
that a horse race is a game as defined for these offences. [6]                             
The two issues in relation to the fraud
convictions are (i) whether the Court of Appeal was wrong to reverse the trial
judge’s finding that the betting public was not put at risk by his conduct; and
(ii) whether, even if the trial judge made that error, the Court of Appeal was
wrong to have entered convictions rather than ordering a new trial. I also
agree with the Court of Appeal’s disposition of these issues. II.          
Analysis A.          
Brief Overview of the Facts [7]                             
At trial, the judge found that, before a race,
Mr. Riesberry injected a horse, “Everyone’s Fantasy”, with epinephrine and/or clenbuterol
for the purpose of enhancing the horse’s performance in the race. The horse
participated in the race and finished sixth. The trial judge also found that,
on a later occasion, Mr. Riesberry tried to bring a syringe loaded with prohibited
drugs onto raceway property at which another horse, “Good Long Life”, was to
race later that day. Mr. Riesberry was arrested and the horse was scratched
from the race. The trial judge found that Mr. Riesberry, as a licensed trainer,
was bound by rules barring possession of syringes and use of the drugs in
question in order to enhance performance: Ontario Racing Commission, Rules
of Standardbred Racing, 2008, r. 10.01(a) and (b). The trial judge also
found that, in both instances, Mr. Riesberry had breached those rules and
attempted to create an unfair advantage for the horses in the race.
Nonetheless, the trial judge acquitted on all charges. [8]                             
It was undisputed on appeal that bets in excess
of $5,000 had been placed on both races and that the trial judge erred in
saying otherwise: Court of Appeal reasons, at para. 18. B.           
The Cheating at Play Convictions [9]                             
With respect to the cheating while playing a
game charges, the trial judge concluded that a horse race is not a game as
defined in the Criminal Code  and therefore the charges were not made
out. The first issue is whether the trial judge erred in law in his legal
interpretation of what constitutes a “game” for the purposes of this offence. [10]                         
The charges against Mr. Riesberry arise under s.
209  of the Criminal Code  which provides that everyone is guilty of an
offence who, “with intent to defraud any person, cheats while playing a game”.
“Game” is defined as “a game of chance or mixed chance and skill”: s. 197(1) .
It follows that the Crown had to establish that a horse race is a game with at
least some element of chance. The trial judge relied on the U.S. case of Harless
v. United States, 1 Morris 169 (Iowa 1843), to conclude that a horse race
is a game of pure skill. [11]                         
It is somewhat unclear to what extent the trial
judge relied on this authority as stating the law in Canada. However, to the
extent that he did so, he made a legal error. The statute considered by the
U.S. court divided games into only two categories, games of chance and games of
skill. That case, therefore, did not address a point that must be addressed
under the Criminal Code . That point is whether horse racing is a game of
mixed chance and skill. The applicable Canadian law on this point is
found in Ross, Banks and Dyson v. The Queen, [1968] S.C.R. 786. There
must be a “systematic resort to chance” to determine outcomes, not merely the
“unpredictables that may occasionally defeat skill”: p. 791. [12]                         
Even if we were to accept that the trial judge
was alive to this difference between the law as set out in Harless and
Canadian law, he nonetheless erred by failing to consider evidence in the
record upon which a trier of fact could find that there was systematic resort
to chance which made the race a game of mixed chance and skill.  I therefore
conclude that the trial judge erred in law on this aspect of the case. [13]                         
The Court of Appeal’s finding of a legal error
at trial does not, on its own, justify setting aside the acquittals and
ordering a new trial. A new trial may be ordered only if the Crown satisfies
the appellate court that the “error (or errors) of the trial judge might
reasonably be thought, in the concrete reality of the case at hand, to have had
a material bearing on the acquittal”: R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16, [2006]
1 S.C.R. 609, at para. 14, per Fish J. for the majority. Whether the Crown has
satisfied this burden is the second issue. The answer depends in this case on
whether there is in the trial record any evidence which could support a finding
that horse racing has a sufficient element of chance to be considered a game of
mixed chance and skill. Mr. Riesberry claims that there is not while the Crown
says that there is. [14]                         
I agree with the Court of Appeal that the record
at trial contains evidence upon which horse racing, in the present
circumstances, could be found to involve a systematic resort to chance. There
was evidence that post position is determined by a computerized random post
position generator and that certain post positions are more advantageous than
others: Court of Appeal reasons, at para. 41. It follows that the Court of
Appeal was correct to order a new trial on these charges. Of course, whether
the evidence actually establishes this will be for the trier of fact at the new
trial to determine. [15]                         
Like the Court of Appeal, I would not address on
appeal the Crown’s highly fact-driven alternative position that Mr. Riesberry’s
conduct converted what would otherwise be a game of pure skill into one of
mixed chance and skill. [16]                         
To conclude on the cheating counts, the Court of
Appeal correctly ordered a new trial on these charges. C.           
The Fraud Charges [17]                         
Fraud consists of dishonest conduct that results
in at least a risk of deprivation to the victim. The trial judge found that the
Crown had failed to prove that the betting public was at risk of deprivation
due to Mr. Riesberry’s conduct. The trial judge also found that, even if the
Crown had proved deprivation, there was no proof of any causal connection
between Mr. Riesberry’s actions and any risk of loss of the money wagered by the
betting public. [18]                         
The Court of Appeal allowed the Crown’s appeal
from the acquittals. On the fraud charges, the court identified a number of
legal errors such that the acquittals had to be set aside. The court also
concluded that if the trial judge had not made these legal errors, he would
have convicted Mr. Riesberry of both fraud counts. [19]                         
Mr. Riesberry submits first that his conduct did
not put the betting public at risk of deprivation and that any risk of
deprivation was too remote. His second submission is that, even if the trial
judge was wrong about this, the Court of Appeal should not have entered
convictions on the fraud charges, but ought instead to have ordered a new
trial. I will address these points in turn. (1)          
Did Mr. Riesberry’s Fraudulent Acts Cause a Risk
of Deprivation That Was Not Too Remote? [20]                         
Like virtually all offences, fraud consists of
two main components, the prohibited act (actus reus) and the required
state of mind (mens rea). Mr. Riesberry’s submission focuses on one of
the two aspects of the actus reus. Those two aspects are: 1.  . . . an act
of deceit, a falsehood or some other fraudulent means; and  2.   deprivation
caused by the prohibited act, which may consist in actual loss or the placing of
the victim’s pecuniary interests at risk.  (R. v.
Théroux, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 5, at p. 20; R. v. Zlatic, [1993] 2 S.C.R.
29, at p. 43) [21]                         
The issue here concerns the aspect of
deprivation. Mr. Riesberry contends that there was no evidence that his
fraudulent conduct caused any risk of deprivation or that at least any such
risk was too remote from his conduct. He submits that the Crown did not
establish that anyone betting on the race had been induced to bet by, or would
not have bet but for, his fraudulent conduct. [22]                         
I cannot accept this position. Contrary to Mr.
Riesberry’s contention, proof of fraud does not always depend on showing that
the alleged victim relied on the fraudulent conduct or was induced
by it to act to his or her detriment. What is required in all cases is proof
that there is a sufficient causal connection between the fraudulent act and the
victim’s risk of deprivation. In some cases, this causal link may be
established by showing that the victim of the fraud acted to his or her
detriment as a result of relying on or being induced to act by the accused’s
fraudulent conduct. But this is not the only way the causal link may be
established. [23]                         
We should first be clear about what Mr.
Riesberry’s fraudulent conduct was before turning to the question of whether it
caused a risk of deprivation. Fraudulent conduct for the purposes of a fraud
prosecution is not limited to deception, such as deception by
misrepresentations of fact. Rather, fraud requires proof of “deceit, falsehood
or other fraudulent means”: s. 380(1). The term “other fraudulent means”
encompasses “all other means which can properly be stigmatized as dishonest”: R.
v. Olan, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 1175, at p. 1180. The House of Lords made the same
point in Scott v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, [1975] A.C. 819, a
case approved by the Court in Olan (p. 1181). Fraud, according to
Viscount Dilhorne in Scott, may consist of depriving “a person
dishonestly of something which is his or of something to which he is or would
or might but for the perpetration of the fraud be entitled”: p. 839.  And as
Lord Diplock said, the fraudulent means “need not involve fraudulent
misrepresentation such as is needed to constitute the civil tort of deceit”: ibid.,
at p. 841. [24]                         
It follows that where the alleged fraudulent act
is not in the nature of deceit or falsehood, such as a misrepresentation of
fact, the causal link between the dishonest conduct and the deprivation may not
depend on showing that the victim relied on or was induced to act by the
fraudulent act. This is such a case. [25]                         
Mr. Riesberry injected and attempted to inject the
racehorses with performance-enhancing substances. The use of such drugs is
prohibited and trainers such as Mr. Riesberry are prohibited even from
possessing loaded syringes at a racetrack. This conduct constituted “other
fraudulent means” because in the highly regulated setting in which he acted,
that conduct can “properly be stigmatized as dishonest”: Olan, at
p. 1180. He carried out these dishonest acts for the purpose of affecting the
outcome of two horse races on which members of the public placed bets.  His
dishonest acts, therefore, were intended to and in one case actually did result
in the possibility that a horse that might otherwise have won would not. The
conduct therefore caused a risk of deprivation to the betting public: it
created the risk of betting on a horse that, but for Mr. Riesberry’s dishonest
acts, might have won and led to a payout to the persons betting on that horse.
To return to Viscount Dilhorne’s words in Scott, Mr. Riesberry’s
dishonest conduct created a risk that bettors would be deprived dishonestly of
something which, but for the dishonest act, they might have obtained. [26]                         
There is a direct causal relationship between
Mr. Riesberry’s dishonest acts and the risk of financial deprivation to the
betting public. Simply put, a rigged race creates a risk of prejudice to the
economic interests of bettors. Provided that a causal link exists, the absence
of inducement or reliance is irrelevant. I agree with the Court of Appeal that
Mr. Riesberry’s reliance on Vézina and
Côté v. The Queen, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 2, is misplaced.
That case made it clear that [f]raud
consists of being dishonest for the purpose of obtaining an advantage and which
results in prejudice or a risk of prejudice to someone’s “property, money or
valuable security”. There is no need to target a victim . . . and the victim
may not be ascertained. [p. 19] [27]                         
This statement covers what Mr. Riesberry did. [28]                         
I conclude that the trial judge erred in law by
finding that the betting public was not put at risk of deprivation by Mr.
Riesberry’s dishonest acts and that any risk of deprivation was too remote. (2)          
Was the Court of Appeal Wrong to Enter Convictions
Rather Than Order a New Trial? [29]                         
Mr. Riesberry submits that the Court of Appeal
erred by entering convictions because the trial judge had not made all of the
necessary findings of fact to support those convictions: see R. v. Cassidy,
[1989] 2 S.C.R. 345, at pp. 354-55. These submissions focus on what Mr.
Riesberry contends is the absence of the necessary findings of fact in relation
to the mental element or mens rea of fraud. [30]                         
The mental element of fraud consists of two
states of mind: 1.     
subjective knowledge of the prohibited act; and  2.   subjective knowledge that the prohibited act could have as a consequence
the deprivation of another (which deprivation may consist in knowledge that the
victim’s pecuniary interests are put at risk).  (Théroux,
at p. 20; Zlatic, at p. 43) [31]                         
Mr. Riesberry’s position is that the trial judge,
having dismissed the fraud charges on the basis of no proof of the actus
reus, did not go on to make findings in relation to these two aspects of
the required mens rea. However, I agree with the Court of Appeal that
the trial judge in fact did make the necessary findings. [32]                         
There can be no doubt that the trial judge found
that Mr. Riesberry knew that his acts were dishonest, which is the first aspect
of the mens rea. The trial judge found that his conduct was for the
purpose of enhancing his horses’ performances, not for any legitimate medical
purpose. As for the second aspect, the trial judge held, in his analysis of the
same record in the context of the cheating while playing a game charges, that
Mr. Riesberry’s conduct amounted to cheating. In other words, he intended to
create an unfair advantage for his horses in their races. This is a finding of
fact that Mr. Riesberry knew that his dishonest conduct put bettors at risk of
deprivation.  That, after all, is what cheating is. (3)          
Conclusion [33]                         
In my view, Mr. Riesberry’s submissions in
relation to the fraud charges cannot be accepted. III.       
Disposition [34]                         
As announced at the conclusion of the hearing of
the appeal, the appeal is dismissed.                     Appeal
dismissed.                     Solicitors
for the appellant: Lafontaine & Associates, Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
respondent: Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.   