SCC Case Information: 37372   SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. George, 2017 SCC 38, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 1021 Appeal
  heard and Judgment rendered: April 28, 2017 Reasons
  delivered: July 7, 2017 Docket: 37372  Between: Barbara
George Appellant  and  Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent     Coram: Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Gascon, and Côté JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 29) Gascon J. (Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis
  and Côté concurring)    R. v. George, 2017 SCC 38, [2017] 1 S.C.R. 1021 Barbara George                                                                                              Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent Indexed as: R. v. George 2017 SCC 38 File No.: 37372. Hearing and
judgment: April 28, 2017. Reasons delivered: July 7, 2017. Present: Abella, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Gascon and Côté JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for saskatchewan                     Criminal
law — Defences — Mistake of age — Appeals — Jurisdiction of Court of Appeal —
Verdict of acquittal — Accused charged with sexual offences against youth — Availability
of mistake of age defence limited by requirement that accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain complainant’s age — Whether trial judge made legal errors in reasonable steps analysis — If so, whether errors were sufficiently
material to justify appellate intervention — Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46,
s. 150.1(4) .                     When
G was 35 years old, she had sex with C.D., a male youth who was
approximately 14 and a half. At the time, she presumed that C.D. was around 17.
G was charged with the offences of sexual interference and sexual assault. Her
only available defence was mistake of age. Section 150.1(4)  of the Criminal
Code  limits the availability of the mistake of age defence by requiring
that the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain
the age of the complainant. The trial judge acquitted G
of both offences based on a reasonable doubt about whether the Crown proved
that she had failed to take all reasonable steps to determine C.D.’s age. The
majority of the Court of Appeal allowed an appeal, quashed the acquittals and
ordered a new trial.                     Held:
The appeal should be allowed and the acquittals restored.                     Crown
appeals against acquittals in proceedings by indictment are limited to
questions of law alone. The trial judgment concerned indictable offences and
contained no errors of law. As a result, the Court of Appeal lacked
jurisdiction to interfere.                     Whether
an error is legal generally turns on its character, not its severity. The
majority of the Court of Appeal erred by translating strong opposition to the
trial judge’s factual inferences into supposed legal errors. The trial judge
did not rely on C.D.’s level of sexual experience as revealed by the sexual
encounter itself. Rather, the trial judge considered information known to G
before sexual contact, such as how C.D. came to her bedroom uninvited and spoke
with her for several hours about various topics, many reflecting maturity,
others suggestive in nature. No legal error arises from this. This was a
reference to C.D.’s conduct in the hours before the sexual contact, a factor
reasonably informing G’s perception of C.D.’s age before sexual contact. The
trial judge also did not err by considering evidence that did not precede the
sexual encounter. Reasonable steps must precede the sexual activity but
requiring that the evidence to prove reasonable steps must also precede the
sexual activity conflates the fact to be proven with the evidence that may be
used to prove it. When determining the relevance of evidence, both its purpose
and its timing must be considered. Evidence properly informing the credibility
or reliability of any witness, even if that evidence arose after the sexual
activity in question, may be considered by the trial judge. Similarly, evidence
demonstrating the reasonableness of the accused person’s perception of the
complainant’s age before sexual contact is relevant, even if that evidence
happens to arise after the sexual activity or was not known to the accused
before the sexual activity.                     Even
if the trial judge had made legal errors, they would not have justified the
intervention of the Court of Appeal. The threshold of materiality required to
justify appellate intervention in a Crown appeal from an acquittal is an error
about which there is a reasonable degree of certainty of its materiality. That
threshold is not met in this case. There was no reasonable degree of certainty
that the alleged errors were material to the trial judge’s verdict. Cases Cited                     Referred
to: R. v. Duran, 2013 ONCA 343, 3 C.R. (7th) 274; R. v. P. (L.T.)
(1997), 113 C.C.C. (3d) 42; R. v. K. (R.A.) (1996), 106 C.C.C. (3d) 93; R.
v. Tannas, 2015 SKCA 61, 21 C.R. (7th) 166; R.
v. Gashikanyi, 2015 ABCA 1, 588 A.R. 386; R. v. Dragos, 2012 ONCA
538, 111 O.R. (3d) 481; R. v. Osborne (1992), 17 C.R. (4th) 350; R.
v. J.M.H., 2011 SCC 45, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 197; R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16, [2006] 1
S.C.R. 609; R. v. Morrisey
(1995), 97 C.C.C. (3d) 193; R. v. Mastel, 2011 SKCA 16, 84 C.R. (6th) 405; R. v. Morin, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 345. Statutes and Regulations Cited Authors Cited Benedet, Janine. Annotation to R. v. Mastel (2011), 84 C.R.
(6th) 405. Benedet,
Janine. Comment on R. v. Tannas (2015), 21 C.R. (7th) 166. Manning, Mewett & Sankoff: Criminal Law,
5th ed., by Morris Manning and Peter Sankoff. Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2015. Vandervort, Lucinda. “‘Too Young to Sell Me Sex?!’ Mens Rea,
Mistake of Fact, Reckless Exploitation, and the Underage Sex Worker” (2012), 58
Crim. L.Q. 355.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal (Richards C.J. and
Jackson and Whitmore JJ.A.), 2016 SKCA 155, 344 C.C.C. (3d) 543, [2016]
S.J. No. 637 (QL), 2016 CarswellSask 754 (WL Can.), setting aside the
accused’s acquittals for sexual interference and sexual assault entered by
Kovach J. and ordering a new trial. Appeal allowed.                     Ross Macnab and Thomas Hynes, for
the appellant.                     Erin Bartsch, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by  [1]                             
Gascon J. — At the hearing, the Court allowed the
appeal and restored Ms. George’s acquittals, with reasons to follow. These are
those reasons. I.              
Overview [2]                             
Sexual crimes are disproportionately committed
against vulnerable populations, including youth. The “reasonable steps” requirement
in s. 150.1(4)  of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46  — which
requires an accused person who is five or more years older than a complainant
who is 14 years of age or more but under the age of 16, to take “all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the complainant” before
sexual contact — seeks to protect young people from
such crimes. It does so by placing the responsibility for preventing
adult/youth sexual activity where it belongs: with adults. Parliament’s
allocation of responsibility to adults is crucial for protecting young people
from sexual crimes. However, through s. 676(1) (a) of the Criminal Code ,
Parliament limits Crown appeals against acquittals in proceedings by indictment
to “question[s] of law alone”. As a result, Parliament has accepted that an
acquittal at trial on an indictable offence cannot be overturned unless an
error of law was made. As the trial judgment below concerned indictable
offences and contained no errors of law, Ms. George’s acquittals were sustained
and her appeal was allowed. II.           
Context [3]                             
Ms. George had sex with an adolescent boy, C.D.
When the sexual activity took place, Ms. George was 35 years old; C.D. was
approximately 14 and a half. The sexual activity was found to be apparently
consensual, meaning that both partners willingly participated. In fact, C.D.
instigated the sexual encounter, despite Ms. George’s genuine protestations.
Still, C.D. was incapable of legally consenting because of the combination of
his young age and his age disparity with Ms. George. [4]                             
The sexual activity happened after Ms. George’s
son — who was 17 at the time — hosted a party at their apartment. Ms. George
did not foresee sexual activity with C.D. For most of the party, she remained
in her bedroom. However, after the party ended, C.D. came to the bedroom. They
spoke for several hours about music, custody issues, C.D.’s relationships, and
his difficulties meeting mature girlfriends. [5]                             
Ultimately, C.D. initiated sexual contact. He
asked Ms. George if it “would be weird” if he kissed her. Almost
simultaneously, C.D. leaned forward to kiss Ms. George. She backed away, but
C.D. again moved towards her, and she let him complete a brief kiss. C.D. then
“immediately” moved on top of Ms. George, removed the blankets which were
covering her body, lowered his pants, and moved her underwear to the side. She
asked him what he was doing. She also asked him to stop several times. But he
ignored these requests and persisted. In the end, Ms. George “simply let him
finish”. She described the sexual encounter as “weird, awkward, and quick”.
Despite these facts, there was “no dispute that, although reluctant at first,
Ms. George was a willing participant”. Further, before the Court, neither party
contested Ms. George’s consent to the sexual activity. [6]                             
C.D. did not complain to any authorities about
his sexual activity with Ms. George; he even proposed that they continue
having sex once a week. Rather, the RCMP learned about Ms. George’s sexual
activity with C.D. by happenstance. Ms. George applied to join the RCMP,
and part of the screening process involved a questionnaire which asked if she
had “ever engaged in sexual activity with someone who was under the age of 16”.
At the time of the sexual activity, Ms. George had presumed that C.D. was
around 17 because, in the several months she had known C.D., he looked that
age, shaved, openly smoked cigarettes, easily bought cigarettes, and was a
friend of her son (who was himself 17, typically socialized with older peers,
and displayed less emotional maturity than C.D.). But the questionnaire
prompted her to inquire as to C.D.’s exact age. When she learned that C.D. had
actually been 14 and a half at the time of their sexual activity, she “felt
panic”. She nevertheless submitted the questionnaire and admitted to the RCMP
that she had engaged in sexual activity with a minor. Consequently, she was
charged with two Criminal Code  offences: (1) sexual interference (s.
151 ); and (2) sexual assault (s. 271 ). [7]                             
For both offences, the Criminal Code  barred
Ms. George from relying on C.D.’s consent as a defence, because C.D. was
younger than 16 (s. 150.1(1) ) and Ms. George was more than five years his
senior (s. 150.1(2.1) ). Accordingly, her only available defence — or, more
accurately, her only available means of negating her criminal intent (mens
rea) to have sex with a minor (H. C. Stewart, Sexual Offences in
Canadian Law (loose-leaf), at p. 4-24) — was “mistake of age”, i.e.
Ms. George believing that C.D. was at least 16. However, the Criminal Code 
limits the availability of the mistake of age defence by requiring that “all
reasonable steps” be taken to ascertain the complainant’s age: 150.1
. . . Mistake
of age (4) It is not a
defence to a charge under section 151  or 152 , subsection 160(3)  or 173(2) , or
section 271 , 272  or 273  that the accused believed that the complainant was 16
years of age or more at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed
unless the accused took all reasonable steps to ascertain the age of the
complainant. [8]                             
     At common law, “true crimes” — like those
at issue here — would have a purely subjective fault element. However, through
statutory intervention, Parliament has imported an objective element into the
fault analysis to enhance protections for youth (Stewart, at pp. 4-23 and
4-24). As a result, to convict an accused person who demonstrates an “air of
reality” to the mistake of age defence, the Crown must prove, beyond a
reasonable doubt, either that the accused person (1) did not honestly believe
the complainant was at least 16 (the subjective element); or (2) did not take
“all reasonable steps” to ascertain the complainant’s age (the objective
element) (Stewart, at p. 4-24; M. Manning, Q.C., and P. Sankoff, Manning,
Mewett & Sankoff: Criminal Law (5th ed. 2015), at p. 1113 (“Manning,
Mewett & Sankoff”)). [9]                             
Determining what raises a reasonable doubt in
respect of the objective element is a highly contextual, fact-specific exercise
(R. v. Duran, 2013 ONCA 343, 3 C.R. (7th) 274, at para. 52; R. v. P.
(L.T.) (1997), 113 C.C.C. (3d) 42 (B.C.C.A.), at para. 20; R. v. K.
(R.A.) (1996), 106 C.C.C. (3d) 93 (N.B.C.A.), at p. 96; Stewart, at p.
4-25; A. Maleszyk, Crimes Against Children: Prosecution and Defence
(loose-leaf), vol. 1, at p. 11-4). In some cases, it may be reasonable to ask a
partner’s age. It would be an error, however, to insist that a reasonable
person would ask a partner’s age in every case (see e.g. R. v. Tannas,
2015 SKCA 61, 21 C.R. (7th) 166, at para. 27; R. v. Gashikanyi, 2015
ABCA 1, 588 A.R. 386, at para. 17). Conversely, it would be an error to assert
that a reasonable person would do no more than ask a partner’s age in every
case, given the commonly recognized motivation for young people to misrepresent
their age (R. v. Dragos, 2012 ONCA 538, 111 O.R. (3d) 481, at paras. 17,
26, 45 and 51; L. Vandervort, “‘Too Young to Sell Me Sex?!’ Mens Rea,
Mistake of Fact, Reckless Exploitation, and the Underage Sex Worker” (2012), 58
Crim. L.Q. 355, at pp. 360 and 375; J. Benedet, Comment on R. v.
Tannas (2015), 21 C.R. (7th) 166, at p. 168; Stewart, at p. 4-26.1). Such
narrow approaches would contradict the open-ended language of the reasonable
steps provision. That said, at least one general rule may be recognized: the
more reasonable an accused’s perception of the complainant’s age, the fewer
steps reasonably required of them. This follows inevitably from the phrasing of
the provision (“all reasonable steps”) and reflects the jurisprudence (R.
v. Osborne (1992), 17 C.R. (4th) 350 (Nfld. C.A.), at para. 64), and
academic commentary (Manning, Mewett & Sankoff, at p. 1113). III.         
Judicial History [10]                         
At trial, Kovach J. acquitted Ms. George of both
offences. He noted that the reasonable steps inquiry is contextual, and he
considered various factors, including C.D.’s physical appearance, behaviour and
activities, the age and appearance of C.D.’s social group, and the
circumstances in which Ms. George had observed C.D. After a detailed review of
these factors, Kovach J. ruled that there remained a reasonable doubt about
whether the Crown proved that she had failed to take all reasonable steps to
determine C.D.’s age. [11]                         
The Court of Appeal’s judgment included majority
and dissenting opinions. They were divided on two points: (1) whether Kovach J.
had made any legal errors, a statutory requirement for Crown appeals from
acquittals for indictable offences (Criminal Code, s. 676(1) (a); R.
v. J.M.H., 2011 SCC 45, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 197, at para. 24); and (2) whether
those errors were sufficiently material to the verdict, a jurisprudential
requirement for such appeals (R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16, [2006] 1
S.C.R. 609, at para. 14). [12]                         
Richards C.J.S., writing for the majority,
allowed the appeal, quashed the acquittals and ordered a new trial (2016 SKCA
155, 344 C.C.C. (3d) 543, at paras. 50-51). He held that Kovach J. had erred in
law in two ways: (1) by considering evidence from during or after the sexual
encounter in assessing the reasonableness of the steps taken by Ms. George
before the encounter; and (2) by relying on questionable factual inferences
regarding whether C.D. may have looked mature for his age at the time of the
sexual activity (paras. 41-46). He also ruled that those legal errors were
“central” to Kovach J.’s analysis, thus demonstrating their materiality to the
verdict and justifying appellate intervention (paras. 48-49). [13]                         
In contrast, Jackson J.A., dissenting, would
have dismissed the appeal and upheld the acquittals (para. 100). In her view,
Kovach J. had made no legal errors (para. 89). Specifically, the errors which
Richards C.J.S. alleged to be legal related instead to disagreement over
factual inferences drawn by the trial judge (paras. 77-80, 85-88 and 92). In
the alternative, Jackson J.A. held that the errors which Richard C.J.S.
identified, if legal, were insufficiently material to justify appellate
intervention because she was not satisfied that the verdict would not
“necessarily” have been the same without those errors (paras. 73, 94 and 99).
At multiple points in her reasons, Jackson J.A. also felt it necessary to
remark that this case lacked the hallmarks of sex crimes involving children,
such as grooming and deliberate exploitation of vulnerability (paras. 65-67,
96(d) to (f) and 97). IV.        
Issues [14]                         
This case raises two issues: (1) whether the
trial judge made any legal errors in his reasonable steps analysis; and (2) if
he did, whether those errors were sufficiently material to justify appellate
intervention. V.           
Analysis [15]                         
A careful review of the trial judge’s reasons
reveals no legal errors. As a result, the Court of Appeal lacked jurisdiction
to interfere with the trial judgment. [16]                         
I note, at the outset, that the trial judge
correctly articulated the governing legal principles and cited multiple leading
authorities. Of course, simply stating the correct legal test does not exhaust
our inquiry and cannot insulate a trial judge from legal errors. But it
helpfully orients our remaining analysis to whether the trial judge’s
application of those principles reveals any legal errors. [17]                         
Whether an error is “legal” generally turns on
its character, not its severity (J.M.H., at paras. 24-39). In this case,
the majority confused these two concepts; it translated its strong opposition
to the trial judge’s factual inferences (severity) into supposed legal errors
(character). Here, that was an improper approach, and it disregarded the
restraint required by Parliament’s choice to limit Crown appeals from
acquittals in proceedings by indictment to “question[s] of law alone” (Criminal
Code, s. 676(1) (a)). [18]                         
First of all, it goes without saying that an
accused person cannot rely on the impugned sexual activity itself as a
reasonable step in ascertaining the complainant’s age before the sexual
activity. With this in mind, the majority claimed that the trial judge had
improperly relied on “C.D.’s level of sexual experience as revealed by the
sexual encounter itself” in determining whether Ms. George had taken all
reasonable steps before the sexual activity (para. 47). However, this
misconstrues the trial judge’s reasons when they are read as a whole and in
context, as required (R. v. Morrisey (1995), 97 C.C.C. (3d) 193, at pp.
203-4). The trial judge explained: The most compelling activity
engaged in by [C.D.] suggestive of a level of maturity beyond his years, was
the sexual encounter itself. Not the mere fact of sexual intercourse with a
significantly older female partner, but, rather, the obvious level of comfort
with which he approached the encounter . . . . [Emphasis added.]  (Trial
Transcript, A.R., at p. 11) [19]                         
Considered in conjunction with the trial judge’s
unambiguous recognition that all reasonable steps must precede sexual contact,
C.D.’s “obvious level of comfort” with how he “approached” the encounter must
refer to how C.D. came to Ms. George’s bedroom uninvited and spoke with
her for several hours about various topics, many reflecting maturity, and
others suggestive in nature. All of this information was known to Ms. George
before the sexual contact. According to the trial judge, this was one of many
factors reasonably informing her perception of C.D.’s age before sexual
contact. No legal error arises from this. [20]                         
Admittedly, the trial judge considered other
evidence that did not precede the sexual encounter. The majority considered
this to be a further legal error. But it is not. As noted, Ms. George’s
reasonable steps must precede her sexual activity with C.D.; the trial judge
expressly recognized this. But it does not follow that the evidence she tenders
must also precede her sexual activity with C.D. Such an interpretation
conflates the fact to be proven with the evidence that may be used to prove it. [21]                         
When determining the relevance of evidence in
this context, both its purpose and its timing must be considered. Evidence demonstrating
steps taken after the sexual activity to ascertain a complainant’s age — for
example, the accused person checking the complainant’s photographic
identification immediately after the sexual activity — is irrelevant to the
reasonable steps inquiry. As a result, considering such evidence would amount
to a legal error, as it reveals a “misapprehension of . . . legal principle” (J.M.H.,
at para. 29). However, evidence properly informing the credibility or
reliability of any witness, even if that evidence arose after the sexual
activity in question, may be considered by the trial judge. Similarly, evidence
demonstrating the reasonableness of the accused person’s perception of the
complainant’s age before sexual contact is relevant to adjudicating the reasonableness
of the steps taken by the accused person (Duran, at paras. 51-54), even
if that evidence happens to arise after the sexual activity or was not known to
the accused before the sexual activity (see e.g. Osborne, at para. 22(4)
and (5)). [22]                         
For example, consider a photograph of an
underage complainant taken a week after impugned sexual activity, in which the
complainant looks as old as 21. The adult charged with assaulting the
complainant could not have relied on viewing the photograph itself as one of
their reasonable steps, because it was taken after the sexual activity
occurred. But that is not the purpose for which the photograph would be
tendered as evidence. Rather, the photograph would be tendered as evidence for
the purpose of proving the complainant’s physical appearance around the time of
the sexual activity, which could, depending on the circumstances, be relevant
to the reasonableness of the accused person’s perception of the complainant’s
age. [23]                         
The evidence arising after the sexual activity
considered by the trial judge in this case, to which the majority objected (at
para. 34), did not detract from and was consistent with Ms. George’s testimony
as to how C.D. appeared to her and acted in her presence during the several
months they knew each other before the sexual encounter. To that extent, it was
admissible for the purpose of assessing her credibility at large, which
included her testimony as to how the complainant appeared to her in the months
preceding the sexual activity. [24]                         
While one may disagree with the weight the trial
judge gave this evidence, no legal error arises from mere disagreements over
factual inferences or the weight of evidence (J.M.H., at para. 28).
Indeed, many of the majority’s comments reveal that its discomfort with this
evidence was not because it was irrelevant (which would have illustrated a
misconception of principle, a legal issue: ibid., at para. 29), but
because its relevance was marginal (a factual issue). The trier of fact is best
situated to assign weight to evidence. In any event, if the Crown objects to
inferences about a complainant’s physical appearance at a younger age, it is
permitted to tender direct evidence of that physical appearance (for example, a
photograph). The majority’s view that the trial judge could not draw such an
inference because Ms. George had failed to tender evidence proving that C.D.’s
appearance “had not changed” between ages 14 and 17 (para. 46) suggests that
the trier of fact is prohibited from drawing factual inferences. To the
contrary, factual inferences are a necessary means through which triers of fact
consider all of the evidence (direct and indirect) before them. [25]                         
Given the above, the Court of Appeal lacked
jurisdiction to review the trial judge’s decision. On that basis, the Court
allowed the appeal. That said, two final points arising from the dissent merit
brief consideration. [26]                         
First, the dissenting judge felt it necessary to
comment on how this case lacks the hallmarks of sex crimes against children,
including grooming and exploitation of vulnerability (paras. 65-67, 96(d) to
(f) and 97). But no such hallmarks are required for the offences at issue. It
is a criminal offence to sexually touch a child who is 14 years of age or more
but younger than 16 when you are five or more years their senior, even if you
honestly believe they are older than 16, unless you have taken “all reasonable
steps” to ascertain their age; nothing more is required (Benedet, at p. 167).
Indeed, to suggest that exploitation is a requirement for the offence belies
(1) the scheme of the Criminal Code , which already prohibits sexual
exploitation (s. 153 ) and sexual activity where “consent” is procured through
abuse of trust, power or authority (s. 273.1(2) (c)); and (2) Parliament’s
recognition that adult/youth sexual relationships are inherently exploitative.
To the extent that the dissent was suggesting that such ancillary
considerations are necessary in proving all sex crimes against children, I
reject that proposition. To be clear, overt indicia of exploitation may
diminish the credibility of an accused person’s purported mistaken belief in
the complainant’s age, or the reasonableness of the steps taken by that accused
person (see e.g. Dragos, at para. 52; R. v. Mastel, 2011 SKCA 16,
84 C.R. (6th) 405, at para. 18; J. Benedet, Annotation to R. v. Mastel
(2015), 84 C.R. (6th) 405, at p. 406), but they are not required for the
offence itself to be made out. [27]                         
Second, the dissent stated that, to overturn an
acquittal, an appellate court must be satisfied that the verdict would “not
necessarily have been the same” without the trial judge’s legal errors (paras.
74 and 99, see also paras. 73 and 94). If the dissent was implying that an
appellate court can overturn an acquittal where it is merely possible that the
verdict would have changed, that is too low a threshold. This Court has used
various phrasings to articulate the threshold of materiality required to
justify appellate intervention in a Crown appeal from an acquittal. An
“abstract or purely hypothetical possibility” of materiality is below the
threshold (Graveline, at para. 14). An error that “would necessarily”
have been material is above the threshold (ibid., at paras. 14-15; R.
v. Morin, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 345, at p. 374). And an error about which there
is a “reasonable degree of certainty” of its materiality is at the required
threshold (Graveline, at paras. 14-15; Morin, at p. 374). [28]                         
That threshold is not met here. The allegations
of errors on the trial judge’s part that have arguable merit relate to two pieces
of corroborative evidence. Further, that evidence was surrounded by alternate
evidence — including C.D.’s physical appearance, behaviour and activities, the
age and appearance of C.D.’s social group, and the circumstances in which Ms.
George had observed C.D. — all of which supported the trial judge’s view that
reasonable doubt remained in respect of whether the Crown had proven that Ms.
George failed to meet the reasonable steps requirement. In my view, there was
no reasonable degree of certainty that the trial judge’s controversial
inferences were material to his verdict. It follows that, even if these
inferences had amounted to legal errors, they would not have justified
appellate intervention in any event. VI.        
Conclusion [29]                         
As explained in these reasons, the trial judge’s
factual inferences did not amount to legal errors conferring appellate
jurisdiction in this case. This is why, at the hearing, the Court allowed the
appeal, and restored Ms. George’s acquittals.                     Appeal
allowed.                     Solicitors for the
appellant: Gerrand Rath Johnson, Regina.                     Solicitor for the
respondent: Attorney General of Saskatchewan, Regina.  