  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation:
  R. v. Hay, 2013 SCC 61, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 694 Date:
  20131108 Docket:
  33536  Between: Leighton
Hay Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent  Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell
and Wagner JJ.  Reasons for
  Judgment: (paras. 1 to 78)  Concurring
  Reasons: (paras. 79 to 102) Rothstein J. (McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Cromwell
  and Wagner JJ. concurring)  Fish J.   R. v. Hay, 2013 SCC 61, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 694 Leighton Hay                                                                                                   Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent Indexed as:  R. v. Hay 2013 SCC 61 File No.:  33536. 2013:  April 23; 2013:  November 8. Present: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein,
Cromwell and Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                     Criminal law — Charge to jury — Eyewitness
evidence — Whether trial judge instructed jury that it could convict accused
based on eyewitness evidence alone — If so, whether such an instruction would
constitute an error.                     In
the early morning of July 6, 2002, two men, one wearing a blue/green
shirt, shot and killed C.M. in a Toronto nightclub.  E was seen leaving the
club in a car registered to the appellant H’s mother, with whom H lived.  Multiple
witnesses were able to confidently identify E as the shooter.  Given H’s
connection to the residence and a database lookup that revealed he had a prior
firearm conviction, the police considered him a suspect as well.  L.M., who
witnessed the shooting, was shown a lineup which included one photo of H that
was taken roughly two years earlier.  When asked about the identity of the
shooter in the blue/green shirt, she selected H’s photo.  Three weeks after the
shooting, L.M. participated in a second photo lineup which contained the photo
of H taken on the day of his arrest.  L.M. did not select any photo from this
sequence.  E and H were subsequently charged with the first degree murder of
C.M. and the attempted murder of his brother.                     While
the application for leave to appeal was pending before this Court, H filed a
motion to compel the Crown to release hair clipping
evidence for forensic testing.  H sought to forensically examine the hair
clippings to determine from what part of the body the clippings came.  This
Court allowed the motion.  H subsequently filed a motion to adduce the reports
and testimony of experts who conducted the forensic examination.                     Held:
 The appeal should be allowed, the motion to adduce fresh evidence should be
granted and the matter should be remanded for retrial.                     Per Fish J.:  There is agreement that the appellant’s motion to adduce
fresh evidence should be granted, that the appeal should be allowed and that a
new trial should be ordered.  However, the trial judge made a fatal error by
instructing the jury that it could convict the appellant on the evidence of L.M.
alone.                     Crown
counsel asked the judge to instruct the jury that they could convict the
appellant on the evidence of one eyewitness alone.  Counsel made clear that he
was referring specifically to the testimony of L.M.  In his closing address,
Crown counsel proceeded on the understanding that the trial judge would charge
the jury to that effect. At no point in his charge did the trial judge correct
these assertions by the Crown.  Pursuant to the Crown’s closing argument, the
jury would thus have assumed that it was entitled to convict the appellant
based solely on L.M.’s eyewitness identification.  This misapprehension of the
law was reinforced by the trial judge in his instructions to the jury.  Although
the trial judge urged caution, he informed the jury in unmistakable terms that
the testimony of one eyewitness could properly ground a conviction.  The jury
would therefore have understood that this rule applied unless instructed
otherwise for a particular witness.  No such instruction was ever given.  On
the contrary, the trial judge explained that identification evidence is
stronger if the accused was previously known to the witness.  This was
indisputably a direct reference to L.M.’s evidence implicating the appellant.  The
trial judge’s subsequent instructions regarding L.M.’s evidence further
reinforced Crown counsel’s uncorrected statement to the jury that they could
convict the appellant on her photo identification alone.  It is not possible in
light of this record to conclude that the trial judge did not instruct the jury
that it could convict the appellant on the evidence of L.M. alone. Cases Cited By Rothstein J.                     Applied:
 Palmer v. The Queen, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759; referred to:  R. v.
Hay, 2010 SCC 54, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 206; R. v. Mezzo, [1986] 1 S.C.R.
802; R. v. Turnbull, [1976] 3 All E.R. 549; R. v. Hibbert, 2002
SCC 39, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 445; R. v. Canning, [1986] 1 S.C.R. 991; R.
v. Nikolovski, [1996] 3 S.C.R. 1197; R. v. Arcuri, 2001 SCC 54,
[2001] 2 S.C.R. 828; R. v. Reitsma, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 769, rev’g (1997),
97 B.C.A.C. 303; R. v. Zurowski, 2004 SCC 72, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 509; United
States of America v. Shephard, [1977] 2 S.C.R. 1067; R. v. Jaw, 2009
SCC 42, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 26; R. v. Avetysan, 2000 SCC 56, [2000] 2 S.C.R.
745; R. v. Candir, 2009 ONCA 915, 257 O.A.C. 119; R. v. Pickton,
2010 SCC 32, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 198; R. v. G.D.B., 2000 SCC 22, [2000] 1
S.C.R. 520; R. v. M. (P.S.) (1992), 77 C.C.C. (3d) 402; McMartin v.
The Queen, [1964] S.C.R. 484; R. v. Stolar, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 480. Statutes and Regulations Cited                     APPEAL from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Moldaver,
Blair and MacFarland JJ.A.), 2009 ONCA 398, 249 O.A.C. 24, [2009] O.J. No. 1904
(QL), 2009 CarswellOnt 2518, affirming the accused’s convictions for first degree
murder and attempted murder entered by McCombs J.  Appeal allowed.                     James Lockyer, Philip
Campbell and Joanne McLean, for the appellant.                     Susan L. Reid,
for the respondent.                      The
judgment of McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell and Wagner
JJ. was delivered by                     Rothstein J. — I.         
Introduction [1]                             
Leighton Hay was convicted of first degree
murder and attempted murder for a shooting that took place in a Toronto
nightclub.  He appeals his conviction on two grounds.  First, he argues that
the trial judge erred by instructing the jury that he could be convicted based
solely on the testimony of the one eyewitness who implicated him at trial. 
Second, he has filed a motion in this Court to adduce fresh evidence, which, he
says, warrants acquittal or a new trial. [2]                             
I agree with the Court of Appeal that the trial
judge did not err in instructing the jury.  The eyewitness testimony against
Mr. Hay on its own could not have supported an inference of guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt; however, the trial judge’s instruction, read as a whole, did
not instruct the jury that it could convict Mr. Hay based solely on her
testimony. [3]                             
However, Mr. Hay’s motion to adduce fresh
evidence should be granted.  He has asked this Court to consider evidence from
two experts who have forensically examined hair clipping exhibits that the
Crown relied on at trial to establish that Mr. Hay shaved his head after the
shooting.  The evidence was used to explain the discrepancy between the
eyewitness description of the shooter and Mr. Hay’s actual appearance at the
time of arrest.  It was also adduced as evidence that Mr. Hay had attempted an
after-the-fact change of his appearance.  The fresh evidence indicates that the
hair clippings did not originate from Mr. Hay’s scalp.  In my view, Mr. Hay has
satisfied the standard for adducing fresh evidence articulated in Palmer v.
The Queen, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759, at p. 775, and the appropriate remedy is a
new trial. II.      
Factual Background [4]                             
In the early morning of July 6, 2002, two men
shot and killed Collin Moore in a Toronto nightclub.  The men also shot at
Collin’s brother, Roger Moore, who escaped with a graze to his forehead. [5]                             
The evidence at trial established that Collin
was hosting a monthly fundraising event at the nightclub.  Sometime after
midnight, three or four men arrived at the club and refused to pay the entry
fee.  Two of the intruders were Gary Eunick, who was seen wearing an orange
vest, and his brother, both of whom were known by multiple witnesses at the
club.  The intruders pushed their way into the lobby of the club.  When Collin
and Roger intervened, a fight broke out in which beer bottles were broken and
the glass door of the club was smashed. [6]                             
Following the fight in the lobby, Collin and
Roger retreated to the nightclub’s kitchen.  The intruders exited the club, at
which point Mr. Eunick was seen fidgeting with a gun in the parking lot. 
Minutes later, he and two of the other intruders, one wearing a blue/green
shirt, returned to the nightclub.  Mr. Eunick was armed with a semi-automatic
handgun and the man in the blue/green shirt carried a long barrel revolver. 
Mr. Eunick and the man in the blue/green shirt entered the kitchen, where they
shot Collin eight times, killing him.  They also shot at Roger, who was grazed
by a bullet and only slightly wounded. [7]                             
The owner of the nightclub saw Mr. Eunick
leaving the club in a green Honda and recorded the licence plate number.  The
car was registered to Lydia Hay, who resided at 6927 Chigwel Court, with her
daughter Lisa Hay, who was Gary Eunick’s girlfriend, and her son Leighton Hay,
the appellant.  The police arrived at the Chigwel residence within
approximately half an hour of the shooting, where they found the green Honda in
the driveway.  They surveilled the residence for approximately the next 10 hours. [8]                             
While the police were surveilling the home, several
witnesses from the nightclub were shown photo lineups at the police station. 
Multiple witnesses were able to confidently identify Gary Eunick as the shooter
in an orange vest with the semi-automatic gun.  Given Mr. Hay’s connection to
the Chigwel residence and a database lookup that revealed he had a prior
firearm conviction, the police considered him a suspect.  Leisa Maillard, an
acquaintance of Collin Moore who was in the kitchen at the time the intruders
entered to shoot him, was shown a lineup containing a photo of Mr. Hay.  When
asked about the identity of the shooter in the blue/green shirt, she selected
Mr. Hay’s photo.  The details of that selection are discussed in more detail
later. [9]                             
Neither party proffered evidence as to whether
Mr. Hay’s photo was included in the lineups shown to witnesses other than Ms.
Maillard. [10]                         
At approximately noon, following the shooting,
Lisa Hay, Mr. Hay’s sister, emerged from the Chigwel residence and appeared as
though she was prepared to clean the green Honda.  At this point, the police
moved in, secured the residence, and arrested Gary Eunick and Leighton Hay. 
The men were subsequently charged with the first degree murder of Collin Moore
and the attempted murder of Roger Moore. III.   
Procedural History A.      
Trial Proceedings [11]                         
Mr. Eunick and Mr. Hay were tried together on
both counts.  The Crown’s theory at trial was that Mr. Eunick and Mr. Hay were
the two men who entered the kitchen and shot at the Moore brothers. [12]                         
The identity of Mr. Eunick as one of the
shooters was never in serious doubt.  Mr. Eunick was identified by multiple
witnesses at the nightclub, including Collin Moore’s wife, who knew him, and
the club owner, who named him during his initial 911 call that night.  The
physical evidence connecting Mr. Eunick to the shooting was also overwhelming. 
The Crown introduced evidence of a palm print and blood found on the front door
of the nightclub that matched Mr. Eunick.  It also introduced evidence of
several items found scattered around the Chigwel residence that implicated Mr.
Eunick, including:  a shopping bag recovered from the back of the house
containing the orange vest he wore at the club, which had Mr. Eunick’s blood
and gunshot granules on it; a backpack containing a white T-shirt and blue
jeans, which had Mr. Eunick’s blood and gunshot residue on them; shoes in Lisa
Hay’s closet, which had glass shards in the treads from the broken door at the
club; bullets found in a sock in a hamper at the entrance to Mr. Hay’s bedroom,
one of which may have been cycled through (i.e. was at some point loaded in the
chamber of the semi-automatic handgun fired by Mr. Eunick); and Mr. Eunick’s
blood in the front passenger area of the Honda Civic. [14]                         
The Crown’s case against Mr. Hay consisted of
testimony from Ms. Maillard and four pieces of physical evidence: (1) the
aforementioned bullets in a sock, which were found in a laundry hamper at the
entrance of Mr. Hay’s bedroom; (2) a white T-shirt, which contained a particle
of gunshot residue, found in the same hamper; (3) hair clippings found in a
newspaper in the bathroom garbage; and (4) hair clippings found in an electric
razor in Mr. Hay’s nightstand.  An understanding of the relevance of each piece
of evidence and the overall strength of the Crown’s case is necessary to
evaluate Mr. Hay’s arguments on appeal. (1)     
Ms. Maillard’s Eyewitness Evidence [15]                         
Ms. Maillard was the only eyewitness who
implicated Mr. Hay as one of the shooters.  She testified that she was in the
kitchen when the two shooters entered and that she focused her attention on the
shooter who was wearing the blue/green plaid button-up shirt with a white
T-shirt underneath and who carried a long barrel revolver.  She described him
as having two-inch long “picky” dreadlocks: A.R., vol. II, at p. 832.  According
to her testimony, she said to the shooter: “You don’t have to do this, you
know.  If you guys want to fight, just fight.  He has a wife and kids” (p. 835). 
At that point, the man turned to her, pointed his gun, and said, “Shut your
blood clot before I kill you” (ibid.).  Ms. Maillard continued to
focus on the man in the blue/green shirt, who moved further into the kitchen
and began firing at the Moore brothers.  After the fourth shot, she left the
kitchen and hid in the hallway. [16]                         
As mentioned above, following the shooting, the
police suspected that Mr. Hay might be the second shooter and included his
picture in a photo lineup shown to Ms. Maillard.  The evidence at trial
established that the lineup contained 12 photos, one photo of Mr. Hay that was
taken roughly two years earlier and 11 photos depicting men with similar
features. [17]                         
 Detective Derek Young provided Ms. Maillard
with a series of cautions before showing her the photo lineup.  In particular,
he informed her that he would be showing her a page with 12 photos on it that
may or may not include a photo of the suspect.  He informed her that she should
go through each of the 12 photos before selecting anyone and that she should
not rely heavily on facial features that might change.  He told her that if she
was able to identify the shooter with 100 percent positivity, she should say
so, and if not, she should provide a percentage on the likelihood that the
person she has selected was the suspect. [18]                         
Det. Young’s and Ms. Maillard’s testimony
established that Ms. Maillard looked at each photo in the lineup and that when
she reached the photo depicting Mr. Hay, she became shaken up.  She pointed at
the photo and stated: “Out of all of these pictures this gentleman most fits
the description of the gentlemen I saw shooting”: A.R., vol. III, at p. 999. 
She stated to the investigating officer that in her belief, the photo of Mr.
Hay depicted the shooter in the blue/green shirt and on “a percentage scale I
would probably say maybe 80 percent” (pp. 979-80).  Det. Young then sought to
clarify her statement with the following exchange: [Det. Young:]      Are you saying that this photograph depicts the
likeness about 80 percent of the person?  . . .  [Ms. Maillard:]     That’s
correct.  . . .  [Det. Young:]      That did
the shooting?  . . .  [Ms. Maillard:]     That’s
correct.  . . .  [Det. Young:]      But are you saying this is the person that did
the shooting?  I have to have a yes or no.  . . .  [Ms. Maillard:]     No, the photograph is about 80 percent . . . of
what depicts the likeness of the person that did the shooting.  . . .  [Det. Young:]      Okay.  . . .  [Ms. Maillard:]     I wish I could. [A.R., vol. III, at pp. 1014-16] [19]                         
At trial, Ms. Maillard took the position that
she did intend to identify Mr. Hay as the shooter in the blue/green shirt.  She
explained her comment that the photo shared 80 percent of the likeness of the
shooter as follows: I meant that
the photograph being a photocopy, about not being able to pick up the facial
hair, not being able to see, you know, knowing that it might not be a current
photograph of him, noting that his hair might be different, taking into account
all those factors that I was told and being — seeing someone get shot and
knowing that this is something very important that I was doing, picking
somebody, you know, out of a line-up that was responsible for a man dying, I
was being cautious.  [A.R., vol. II, at pp. 856-57] [20]                         
According to Ms. Maillard’s testimony, a day or
two after the shooting, she called the police station “to find out whether or
not [her] I.D. was pretty much the right person or not”: A.R., vol. II, at pp.
893-94. [21]                         
Three weeks after the shooting, Ms. Maillard
participated in a second photo lineup, in which she was shown a number of
photographs in sequence and asked if any matched the shooter in the blue/green
shirt.  The photo sequence contained the photo of Mr. Hay taken on the day of
his arrest, following the shooting.  However, Ms. Maillard did not select any
photo from the sequence.  Ms. Maillard testified at trial that she just
“flipped through” the photos and stated that the arrest photo did not have a
gaunt face, as she had recalled the shooter at the club: A.R., vol. II, at p.
895. [22]                         
Finally, defence counsel elicited testimony from
Ms. Maillard that at the preliminary inquiry, she repeatedly identified Mr.
Eunick, not Mr. Hay, as the shooter in the blue/green shirt.  Ms. Maillard
testified that she erroneously pointed out Mr. Eunick because she was nervous
and scared, and because Mr. Hay had bulked up since the shooting. [23]                         
Ms. Maillard was not asked at trial if she could
make an in-court identification of Mr. Hay. (2)     
Physical Evidence:  Bullets, White T-Shirt and
Hair Clippings [24]                         
As mentioned above, the Crown introduced the
following physical evidence implicating Mr. Hay: (1) bullets found in a sock in
a laundry hamper in his bedroom, one of which may have been cycled through the
semi-automatic handgun fired by Mr. Eunick; (2) a white T-shirt in the same
hamper with one granule of gunshot residue on it; (3) hair clippings from a
newspaper in the garbage of the bathroom nearest to Mr. Hay’s bedroom; and (4)
hair clippings in an electric razor found in Mr. Hay’s nightstand. [26]                         
The white T-shirt was tied to the shooting by
virtue of the eyewitness testimony that the shooter in the blue/green shirt was
wearing a white T-shirt underneath and the fact that the T-shirt was found on
the top of Mr. Hay’s laundry hamper with one speck of gunshot residue on it. 
The Crown’s theory was that Mr. Hay put the bullets and his white T-shirt in
the hamper upon returning home from the shooting. [27]                         
The defence argued that Mr. Eunick, who had
testified that he used the bathroom next to Mr. Hay’s bedroom upon returning
from the club, placed the bullets in Mr. Hay’s hamper, which was located just
inside the entrance to the bedroom.  In the process of doing so, Mr. Eunick
contaminated the white T-shirt on the top of the hamper with a single granule
of gunshot residue.  According to the defence, this was supported by the fact
that there was no gunshot residue found on any of the other items in the
hamper. [28]                         
The other physical evidence introduced by the
Crown was hair clippings obtained from two places: (1) a crumpled page of
newspaper dated three weeks earlier found in the waste basket in the bathroom
near Mr. Hay’s bedroom and (2) an electric razor found in the nightstand next
to Mr. Hay’s bed.  The evidence established that the hairs in the newspaper and
the razor were less than a centimeter long.  The hair was not submitted to a
forensic expert for trial and no expert testified regarding the hair. [30]                         
In addition to this physical evidence, the Crown
also introduced a videotape of the Chigwel Court residence recorded after Mr.
Eunick and Mr. Hay were arrested.  One scene in the video depicts a blue shirt
draped on a bunk bed in a second bedroom in the home.  However, the record does
not indicate that the Crown ever sought to seize the shirt, let alone submit it
for testing or present it to one of the eyewitnesses to make the case that it
was the blue/green shirt worn by the second shooter. (3)     
Jury Verdict [31]                         
Based on the evidence described above, the jury
found Mr. Eunick and Mr. Hay guilty of first degree murder of Collin Moore and
attempted murder of Roger Moore. B.      
Ontario Court of Appeal, 2009 ONCA 398, 249 O.A.C. 24 [32]                         
In the Court of Appeal, Mr. Hay challenged his
conviction on the bases that the jury’s verdict was unreasonable and that the
trial judge erred in instructing the jury on eyewitness identification. 
Moldaver J.A., as he then was, wrote for a unanimous panel and dismissed the
appeal. [33]                         
The court held that the jury’s verdict was not
unreasonable because, despite weaknesses in Ms. Maillard’s eyewitness
testimony, there was other confirmatory evidence presented to the jury,
including the bullets and shirt found in Mr. Hay’s hamper and the hair
clippings, which allowed for the “powerful inference” that Mr. Hay shaved his
head after the murder to disguise his appearance (para. 36).  The court
acknowledged that the jury could have drawn multiple inferences from the
evidence presented, but concluded that this confirmatory evidence “put this
case over the unreasonable verdict threshold” (ibid.). [34]                         
With respect to the trial judge’s instruction to
the jury on eyewitness identification, Mr. Hay raised three arguments.  First,
he argued that the trial judge erroneously instructed the jury that it could
convict Mr. Hay on the evidence of Ms. Maillard alone.  The Court of Appeal
disagreed.  In its view, the trial judge did not instruct the jury that it
could convict on Ms. Maillard’s testimony alone.  Rather, the trial judge
instructed the jury that it must look to confirmatory evidence. [35]                         
Mr. Hay raised two other challenges regarding
the trial judge’s instruction on eyewitness evidence and challenged the trial
judge’s instruction on the planning and deliberation requirement for first degree
murder.  These challenges were rejected by the Court of Appeal and have not
been reargued before this Court. C.      
Motion for an Order to Release Exhibits [36]                         
While the application for leave to appeal was
pending before this Court, Mr. Hay filed a motion to compel the Crown to
release two pieces of evidence for forensic testing:  the hair clippings found
in the crumpled newspaper and the hair clippings found in the electric razor. 
Mr. Hay sought to forensically examine the hair clippings to determine from
what part of the body the clippings came.  This Court allowed the motion; see R.
v. Hay, 2010 SCC 54, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 206, at para. 10.  However, it
deferred consideration of any motion to adduce fresh evidence to be considered
with the appeal (para. 9). [37]                         
On December 1, 2010, the parties submitted a
proposed protocol for releasing the hair clippings and having them examined by
the Centre of Forensic Sciences.  This Court ordered that the hairs be released
and examined in accordance with that protocol.  Mr. Hay subsequently filed a
motion under s. 683  of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , to
adduce the reports and testimony of experts who conducted the forensic
examination. IV.       Issues [38]                         
This appeal presents two issues: (1)        Whether the trial judge erred by instructing the jury
that it could convict Mr. Hay based on Ms. Maillard’s eyewitness evidence
alone. (2)        Whether Mr. Hay’s motion to adduce fresh evidence should
be granted and if so, what is the appropriate remedy? V.      
Analysis A.      
Jury Charge Regarding Eyewitness Testimony [39]                         
Mr. Hay argues that the trial judge erred by
instructing the jury that it could convict him on Ms. Maillard’s eyewitness
testimony alone.  Like the Court of Appeal, I am of the view that Mr. Hay’s
argument should be rejected.  As I explain below, it would have been an error
to instruct the jury that it could convict Mr. Hay based on Ms. Maillard’s
testimony alone because it was too weak to establish Mr. Hay’s guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.  However, read as a whole, the trial judge’s jury charge did
not instruct the jury that it could convict based on Ms. Maillard’s testimony
alone.  Rather, it instructed the jury that it must look to confirmatory
evidence.  It is not disputed that Ms. Maillard’s testimony in conjunction with
the confirmatory evidence was sufficient to support the conclusion that Mr. Hay
was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt and, thus, there was no error in the jury
charge. (1)      Whether It Would Have Been an Error to Instruct the Jury That It
Could Convict Mr. Hay Based on Ms. Maillard’s Testimony Alone [41]                         
Although the duty to assess the credibility and
weight of an eyewitness’ evidence sits with the jury and, in some
circumstances, the testimony of one eyewitness will support a conviction, the
jury should not be permitted to convict on the basis of eyewitness testimony
that could not support an inference of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  In other
words, a jury should not be instructed that it may convict based on eyewitness
testimony alone where that testimony, even if believed, would necessarily leave
reasonable doubt in the mind of a reasonable juror; see R. v. Arcuri,
2001 SCC 54, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 828, at paras. 21-25; R. v. Reitsma, [1998]
1 S.C.R. 769, rev’g (1997), 97 B.C.A.C. 303; R. v. Zurowski, 2004 SCC
72, [2004] 3 S.C.R. 509; United States of America v. Shephard, [1977] 2
S.C.R. 1067, at p. 1080.  Indeed, where the Crown’s case consists solely of
eyewitness testimony that would necessarily leave reasonable doubt in the mind
of a reasonable juror, the trial judge must direct an acquittal upon a motion
for directed verdict (Arcuri, at para. 21). [42]                         
In my view, it would have been unreasonable for
the jury to convict Mr. Hay based solely on Ms. Maillard’s eyewitness
testimony.  In addition to the usual frailties associated with eyewitness
identification and photo lineups, the evidence at trial established several other
problems with Ms. Maillard’s ability to identify Mr. Hay as the shooter.  As
described above, Ms. Maillard’s initial selection of Mr. Hay from the photo
lineup was accompanied by a statement that she was not identifying him as the
shooter, but as someone who shared 80 percent of the likeness of the shooter. 
Furthermore, within a couple of days of the shooting, Ms. Maillard called the
police to confirm whether the person she had selected was “pretty much the
right person or not”: A.R., vol. II, at pp. 893-94.  Also, the evidence
established that three weeks after the shooting Ms. Maillard was not able to
select Mr. Hay as the shooter based on his arrest photo taken the day of the
crime and that, at the preliminary inquiry, Ms. Maillard repeatedly identified
Mr. Eunick, not Mr. Hay, as the shooter in the blue/green shirt.  Each of these
events raised some doubt as to Ms. Maillard’s ability to identify Mr. Hay as
the second shooter. [43]                         
To be sure, the Crown did adduce evidence to
address some of the problems with Ms. Maillard’s testimony.  It elicited
testimony from Ms. Maillard that, despite her statements to the contrary when
she selected Mr. Hay’s photo on the morning of the shootings, she did
intend to identify Mr. Hay as the shooter.  Furthermore, the Crown introduced
hair clippings found in Mr. Hay’s bathroom and electric razor to explain that
Ms. Maillard was unable to identify Mr. Hay based on his arrest photo because
he had cut his hair. [45]                         
For these reasons, in my view, it would have
been an error for the trial judge to instruct the jury that it could convict
Mr. Hay based solely on Ms. Maillard’s evidence.  Indeed, in this appeal, the
Crown has not attempted to argue otherwise.  The Crown has instead argued that
the trial judge made no error because he never instructed the jury that it
could have convicted Mr. Hay based on Ms. Maillard’s testimony alone.  I turn
to that argument next. (2)     
Whether the Trial Judge Erred in Instructing the
Jury [46]                         
In my view, the Court of Appeal correctly held
that the trial judge made no error in instructing the jury regarding Ms.
Maillard’s eyewitness testimony. [47]                         
When reviewing a jury charge, “[a]n appellate
court must examine the alleged error in the context of the entire charge and of
the trial as a whole”:  R. v. Jaw, 2009 SCC 42, [2009] 3 S.C.R. 26, at
para. 32.  Where an impugned reference in a jury charge in isolation could be
understood to be an incorrect statement of the law, an appeal court will not
interfere if it is evident that, considering the charge as a whole, the jury
would have been properly instructed: ibid., at paras. 3 and 24. [48]                         
Furthermore, although appeal courts will
interfere when a jury has not been adequately instructed, a trial judge must be
afforded a certain degree of flexibility in instructing the jury; see R. v.
Avetysan, 2000 SCC 56, [2000] 2 S.C.R. 745, at para. 9.  A trial judge is
not required to use “any particular form of words” in instructing the jury
regarding the frailties of eyewitness evidence and, rather, must be afforded
considerable latitude in deciding how best to apprise the jurors about those
frailties: Turnbull, at p. 552; R. v. Candir, 2009 ONCA 915,
257 O.A.C. 119, at para. 110. [49]                         
In the present case the trial judge made the
following general remarks about the reliability of eyewitness evidence, prior
to revisiting in detail the evidence against Mr. Eunick and Mr. Hay: There
has been eyewitness testimony from a number of witnesses.  You must be very
cautious about relying on eyewitness testimony to find either of the two
accused persons guilty.  That caution is required because experience has taught
us that all identification evidence suffers from an inherent frailty.  Human
observations and recollections are notoriously unreliable in this area.  Indeed,
many cases of miscarriage of justice have been due to mistaken identification
by one or more responsible witnesses whose honesty was not challenged and who
had ample opportunity for observation, but whose identifications subsequently
proved to be erroneous.  You
may have no doubt that a witness or witnesses are certain in their own minds
that they observed and recognized the proper identifying characteristics, but a
convincing witness, who is perfectly honest, may also be mistaken.  A person
can be sure in his or her own mind about an identification and yet be
mistaken.  In that context, you must bear in mind the distinction between
credibility or truthfulness, as opposed to reliability or accuracy.  So
I repeat, ladies and gentlemen, you must be very cautious about relying on
eyewitness testimony alone to find either of the defendants guilty of any
crime.  In the past, there have been miscarriages of justice. Persons have been
wrongly convicted because eyewitnesses have made mistakes in identifying the
persons whom they saw committing the crime.  As
a result, you should look for confirmatory evidence to support the eyewitness
identification evidence.  If you find other evidence to support the eyewitness
identification evidence, you may decide that the frailties associated with a
conviction based only on identification evidence has been discounted.  It will
be up to you.  Mr. Hay contends that the
last paragraph of this excerpt would have left the jury with the understanding
that it could have convicted him based on Ms. Maillard’s testimony alone. [50]                         
Taken in isolation, the statement that the jury
was “entitled to convict on the evidence of even a single eyewitness” may
appear to do that.  However, I agree with the Court of Appeal that such an
interpretation of the trial judge’s instruction is belied when the full context
of the jury charge is considered. [51]                         
As the Court of Appeal observed, the impugned
instruction was, as a general matter, a correct statement of the law.  As mentioned
above, a jury may convict on the basis of a single eyewitness’ testimony,
notwithstanding the frailties of eyewitness identifications, if the witness’
testimony could support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. [52]                         
Furthermore, the impugned instruction was made
in the context of general instructions that applied to both Mr. Hay and his
co-defendant, Mr. Eunick.  With respect to Mr. Eunick, there were multiple
witnesses whose testimony could have supported a finding of guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.  Witnesses Jennifer Moore and Hugh Robinson, for instance,
were both able to recognize Mr. Eunick from their past dealings and identify
him as one of the shooters during and immediately after the shooting. You must be
very careful of the evidence of Ms Maillard because of the problems that I have
pointed out.  You should look for other evidence confirming her
identification. [Emphasis added; A.R., vol. V, at p. 2181.] In addition, the trial
judge distinguished Ms. Maillard’s eyewitness account from the stronger
eyewitness evidence against Mr. Eunick: [54]                         
I agree with the Court of Appeal that “[i]n the
face of those instructions, it is fanciful to think that the jury would have
convicted Hay solely on the eye-witness testimony of Ms. Maillard” (para. 48). 
Mr. Hay’s argument boils down to a contention that the trial judge was required
to say words such as “you may not convict Mr. Hay based on Leisa Maillard’s
testimony alone”.  However, the trial judge was not circumscribed to instruct
the jury as to the sufficiency of Ms. Maillard’s testimony using those
particular words.  He had a duty to “convey to the jury as trier of fact the
relevant legal principles and how they apply to the evidence adduced at trial”,
and he must be afforded some latitude in determining the best way to do so:  R.
v. Pickton, 2010 SCC 32, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 198, at para. 61.  A reasonable
juror instructed in the manner described above would not have interpreted the
impugned statement as an instruction that the jury could render a conviction
based solely on Ms. Maillard’s testimony; see Jaw, at para. 24. [55]                         
The record establishes that the trial judge put
great care into his jury charge and, in particular, into the instructions as to
eyewitness evidence.  The trial judge, for instance, gave a mid-trial
instruction to the jury regarding the frailties of eyewitness testimony
immediately after Ms. Maillard testified, in which he reiterated the problems
with her evidence.  At that time, he gave both parties an opportunity to object
and make submissions requesting additional instructions, but neither counsel
did so.  Furthermore, prior to instructing the jury at the end of the trial,
the judge held a pre-charge hearing, in which he accepted submissions on the
instructions relating to eyewitness testimony.  During that hearing, counsel
for the Crown and both defendants were all asked to consider the paragraph Mr.
Hay now impugns, and all counsel expressed satisfaction with its language. 
Counsel for Mr. Hay made several submissions regarding the problems with Ms.
Maillard’s identification, each of which the trial judge made note of and
subsequently included in his instructions to the jury.  At no time during any
of these hearings did any party express the view that the trial judge’s
instruction would convey to the jury that it could convict based on Ms.
Maillard’s testimony alone. [56]                         
For these reasons, I am of the view that the
trial judge did not err in instructing the jury and would dismiss this ground
of appeal. B.      
Motion to Adduce Fresh Evidence [57]                         
As mentioned above, Mr. Hay has filed a motion
to adduce expert evidence regarding the forensic testing of the hair clippings
that the Crown introduced at trial.  Mr. Hay argues that the fresh evidence
establishes that the hair clippings did not come from a shave of Mr. Hay’s
scalp and that, as a result, acquittal or a new trial is warranted.  I explain
below that the motion to adduce fresh evidence should be granted and a new trial
should be ordered. (1)     
The Fresh Evidence [58]                         
Mr. Hay’s fresh evidence consists of affidavits
and cross-examinations of two forensic experts, in which each expert provides
an opinion as to the percentage of hairs in the newspaper and the razor that
came from Mr. Hay’s scalp, as opposed to his face or trunk. [59]                         
Johanne Almer, a scientist at the Centre of
Forensic Sciences, examined the hairs introduced at trial.  In her initial
report, she concluded, based on an examination of the diameter and shape of the
individual hairs, that 68 percent of the hairs in the newspaper and 48 percent
of the hairs in the razor were indicative of facial or trunk origin.  The
remaining hairs could have been facial, trunk or scalp hair. [60]                         
Scientist Richard Bisbing, a second expert,
endorsed the methodology used by Ms. Almer.  After examining the hairs and Ms.
Almer’s work, he concluded that “the samples from the two items are
predominantly comprised of facial hairs” and that “[a]lthough the presence of
some scalp hairs cannot be excluded, there is no indication of a large number
of scalp hairs in either sample”: Application Record, vol. I, Tab D, at p. 3. [61]                         
Mr. Bisbing recommended that a representative
scalp hair be obtained from Mr. Hay to improve the accuracy of the testing.  The
Crown consented.  After a representative scalp hair was obtained, Ms. Almer
conducted further examination and produced a second report affirming her
earlier conclusions.  She reported that if a particular outlier hair from Mr.
Hay’s scalp sample was excluded from her calculations, she would conclude that
at least 91 percent of the hairs from the newspaper and 70 percent of the hairs
from the razor did not originate from Mr. Hay’s scalp.  Mr. Bisbing also
conducted a second examination and agreed with Ms. Almer’s findings.  He
concluded: It can now be stated with a reasonable
degree of scientific certainty that the hairs from the clipper (Item 87) and
from the newspaper (Item 88) are populations of facial (beard) hair. Neither
sample contains a significant number of scalp (head) hairs to challenge this
conclusion.  [Application Record, vol. I, Tab E, at p. 3] [62]                         
The Crown also hired two experts: David Exline,
a hair analyst, and Dr. Jeffrey Rosenthal, a professor of statistics.  Both
experts conducted a paper review of Ms. Almer’s and Mr. Bisbing’s reports
without personal examination of the hairs.  Much of the Crown experts’ analysis
focused on whether it was proper to exclude a hair obtained from Mr. Hay’s
scalp that Ms. Almer and Mr. Bisbing considered to be an outlier.  Both Mr.
Exline and Dr. Rosenthal testified that they would have included the outlier
hair.  However, both also testified that such inclusion would not have a
significant impact on the results and they would thus have reached conclusions
similar to Ms. Almer and Mr. Bisbing.  Consistent with Ms. Almer and Mr.
Bisbing, Mr. Exline testified that although he could not say with absolute
certainty that there were no scalp hairs among the hair clippings, there was,
as a scientific matter, no evidence to support the proposition that the hair
clippings represented a head shave. (2)     
Whether the Motion to Adduce Fresh Evidence
Should Be Granted [63]                         
This Court considered the discretion of an
appellate court to admit fresh evidence under s. 610 of the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1970, c. C-34, the predecessor of s. 683 , in Palmer.  The
overriding consideration upon a motion to adduce fresh evidence is “the
interests of justice”: Criminal Code, s. 683 ; Palmer,
at p. 775.  This requires consideration of the following principles: (1)   The evidence should generally not be admitted if, by due
diligence, it could have been adduced at trial provided that this general
principle will not be applied as strictly in a criminal case as in civil cases:
see McMartin v. The Queen, [1964] S.C.R. 484.  (2)   The evidence must be relevant in the sense that it bears upon
a decisive or potentially decisive issue in the trial.  (3)   The evidence must be credible in the sense that it is
reasonably capable of belief, and  (4)   It must be such that if believed it could reasonably, when
taken with the other evidence adduced at trial, be expected to have affected
the result. [p. 775] Here, the Crown has
conceded that the expert evidence Mr. Hay seeks to adduce is credible and thus
satisfies the third factor.  As I explain below, the consideration of the
remaining factors leads to the conclusion that the fresh evidence should be
admitted. (a)      
Due Diligence [64]                         
The due diligence criterion exists to ensure
finality and order — values essential to the integrity of the criminal process:
R. v. G.D.B., 2000 SCC 22, [2000] 1 S.C.R. 520, at para. 19 (citing R.
v. M. (P.S.) (1992), 77 C.C.C. (3d) 402 (Ont. C.A.), per Doherty
J.A., at p. 411).  The due diligence requirement calls for an appellate court
to consider the reason why the evidence was not presented at trial: G.D.B.,
at para. 20.  However, this Court has recognized that “due diligence is not an
essential requirement of the fresh evidence test, particularly in criminal
cases” and that the “criterion must yield where its rigid application might
lead to a miscarriage of justice” (para. 19).  Nonetheless, it is an important
factor to be considered in the totality of the circumstances (ibid.). [65]                         
Here, Mr. Hay submits that the fresh evidence
was not adduced at trial because his trial counsel was unaware that it was
feasible to perform forensic testing to determine whether hair clippings
originate from an individual’s scalp or another part of the body.  Mr. Hay has
submitted an affidavit from his trial counsel to that effect. [66]                         
In his reasons granting the order to release the
two exhibits for forensic testing, Cromwell J. inferred from the evidence
before him that it simply did not occur to any of the experienced criminal
lawyers that forensic testing of this nature was feasible: This sort of forensic testing was not
conducted by the Crown in preparation for trial and was not requested on behalf
of the defence until several months after the appeal to the Court of Appeal had
been dismissed.  Defence counsel at trial indicates in his affidavit that he
was unaware that forensic analysis could distinguish between scalp and facial
hairs.  There is a letter in the record indicating that the applicant’s counsel
on the appeal to the Court of Appeal was similarly unaware of the feasibility
of such testing.  There is no evidence that the Crown was aware of this
possibility.  Given that it appears that no one requested such testing and the
potential importance of the result which might be obtained, I would infer that
it simply did not occur to any of the experienced criminal lawyers involved
that this testing was available.  [para. 8] The parties have not
provided any reason why this conclusion should be reconsidered. [67]                         
In general, mere lack of knowledge on the part
of trial counsel without any indication that he inquired into the possibility
of obtaining and presenting the evidence is a factor against admitting the
evidence for the first time on appeal: McMartin, at pp. 490-91. 
However, in view of the fact that this is a criminal case, involving charges of
the most serious nature, I would not allow the evidence to be excluded solely
on the basis of a lack of diligence. (b)     
Whether the Evidence Bears on a Decisive or Potentially
Decisive Issue [68]                         
It cannot reasonably be disputed that Mr. Hay’s
fresh evidence bears on a decisive issue.  As described above, the hair
clippings from Mr. Hay’s waste basket and electric razor were used in two
ways.  First, they were used to explain the discrepancy between the
eyewitnesses’ description of the shooter as having dreadlocks and the short
length of Mr. Hay’s hair at the time of his arrest.  This was also how the Crown
explained Ms. Maillard’s inability to identify Mr. Hay based on his arrest
photo.  Second, the hair clippings were used to implicate Mr. Hay by suggesting
that he had cut his hair immediately after the shooting as evidence of an
after-the-fact attempt to change his appearance. [69]                         
The evidence was therefore directly relevant to
whether Mr. Hay was in fact the shooter in the blue/green shirt. (c)      
Whether the Evidence Could Reasonably Be
Expected to Have Affected the Result [70]                         
The fresh evidence that Mr. Hay seeks to adduce
could reasonably be expected to have affected the jury’s verdict.  The import
of the hair clippings is evident from comments made by the trial judge and
Crown counsel, the jury charge and the Court of Appeal’s analysis, each of
which I describe below. [71]                         
Although the Crown has sought to downplay the
significance of the hair evidence in this appeal, it relied heavily on the
haircut evidence at trial.  In his closing address, for instance, Crown counsel
painted the following picture for the jury: When
they came home, they convened at the back of the house. Mr. Hay took off his
shirt and they began to task divide. They took Eunick’s bloody clothes to wash
them. At some point, an old piece of newspaper was laid out, and Leighton
Hay's short, short dreads were shaved off, possibly by himself but more likely
by Mr. Eunick because he knows how to cut hair. They were then dumped into the
toilet. They were taken off, and only the small hairs that weighed the least
stuck to that newspaper, and he crumpled it up and threw it in the garbage, and
that’s where it was, right on top, the last thing put in. Everything else was
flushed.  Mr.
House makes something of the date of that newspaper. If I understood his
submission, the last time Leighton Hay would have shaved was June 18th. But
he keeps his hair shears for shaving in his night table. He shaved his head
that night. He threw the short dreads down the toilet. He left just the small
clippings in that piece of newspaper.  [72]                         
Further, in comments made during the trial in
the absence of the jury and witnesses, the trial judge recognized that if the
Crown could establish that Mr. Hay shaved his head in the morning following the
shootings, it would be “powerful evidence” of his “identity” as the shooter and
that “he did it to alter his appearance”: A.R., vol. II, at p. 928. [73]                         
The significance of the hair clippings was also
reflected in the jury charge.  The trial judge instructed the jury that because
Mr. Hay had a shaved head at the time of his arrest, the jury “must consider
whether the evidence establishes that Leighton Hay shaved his head that night
after he got home”: A.R., vol. V, at p. 2153 (emphasis added).  He
instructed the jury that it must consider confirmatory evidence before relying
on Ms. Maillard’s eyewitness testimony, given the frailties of eyewitness
identifications and her inability to identify Mr. Hay at the second photo
lineup and the preliminary inquiry.  He repeated multiple times that the
Crown’s explanation for Ms. Maillard’s inability to identify Mr. Hay based on
his arrest photo hinged on proving that Mr. Hay had cut his hair after the
murder, for which the only evidence was the hair clippings. [74]                         
The Court of Appeal too recognized that the hair
clipping evidence was significant to the Crown’s case.  In concluding that the
jury’s verdict was not unreasonable, the Court of Appeal explained that the
hair clippings allowed for a “powerful inference” of guilt which was sufficient
to “tip the scales and put this case over the unreasonable verdict threshold” (para.
36).  Given the significance of the haircut to the Crown’s case, Mr. Hay’s
fresh evidence indicating that the hair clippings did not come from a scalp
shave could reasonably be expected to have affected the result. [75]                         
For these reasons, I would grant Mr. Hay’s
motion to adduce fresh evidence. (3)     
The Appropriate Remedy [76]                         
Having concluded that Mr. Hay’s motion to adduce
fresh evidence should be granted, I turn to the appropriate remedy.  This Court
has explained that where an appeal court is of the view that fresh evidence
would be conclusive of the issues in the case, it should dispose of the matter
accordingly: R. v. Stolar, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 480, at p. 492.  However,
where the fresh evidence is not so decisive that it would allow an immediate
disposition of the matter, but it nonetheless has sufficient probative force
that, if accepted by the trier of fact, it might have altered the result of the
trial, an appeal court should admit the evidence and direct a new trial: ibid.;
Palmer, at pp. 776-77. [77]                         
The appropriate remedy here is a new trial.  As
I have explained above, the expert evidence indicating that the hair clippings
did not result from a scalp shave could reasonably be expected to have affected
the verdict.  However, it is not so decisive as to allow an immediate
disposition in the form of an acquittal.  The Crown, in its submissions on the
motion to adduce fresh evidence, has raised the possibility of certain
limitations or gaps in the expert evidence adduced in this appeal.  The
interests of justice require that the Court remit the matter for a new trial,
in which the Crown would have the opportunity to adduce evidence challenging
the reliability of the fresh evidence. VI.       Conclusion [78]                         
For the foregoing reasons, Mr. Hay’s motion to
adduce fresh evidence is granted and the appeal is allowed.  The matter is remanded
for retrial.                     The following are the reasons
delivered by                     Fish J. — I [79]                         
Like Justice Rothstein, and for the reasons he
has given, I would grant the appellant’s motion to adduce fresh evidence and
order a new trial. [80]                         
Our sole disagreement relates to the trial
judge’s charge concerning the evidence of Leisa Maillard.  Justice Rothstein
finds that the trial judge did not instruct the jury that it could convict the
appellant, Leighton Hay, on the evidence of Ms. Maillard alone.  With respect,
I believe that he did. [81]                         
As we shall see, the trial judge and counsel
evidently thought so too.  The jury can hardly have understood the judge’s
charge differently. [82]                         
This error is in my view fatal, though the
judge’s charge was otherwise flawless and eminently fair.  And I think it right
to add that the law in this regard is more certain now than it was at the time
of trial. II [83]                         
Leighton Hay stands convicted of first degree
murder and attempted murder.  Leisa Maillard was the only eyewitness who
implicated Mr. Hay in the fatal shooting of the victim.  In a photo lineup
conducted by the police, Ms. Maillard said she was “about 80 percent” sure that
Mr. Hay was the shooter, but could not answer that question “yes or no”.  She
did not identify Mr. Hay in court.  Other significant frailties in her evidence
are well set out in the reasons of Justice Rothstein (notably at paras. 15-23
and, compendiously, at para. 42). [84]                         
In his pre-charge submissions, Crown counsel
nonetheless asked the judge to instruct the jury that they could convict Mr.
Hay on the evidence of one eyewitness alone (A.R., vol. V, at pp. 2004, 2008
and 2011).  Counsel made clear that he was referring specifically to the
testimony of Ms. Maillard (pp. 2008 and 2014).  Indeed, he could hardly have
been referring to anyone else: As mentioned earlier, no other eyewitness
implicated Mr. Hay. [85]                         
Quite properly, Crown counsel assured the trial
judge that he “want[ed] to be able to fashion [his] closing address to the jury
in a way that’s responsible and consistent with what you’re going to be
telling them” (A.R., vol. V, at p. 2014; unless otherwise indicated,
the emphasis throughout is mine).  The trial judge replied that he “[did not]
have a problem” with the Crown’s request and indicated that he would charge the
jury to that effect, though not necessarily in the wording proposed (pp. 2011
and 2014). [86]                         
In his closing address, Crown counsel proceeded
on that understanding. This was apparent from the very outset: I suspect
His Honour will also tell you, after considering the strength of eyewitness
testimony you’re entitled to convict on it alone if it persuades you,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the person identified was the shooter.  [A.R.,
vol. VI, at p. 111] [87]                         
The Crown then emphasized to the jury that this
principle applied to the testimony of Leisa Maillard: The
lawyer [for Mr. Hay] has made much of the fact that [Ms. Maillard] said 80
percent.  She explained to you what she meant.  80 percent is of the picture,
because it may be an older picture. . . . If you accept her explanation —
there’s no reason not to — you can convict on the photo lineup and [her]
visceral reaction [to it] all alone.  If you’re troubled by it, then your
troubles will be wiped away by the overwhelming confirmatory evidence in this
case, which under Canadian law makes up for any frailties you might find in the
photo lineup. [A.R., vol. VI, at p. 117]  And again:  You
could, in this case, convict Leighton Hay on Leisa Maillard’s photo lineup . . . . [p. 119] [88]                         
At no point in his charge did the able and
experienced trial judge correct these assertions by the Crown.  This confirms
to me, particularly in light of the pre-charge discussions, that they conformed
to the judge’s own understanding of the law. [89]                         
Pursuant to the Crown’s closing argument, the
jury would thus have assumed that it was entitled to convict Mr. Hay based
solely on Ms. Maillard’s eyewitness “identification”. [90]                         
Unfortunately, this misapprehension of the law
was soon to be reinforced by the trial judge in his own instructions to the
jury. [91]                         
Early in his charge, the trial judge made clear
to the jury that “the main issue in this trial is the identity of the people
who murdered Collin Moore” (A.R., vol. V, at p. 2144).  He then explained the
dangers associated with reliance on eyewitness evidence to establish guilt. 
Then, in some measure echoing Crown counsel’s prior submission, he instructed
the jury as follows: . .
. you should look for confirmatory evidence to support the eyewitness
identification evidence.  If you find other evidence to support the eyewitness
identification evidence, you may decide that the frailties associated with a
conviction based only on identification evidence [have] been discounted.  It
will be up to you.  But
even if you find no confirmatory evidence — even
though you are to exercise caution because of the frailties of eyewitness
identification evidence — you are, nevertheless, entitled to convict on the
evidence of even a single eyewitness if you accept that witness’
identification and find that it proves guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. [A.R.,
vol. V, at p. 2146] [92]                         
Thus, although the trial judge urged caution, he
informed the jury in unmistakable terms that the testimony of one eyewitness
could properly ground a conviction.  The jury would therefore have understood
that this rule applied unless instructed otherwise for a particular witness. 
No such instruction was ever given. [93]                         
More particularly, the trial judge never told
the jury that his general instructions that I have just quoted did not apply to
the testimony of Leisa Maillard.  On the contrary, soon afterward, he explained
that identification evidence is stronger if the accused was previously known to
the witness.  And he related this instruction specifically to “the
evidence against Leighton Hay” (A.R., vol. V, at p. 2148).  This was
indisputably a direct reference to Ms. Maillard’s evidence implicating Mr. Hay. [94]                         
In any event, there could be no confusion
regarding which defendant the trial judge was referring to when he instructed
the jury that it was “entitled to convict on the evidence of even a single
eyewitness” (A.R., vol. V, at p. 2146).  Several eyewitnesses identified Mr.
Hay’s co-accused, Gary Eunick, as one of the shooters.  Only Mr. Hay was
identified by “a single eyewitness” — Ms. Maillard (ibid.). 
Accordingly, the only meaningful application of this general instruction was in
regard to Ms. Maillard’s testimony. [95]                         
The judge’s subsequent instructions regarding
Ms. Maillard’s evidence, if anything, reinforced Crown counsel’s uncorrected
statement to the jury that they could convict Mr. Hay on her photo
identification alone — and reinforced as well the judge’s own instruction to
the same effect (reproduced above at para. 91). [96]                         
For example, in terms virtually identical to the
judge’s general caution regarding eyewitness identification evidence, he later
instructed the jury that it “should look for other evidence confirming
her identification” (A.R., vol. V, at p. 2181).  Manifestly, the term “should”
deprives this instruction of imperative force.  And, with respect, I am unable
to find in this or any other passage that the trial judge “instructed the jury
that it must look to confirmatory evidence” (my colleague’s reasons, at
para. 39). [97]                         
Finally, near the very end of his charge, the
trial judge once again indicated to the jury that they could convict Mr. Hay on
the evidence of Ms. Maillard alone.  Without any suggestion that this was wrong
in law, the trial judge referred to Crown counsel’s submission that “just based
on Leisa Maillard’s evidence alone you should be sure that the shooter
was Leighton Hay” (A.R., vol. V, at p. 2245). [98]                         
As mentioned at the outset and with the greatest
of respect, I am unable in light of this record to conclude that the trial
judge did not instruct the jury that it could convict Mr. Hay on the evidence
of Ms. Maillard alone. III [99]                         
The Court of Appeal held, at para. 48, that
“[i]n the face of [the jury] instructions, it is fanciful to think that the
jury would have convicted Hay solely on the eye-witness testimony of Ms.
Maillard.”  My colleague Justice Rothstein agrees (para. 54). [100]                     
Though patently speculative and certainly
unverifiable, that may in fact be so.  In light of the trial judge’s effort to
make clear to the jury that it should be cautious before convicting Mr. Hay
based solely on Ms. Maillard’s identification, it does appear unlikely that the
jury convicted Mr. Hay without any regard to the confirmatory evidence. 
Whether that is the case, however, is a question that we are neither called
upon nor entitled to resolve. [101]                     
Rather, the issue that concerns us here is
whether the trial judge erred in his instructions to the jury, and not with why
the jury decided as it did — a matter beyond our ken. IV [102]                     
As stated at the outset, I agree with Justice
Rothstein that the appellant’s motion to adduce fresh evidence should be
granted, that the appeal should be allowed and that a new trial should be
ordered.                     Appeal
allowed.                     Solicitors
for the appellant:  Lockyer Campbell Posner, Toronto; Joanne McLean,
Toronto.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.   