  SUPREME COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v.
  Vuradin, 2013 SCC 38, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 639 Date: 20130627 Docket: 35143  Between: Fabian Vuradin Appellant and Her Majesty The Queen Respondent   Coram: Fish,
Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.  Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 29) Karakatsanis J.
  (Fish, Rothstein, Cromwell and Moldaver JJ. concurring)     R. v. Vuradin, 2013 SCC 38, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 639 Fabian Vuradin                                                                                              Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent Indexed as:  R. v. Vuradin 2013 SCC 38 File No.:  35143. 2013:  May 16; 2013:  June 27. Present:  Fish, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver and
Karakatsanis JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for alberta                     Criminal law — Judgments and orders — Sufficiency of
reasons — Burden of proof — Accused convicted of sexual assault and unlawful
touching for sexual purpose involving four complainants — Whether trial judge’s
reasons for judgment sufficient — Whether trial judge properly applied burden
of proof.                     The
issues in this appeal are whether the trial judge’s reasons for judgment were
sufficient and whether the trial judge properly applied the burden of proof in
a criminal case.                     Held: 
The appeal should be dismissed.                     The
core question in determining whether the trial judge’s reasons are sufficient
is whether the reasons, read in context, show why the judge decided as he did. 
The trial judge’s reasons satisfy this threshold.  The reasons allow for
meaningful appellate review because they tell the accused why the trial judge
decided as he did.  The trial judge found the complainant’s evidence
compelling, the problems in her evidence inconsequential, and the accused’s
concoction theories speculative.  The reasons reveal that the trial judge
accepted the complainant’s evidence where it conflicted with the accused’s
evidence.  No further explanation for rejecting the accused’s evidence was
required.                     The
trial judge also properly applied the burden of proof.  Although a trial judge
is not required to outline the W.(D.) steps, the trial judge here
referred to W.(D.) and the dangers that it addressed:  the potential for
simply comparing stories and for shifting the onus to the accused.  The trial
judge’s reasons for finding the accused guilty on counts 1 and 2, read in the
context of the reasons as a whole, do not reveal an incorrect application of
the relevant principles.  Here, the accused was not believed.  The Crown’s case
was considered with the accused’s denial in mind, and the trial judge
concluded, as he was entitled to do, that his denial did not raise a reasonable
doubt. Cases Cited                     Referred
to:  R. v. R.E.M., 2008 SCC 51, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3; R. v. W.(D.),
[1991] 1 S.C.R. 742; R. v. Sheppard, 2002 SCC 26, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 869; R.
v. Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 788; R. v. C.L.Y., 2008 SCC
2, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 5; R. v. Boucher, 2005 SCC 72, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 499.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Alberta Court of Appeal (Côté, McDonald and O’Ferrall JJ.A.),
2011 ABCA 280, 515 A.R. 25, 55 Alta. L.R. (5th) 45, [2012] 4 W.W.R. 264, 532
W.A.C. 25, [2011] A.J. No. 1057 (QL), 2011 CarswellAlta 1687, setting
aside three of the accused’s convictions and ordering a new trial.  Appeal
dismissed.                     Peter J.
Royal, Q.C., and Tara E. Hayes,
for the appellant.                     Joanne
Dartana, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     Karakatsanis J. — I.       Introduction [1]                             
The issues in this appeal are whether the trial
judge’s reasons for judgment were sufficient and whether the trial judge
properly applied the burden of proof in a criminal case. [2]                             
The appellant was charged with four counts of
sexual assault and one count of unlawful touching of a person under the age of
14 for a sexual purpose.  The charges involved three child complainants and one
adult complainant.  At trial, the appellant was found guilty of all charges. 
The majority of the Court of Appeal set aside three convictions and ordered a
new trial because similar fact evidence was wrongly admitted.  The dissenting
judge at the Court of Appeal would have set aside all of the convictions and
ordered a new trial:  2011 ABCA 280, 515 A.R. 25.  At issue, therefore, are the
two counts relating to the youngest complainant (counts 1 and 2). [3]                             
This is an appeal as of right limited to
questions of law on which a judge of the Court of Appeal dissented.  The
appellant relies on two such issues: whether the trial judge’s reasons are
sufficient and whether the trial judge correctly applied the burden of proof. 
The trial judge’s ruling with respect to similar fact evidence is not before
us. [4]                             
The trial judge’s reasons are sparse and do not
directly address the appellant’s evidence.  For the reasons that follow,
however, I agree with the majority in the Court of Appeal that the trial
judge’s reasons were sufficient and that the trial judge did not err in his
application of the burden of proof. II.     Background [5]                             
The trial judge found the youngest complainant’s
evidence “compelling”, noting a “particularly poignant exchange” between the
complainant and the investigating police officer that had “the ring of truth”. 
The trial judge stated that (a) the complainant was not shaken on cross-examination;
(b) the inconsistencies in her evidence were minor and to be expected
(particularly from a child witness); (c) the appellant’s arguments with respect
to the physical impossibility of the incidents as described by the complainant
were “merely conjecture”; and (d) although the police officer who interviewed
the complainant posed leading questions, they did not pertain to the “essential
features” of the circumstances leading to the offences.  Further, the trial
judge characterized the appellant’s suggestion that the complainant concocted
the allegations as speculative. [6]                             
With respect to the appellant’s evidence, the
trial judge noted that the appellant “simply denied all of the allegations”. 
Shortly after repeating his finding that the complainant’s evidence was
compelling, the trial judge stated his conclusion on counts 1 and 2:  “In the
end, notwithstanding [the appellant’s] denial, I have no reasonable doubt that
the [appellant] did commit the acts which [the complainant] described”. [7]                             
The majority of the Court of Appeal, represented
by McDonald J.A. with respect to the issues before this Court, found that the
trial judge provided an accurate distillation of the law on the burden of proof
in criminal cases and gave reasons that were sufficient because they met “the Sheppard
requirements and made it clear to the appellant why he had been convicted
at trial” (para. 66). Relying on this Court’s decision in R. v. R.E.M.,
2008 SCC 51, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 3, McDonald J.A. concluded that the reasons
generally demonstrated that where the complainant’s evidence and the accused’s
evidence conflicted, the trial judge had accepted the evidence of the
complainant. [8]                             
Côté J.A., dissenting, found that the trial
judge misapplied the burden of proof and that his reasons were inadequate. 
With respect to the burden of proof, the verdicts of guilt relating to the
youngest complainant were “at best . . . an unexplained conclusion” because the
trial judge did not mention the appellant’s evidence in relation to these counts
(para. 100).  As for the sufficiency of the reasons, the trial judge did not
adequately address the problems with the complainant’s evidence.  The reasons
also did not explain why the appellant’s evidence was rejected or failed to
raise a reasonable doubt and did not permit an appellate court to determine
whether he misapplied the principles in R. v. W.(D.), [1991] 1 S.C.R.
742. III.    Were the Trial Judge’s Reasons Sufficient? [9]                             
Counsel for the appellant candidly submitted
that he was not asking the court to make any new law.  Rather, he submitted
that the reasons of the trial judge did not explain why the trial judge
accepted the evidence of the complainant, despite live credibility issues, and
did not address the appellant’s evidence or explain why it was rejected. The
reasons did not allow an appellate court to determine whether there was a legal
error in the application of W.(D.). [10]                         
An appellate court tasked with determining
whether a trial judge gave sufficient reasons must follow a functional approach: 
R. v. Sheppard, 2002 SCC 26, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 869, at para. 55.  An
appeal based on insufficient reasons “will only be allowed where the trial
judge’s reasons are so deficient that they foreclose meaningful appellate
review”:  R. v. Dinardo, 2008 SCC 24, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 788, at para. 25. [11]                         
Here, the key issue at trial was credibility.
Credibility determinations by a trial judge attract a high degree of
deference.  In Dinardo, Charron J. explained: Where a case turns largely on
determinations of credibility, the sufficiency of the reasons should be
considered in light of the deference afforded to trial judges on credibility
findings.  Rarely will the deficiencies in the trial judge’s credibility
analysis, as expressed in the reasons for judgment, merit intervention on
appeal.  Nevertheless, a failure to sufficiently articulate how credibility
concerns were resolved may constitute reversible error (see R. v. Braich,
[2002] 1 S.C.R. 903, 2002 SCC 27, at para. 23).  As this Court noted in R.
v. Gagnon, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 621, 2006 SCC 17, the accused is entitled to
know “why the trial judge is left with no reasonable doubt” . . . .  [para. 26] [12]                         
Ultimately, appellate courts considering the
sufficiency of reasons “should read them as a whole, in the context of the
evidence, the arguments and the trial, with an appreciation of the purposes or
functions for which they are delivered”: R.E.M., at para. 16.  These
purposes “are fulfilled if the reasons, read in context, show why the judge
decided as he or she did” (para. 17). [13]                         
In R.E.M., this Court also explained that
a trial judge’s failure to explain why he rejected an accused’s plausible
denial of the charges does not mean the reasons are deficient as long as the
reasons generally demonstrate that, where the complainant’s evidence and the
accused’s evidence conflicted, the trial judge accepted the complainant’s
evidence.  No further explanation for rejecting the accused’s evidence is
required as the convictions themselves raise a reasonable inference that the
accused’s denial failed to raise a reasonable doubt (see para. 66). [14]                         
The appellant submits that the reasons do not
disclose why the trial judge decided as he did. Before accepting the
complainant’s evidence the trial judge failed to address live issues relating
to the credibility of the complainant.  A number of the live issues, listed in
detail by the dissenting judge in the Court of Appeal, went unmentioned by the
trial judge or, if mentioned, were followed by a bald conclusion.  Although a
trial judge’s credibility findings relating to witnesses should not be lightly
disturbed, the trial judge’s reasons do not adequately explain why he accepted
the complainant’s evidence and why the appellant’s evidence did not raise a
reasonable doubt. [15]                         
The core question in determining whether the
trial judge’s reasons are sufficient is the following: Do the reasons, read in
context, show why the judge decided as he did on the counts relating to the
complainant? In this case, the trial judge’s reasons satisfy this threshold. [16]                         
First, the trial judge found the evidence of the
complainant compelling — that is, credible and reliable.  He explained why,
noting an exchange between the complainant and the investigating police officer
to whom she expressed worry about being considered a bad girl because she may
have liked what the appellant had done to her.  The trial judge stated that
this “had the ring of truth”. [17]                         
Second, the trial judge recognized the live
issues relating to the complainant’s credibility.  He was not obliged to
discuss all of the evidence on any given point or answer each and every
argument of counsel:  R.E.M., at paras. 32 and 64; and Dinardo,
at para. 30.  Here, he noted the problems in her evidence — the lack of a
hymen, inconsistency as to the number of incidents, the physical impossibility
of some allegations, and leading questions by the police officer who took her
statement.  He addressed each of them, albeit briefly, ultimately finding that
they were inconsequential to his conclusion.  He characterized the appellant’s
suggestion of concoction as speculative. [18]                         
Third, the trial judge considered the
appellant’s denial of the allegations. He acknowledged that the appellant’s
evidence may have been more fulsome if his command of the English language were
better.  Read in context, the trial judge’s reasons reveal that he rejected the
appellant’s denial.  Later in his reasons, in relation to the other counts, the
trial judge stated that the denial was not truthful and did not raise a doubt. [19]                         
I conclude that the reasons were sufficient —
they allow for meaningful appellate review because they tell the appellant why
the trial judge decided as he did. The trial judge found the complainant’s
evidence compelling, the problems in her evidence inconsequential, and the
appellant’s concoction theories speculative.  The reasons reveal that the trial
judge accepted the complainant’s evidence where it conflicted with the
appellant’s evidence.  No further explanation for rejecting the appellant’s
evidence was required. IV.    Did the Trial Judge Err in His Application of the Burden
of Proof? [20]                         
The appellant submits that the trial judge
misapplied the burden of proof in a criminal case by not following the test in W.(D.)
and thereby failing to properly assess the appellant’s evidence. [21]                         
The paramount question in a criminal case is
whether, on the whole of the evidence, the trier of fact is left with a
reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused:  W.(D.), at p.
758.   The order in which a trial judge makes credibility findings of witnesses
is inconsequential as long as the principle of reasonable doubt remains the
central consideration.  A verdict of guilt must not be based on a choice
between the accused’s evidence and the Crown’s evidence:  R. v.
C.L.Y., 2008 SCC 2, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 5, at paras. 6-8.  However,
trial judges are not required to explain in detail the process they followed to
reach a verdict:  see R. v. Boucher, 2005 SCC 72, [2005] 3 S.C.R. 499,
at para. 29.  [22]                         
The trial judge adverted to the principles of W.(D.)
at the outset of his reasons: W.(D.) requires me to attend to the evidence of the accused in a particular
way.  That does not mean, however, that the accused’s evidence is considered in
a vacuum.  The dangers that W.(D.) addresses are the potential for
simply comparing stories and for shifting the onus to the accused.  However,
the accused’s evidence is part of a body of evidence, all of which bears upon
the credit that may be given to any portion of that evidence.  One cannot determine whether
the accused’s evidence is true or at least raises a reasonable doubt by simply
considering his evidence and the way he gave it.  Doing so ignores one of the
fundamental [tenets] of fact-finding.  It is not just internal consistency
which lends credence to testimony.  External consistency is also part of the
analysis.  Evidence inconsistent with found or admitted fact, may be
discounted, no matter what its source.  [Emphasis added.]  [23]                         
Immediately following these paragraphs, the
trial judge assessed the complainant’s credibility, starting with the statement: 
“In this case, [the complainant’s] evidence was compelling.” [24]                         
The appellant argues that in the absence of any
reasons why his evidence was rejected or did not raise a reasonable doubt, the
reasons suggest that the trial judge first found the complainant credible, and
then used that finding — or “found fact” to use the trial judge’s words — to
later reject the evidence of the appellant, effectively choosing the Crown’s
evidence over that of the defence. [25]                         
In my view, the trial judge was merely articulating
general principles of law that may be used in assessing the evidence of
the accused.  Further, in assessing the Crown’s case, the trial judge referred
explicitly to the appellant’s denial:  “. . . notwithstanding [the appellant’s]
denial, I have no reasonable doubt that the [appellant] did commit the acts
which [the complainant] described”. [26]                         
I conclude, therefore, that the trial judge
properly applied the burden of proof.  Although a trial judge is not required
to outline the W.(D.) steps, the trial judge here referred to W.(D.)
and the dangers that it addresses:  “. . . the potential for simply comparing
stories and for shifting the onus to the accused”.  In my view, the trial
judge’s reasons for finding the appellant guilty on counts 1 and 2, read in the
context of the reasons as a whole, do not reveal an incorrect application of
the principles outlined in that decision. [27]                         
In the result, the trial judge rejected the
appellant’s testimony.  In Boucher, Charron J. (dissenting in part)
stated that when a trial judge rejects an accused’s testimony, “it can
generally be concluded that the testimony failed to raise a reasonable doubt in
the judge’s mind” (para. 59). Similarly, in R.E.M., McLachlin C.J.
stated that “the convictions themselves raise a reasonable inference that the
accused’s denial of the charges failed to raise a reasonable doubt” (para. 66). [28]                         
Here, the appellant was not believed.  The
Crown’s case was considered with the appellant’s denial in mind, and the trial
judge concluded, as he was entitled to do, that his denial did not raise a
reasonable doubt. V.  Conclusion [29]                         
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.                     Appeal
dismissed.                     Solicitors
for the appellant:  Royal Teskey, Edmonton.                     Solicitor
for the respondent:  Attorney General of Alberta, Edmonton.   