  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Levkovic, 2013 SCC 25, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 204 Date: 20130503 Docket: 34229  Between: Ivana
Levkovic Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent - and - Attorney
General of Canada and Criminal
Lawyers’ Association of Ontario Interveners    Coram: McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell
and Moldaver JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 81) Fish J. (McLachlin C.J. and LeBel,
  Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell and Moldaver JJ. concurring)      R. v.
Levkovic, 2013 SCC 25, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 204 Ivana Levkovic                                                                                                Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Attorney General of Canada and Criminal Lawyers’ Association
of Ontario                                                Interveners Indexed as:  R. v. Levkovic 2013 SCC 25 File No.:  34229. 2012:  October 10; 2013:  May 3. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and LeBel, Fish, Abella, Rothstein,
Cromwell and Moldaver JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for ontario                     While
cleaning a recently vacated apartment, a building superintendent discovered on
the balcony a bag containing the remains of a human baby.  According to the
Crown, the remains were of a female delivered “at or near full term”.  The
cause of death could not be determined and it was unknown whether there had
been a live birth.  The accused was charged under s. 243  of the Criminal
Code  with concealing the dead body of a child.  Before any evidence was
called, she challenged the constitutionality of s. 243  on the grounds that
the section infringes her right to liberty and security under s. 7  of the
Charter .  The trial judge concluded that the concept of a child that died
before birth is unconstitutionally vague because he could not identify the
moment on the gestational spectrum when a fetus becomes the body of a child for
the purpose of s. 243 .  He severed the word “before” from s. 243 .  The
Crown did not call evidence and the accused was acquitted.  The Court of Appeal
allowed an appeal and ordered a new trial on the grounds that the trial judge
applied an overly demanding standard of vagueness.  The Court of Appeal relied
on the “chance of life” standard from R. v. Berriman (1854), 6 Cox C.C.
388, to conclude that a fetus becomes a child for the purpose of s. 243  when
the fetus has reached a stage when, but for some external event or
circumstance, it would likely have been born alive.                     Held:  The appeal
should be dismissed.                     Impermissibly
vague laws mock the rule of law and scorn an ancient and well-established principle
of fundamental justice:  No one may be convicted or punished for an act or
omission that is not clearly prohibited by a valid law.  The issue on this
appeal is whether s. 243  of the Criminal Code  satisfies these
constitutional requirements.                     The
risk of incarceration upon conviction clearly engaged the accused’s liberty
interest under s. 7  of the Charter .  It is thus unnecessary to
dispose of her submission that s. 243  infringes s. 7  because it
interferes with a decision of fundamental personal importance:  whether and how
to disclose the natural end of a failed pregnancy.  Furthermore, the accused’s
argument that s. 7  of the Charter  must hold s. 243  to a
heightened standard of precision because it interferes with every woman’s right
not to disclose a naturally failed pregnancy raises a challenge for vagueness
in form but overbreadth in substance.  Given that the accused’s overbreadth
arguments were rejected by both courts below and not raised on this appeal,
there is no proper basis to revisit the issue here.                     In
accordance with s. 7  of the Charter , in a criminal context, a
statutory provision must afford citizens fair notice of the consequences of
their conduct and it must limit the discretion of those charged with its
enforcement.  A provision that fails to satisfy these essential requirements is
void for vagueness.  This is judicially determined by examination of both the
provision’s text and context.  Section 243  meets the minimum standard of
precision required by the Charter .  In its application to a child that
died before birth, it only captures the disposal of the remains of children
that were likely to be born alive.  A conviction will only lie where the Crown
proves that the child, to the knowledge of the accused, was likely to have been
born alive.  Section 243  gives fair notice of the risk of prosecution and
conviction and limits with sufficient clarity the discretion of those charged
with its enforcement.  There is thus no need to conduct a s. 1  analysis.                     A
court can conclude that a law is unconstitutionally vague only after exhausting
its interpretive function.  This requires considering prior judicial
interpretations of the provision, the legislative purpose of the provision, its
subject matter and nature, societal values and related legislative provisions. 
A plain reading of s. 243  makes clear that it is focused on the event of
birth.  The interpretation of s. 243  is informed by Berriman, which
sets out that an accused can only be convicted of child concealment if he or
she, with intent to conceal its birth, disposed of the body of a child that had
reached a point of development where, but for some accidental circumstances it
might have been born alive.  However, where Berriman required that the
fetus “might have been born alive”, a likelihood requirement is
to be preferred.  A likelihood standard best comports with the late term focus
of s. 243  and affords greater certainty in its application.  Moreover, a
likelihood standard is consistent
with the primary purpose of s. 243  in facilitating the investigation of
other Criminal Code  provisions: the homicide provisions that apply only
when the victim is a human being which, in the case of a child, requires that
the child has completely proceeded, in a living state, from the body of its mother;
ss. 238  and 242 , both of which focus on the event of birth; and, s. 662(4) 
which, on a charge of murder or infanticide, permits a conviction under s. 243 
where neither murder nor infanticide is made out.  Limiting
the pre-birth application of s. 243  to fetuses that were likely to have
been born alive is consistent with the clear late term focus of these offences.                     Section 243 
is not vague because an accused is dependent on expert medical evidence to know
whether a fetus would likely have been born alive.   Medical evidence would be
required even if s. 243  provided a detailed description of the precise
moment on the gestational spectrum where a miscarriage becomes a still birth. Cases Cited                     Discussed:
 R. v. Berriman (1854), 6 Cox C.C. 388; referred to:  Reference
re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code (Man.), [1990] 1
S.C.R. 1123; Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385 (1926); Cline
v. Frink Dairy Co., 274 U.S. 445 (1927); R. v. Mabior, 2012 SCC 47,
[2012] 2 S.C.R. 584; Canada (Attorney General) v. PHS Community Services
Society, 2011 SCC 44, [2011] 3 S.C.R. 134; R. v. Nova Scotia
Pharmaceutical Society, [1992] 2 S.C.R. 606; Canadian Foundation for
Children, Youth and the Law v. Canada (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 4, [2004]
1 S.C.R. 76; Ontario v. Canadian Pacific Ltd., [1995] 2 S.C.R. 1031; Osborne
v. Canada (Treasury Board), [1991] 2 S.C.R. 69. Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 1 , 7 . R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 1094, s. 20. Authors Cited Manning, Morris, and Peter Sankoff.  Manning, Mewett &
Sankoff:  Criminal Law, 4th ed.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2009. Ontario.  Inquiry into Pediatric Forensic Pathology in Ontario: 
Report, vol. 1.  Toronto:  Ministry of the Attorney General, 2008. Stuart, Don.  Canadian Criminal Law:  A Treatise, 6th ed.  Scarborough,
Ont.:  Carswell, 2011. Williams, Glanville.  Criminal Law:  The General Part, 2nd
ed.  London:  Stevens & Sons, 1961.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Ontario Court of Appeal (Doherty, Armstrong and Watt
JJ.A.), 2010 ONCA 830, 103 O.R. (3d) 1, 223 C.R.R. (2d) 261, 271 O.A.C. 177,
264 C.C.C. (3d) 423, 81 C.R. (6th) 376, [2010] O.J. No. 5252 (QL), 2010
CarswellOnt 9252, setting aside the acquittal entered by Hill J. (2008), 235
C.C.C. (3d) 417, 178 C.R.R. (2d) 285, 2008 CanLII 48647, [2008] O.J. No. 3746
(QL), 2008 CarswellOnt 5744, and ordering a new trial.  Appeal
dismissed.                     Jill Copeland, Delmar Doucette, Jessica Orkin and Nicole Rozier, for the appellant.                     Jamie Klukach and Gillian Roberts, for the respondent.                     Robert J.
Frater and Richard Kramer, for the intervener the Attorney
General of Canada.                     Marie Henein and Danielle Robitaille, for the intervener the Criminal
Lawyers’ Association of Ontario.                     The judgment of the Court was
delivered by                     Fish J. — I [1]                             
Impermissibly vague laws mock the rule of law
and scorn an ancient and well-established principle of fundamental justice: No
one may be convicted or punished for an act or omission that is not clearly
prohibited by a valid law.  That principle is now enshrined in the Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms . This has been recognized by the Court since
its earliest pronouncements on unconstitutional vagueness in the Charter 
era. [2]                             
In Reference re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c) of
the Criminal Code (Man.), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1123, the Court cited with
approval two decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States[1] holding that
“impermissibly vague laws” violate “the first essential of due process of law”
(p. 1151), and continued as follows: [3]                             
And very recently, speaking for the Court in R.
v. Mabior, 2012 SCC 47, [2012] S.C.R. 584, Chief Justice McLachlin
reaffirmed the governing principle in these terms: It is a fundamental requirement of the
rule of law that a person should be able to predict whether a particular act
constitutes a crime at the time he commits the act.  The rule of law requires
that laws provide in advance what can and cannot be done . . . .  Condemning
people for conduct that they could not have reasonably known was criminal is
Kafkaesque and anathema to our notions of justice.  After-the-fact condemnation
violates the concept of liberty in s. 7  of the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms  and has no place in the Canadian legal system. [para. 14] [6]                             
The trial judge held that it is; the Ontario
Court of Appeal held that it is not.  With respect for the contrary conclusion
of the trial judge, I agree with the Court of Appeal. [7]                             
The appellant argues that s. 7  of the Charter 
must hold s. 243  to a more exacting standard of precision because it
interferes with what in her view is a constitutionally protected personal
autonomy and privacy interest: every woman’s right not to disclose a naturally
failed pregnancy. [9]                             
It seems to me that the appellant’s submission
regarding a woman’s right not to disclose a naturally failed pregnancy amounts
to a challenge for vagueness in form but overbreadth in substance.  A challenge
for overbreadth would require the Court to balance the impact of s. 243  on the
appellant’s constitutionally protected interests against the impact necessary
for s. 243  to achieve its justified legislative objectives.  The appellant’s
arguments regarding this balance were rejected by both courts below.  Moreover,
there is no challenge for overbreadth on this appeal.  And it is not open to
the appellant, in characterizing her privacy interest submission as a vagueness
challenge, to circumvent this balancing exercise that informs a proper
constitutional challenge for overbreadth. [10]                         
There is otherwise no dispute regarding the
analytical framework for determining whether a statutory provision is void for
vagueness.  Nor is there any dispute as to the governing criteria: In a
criminal context, the impugned provision must afford citizens fair notice of
the consequences of their conduct and limit the discretion of those charged
with its enforcement. [11]                         
Whether the provision satisfies these essential
requirements will be judicially determined by examination of both its text and
context.  Normally, in making that determination, the court will first consider
the plain meaning of the words used by Parliament to define the essential
elements of the offence.  In this regard, the requirement of a specific intent,
as in this case, will often shed light on the intelligibility of the terms used
to describe the prohibited act or omission. [12]                         
I shall later have more to say about these
established rules of interpretation.  As we shall see, their application here
leads me to conclude that s. 243  of the Criminal Code  is not
impermissibly vague in its application to a child that dies before birth.  Only
that aspect of the provision is in issue on this appeal. [13]                         
Any ambiguity as to this element of the offence
is resolved in favour of the accused, as it must be, by restricting the
pre-birth application of s. 243  to the delivery of a child that would likely
have been born alive.  By this I mean, here and throughout, a child that has
reached a stage of development where, but for some external event or
circumstances, it would likely have been born alive. [14]                         
I recognize, of course, that provincial and
territorial legislation requires reporting of all stillbirths, generally
defined as “the complete expulsion or extraction from its mother of a product
of conception either after the twentieth week of pregnancy or after the product
of conception has attained the weight of 500 grams or more [without signs of
life]”, or words to this effect: see, for example, Vital Statistics Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. V.4, s. 1. [16]                         
Finally, a brief word regarding the fault
element of s. 243  in its application to a child that died before birth.  The
Crown concedes, properly in my view, that the burden of proof would be on the
prosecution to establish the accused’s awareness that the child died at a time
when it was likely to be born alive.  Any doubt in this regard would require an
acquittal.  In addition, as in cases where the child dies at or after birth, the
prosecution must prove that the accused disposed of its body “with intent to
conceal the fact that [the child’s] mother has been delivered of it”. [17]                         
For these reasons and the reasons that follow, I
would dismiss the appellant’s appeal to this Court, affirm the judgment of the
Court of Appeal, and remit the matter for trial. II [18]                         
By agreement, the appellant’s constitutional
challenge to s. 243  was heard and decided by the trial judge before any
evidence was called.  Accordingly, the facts alleged by the Crown remain to
this day unproven and are thus conditionally relevant here as a matter of
context only. [19]                         
For present purposes, the following summary will
suffice. [20]                         
While cleaning a recently vacated apartment, a
building superintendent discovered on the balcony a bag containing the remains
of a human baby.  Post-mortem examination revealed that the remains were of a
female delivered “at or near full term”: R.F., at para. 8.  Due to the
decomposition of the remains, the cause of death could not be determined and it
was unknown whether there had been a live birth. [21]                         
Following media reports of the superintendent’s
discovery, Ivana Levkovic, the appellant in this Court, attended at a police
station and gave a statement to the police.  She gave birth to the baby, she explained,
after falling while alone in the apartment.  She then placed the baby in a bag,
deposited the bag on the balcony, and left the apartment.  Nothing in her
statement to the police suggests that the baby was alive at birth. [22]                         
Ms. Levkovic was charged with concealing the
body of a child under s. 243  of the Criminal Code .  She pleaded not
guilty and, before any evidence was called, challenged the constitutionality of
s. 243  on the ground that it is impermissibly vague in its application to a child
that died before birth.  To this extent, she submitted, s. 243  violates s.
7  of the Charter . [23]                         
The trial judge granted Ms. Levkovic’s
application: (2008), 235 C.C.C. (3d) 417.  He concluded that the concept of a
child that died before birth is unconstitutionally vague because he could not
identify the moment on the gestational spectrum when a fetus becomes the body
of a child within the meaning of s. 243 . [24]                         
To bring the provision into compliance with s. 7 
of the Charter , the trial judge severed the word “before” from the text
of the provision, thereby limiting its application to children that died either
during or after birth. [25]                         
The Crown elected to call no evidence and the
trial judge acquitted the appellant. [26]                         
The Court of Appeal allowed an appeal by the
Crown, set aside the decision of the trial judge, restored the pre-birth
application of s. 243 , and ordered a new trial: 2010 ONCA 830, 103 O.R. (3d) 1. [27]                         
The Court of Appeal concluded that the trial
judge had erred by applying an overly demanding standard of vagueness and in
failing to apply R. v. Berriman (1854), 6 Cox C.C. 388 (Surrey Assizes),
to his interpretation of s. 243 .  Relying on Berriman, the Court of
Appeal held that a fetus becomes a child for the purpose of s. 243  upon
reaching a stage in its development when, but for some external event or other
circumstances, it would likely have been born alive. [28]                         
Ms. Levkovic now asks this Court to overrule the
Court of Appeal and restore her acquittal.  She raises two main grounds:  (1)
that the Court of Appeal erred in conducting an insufficiently contextual
vagueness analysis, overlooking the full impact of s. 243  on her Charter -protected
right to liberty and security; and (2) that the Court of Appeal erred in
relying on the chance of life standard to uphold the constitutionality
of s. 243 . III [29]                         
Plainly, Ms. Levkovic’s prosecution under s. 243 
of the Criminal Code  engages her liberty interest under s. 7  of the Charter ,
given the risk of her incarceration upon conviction: Canada (Attorney
General) v. PHS Community Services Society, 2011 SCC 44, [2011] 3 S.C.R.
134, at para. 87. [30]                         
It is therefore unnecessary at this stage to
dispose of the appellant’s submission that s. 243  also infringes her
liberty and security under s. 7  of the Charter  because it interferes
with a decision of fundamental personal importance: whether and how to disclose
the natural end of a failed pregnancy. [31]                         
Accordingly, I now turn instead to consider
whether s. 243 , though it engages s. 7  of the Charter , nevertheless
passes constitutional muster because it accords with the principles of
fundamental justice. IV [32]                         
The doctrine against vagueness is founded on two
rationales: a law must provide fair notice to citizens and it must limit
enforcement discretion.  Understood in light of its theoretical foundations,
the doctrine against vagueness is a critical component of a society grounded in
the rule of law:  R. v. Nova Scotia Pharmaceutical Society, [1992] 2
S.C.R. 606, at pp. 626-27; Canadian Foundation for Children, Youth and the
Law v. Canada (Attorney General), 2004 SCC 4, [2004] 1 S.C.R. 76, at
para. 16. [33]                         
Since long before the Charter , Canadian
criminal law has adhered to the principle of certainty: prohibited conduct must
be fixed and knowable in advance: M. Manning and P. Sankoff, Manning, Mewett & Sankoff: 
Criminal Law (4th ed. 2009), at p. 76.  As
Glanville Williams explained in Criminal Law: The General Part (2nd ed.
1961), at pp. 575-76 (cited in D. Stuart, Canadian Criminal Law:  A Treatise
(6th ed. 2011), at pp. 20-21):  . .
. “Law” for this purpose means a body of fixed rules; and it excludes wide
discretion even though that discretion be exercised by independent judges.  The
principle of legality involves rejecting “criminal equity” as a mode of
extending the law. [34]                         
This does not mean that an individual must know
with certainty whether a particular course of conduct will ultimately result in
a conviction of the crime that prohibits such conduct.  What it does mean is
that the essential elements of the crime must be ascertainable in advance.  If
an accused must wait “until a
court decides what the contours and parameters of the offence are then the
accused is being treated unfairly and contrary to the principles of fundamental
justice”:  Manning, at pp. 75-76. [35]                         
Individuals are nonetheless expected to refrain
from conduct that tests the boundaries of criminal law lest they bear the
consequences of the risk they have knowingly assumed: see Canadian
Foundation for Children, at para. 42.  Understandably, the appellant
acknowledges that the Constitution contemplates a necessary degree of
imprecision in this regard.  She submits, however, that such imprecision is
unconstitutional if it requires individuals to refrain from constitutionally
protected conduct. [36]                         
The appellant argues that s. 243  must explicitly
draw a dividing line between miscarriages and stillbirths lest a woman feel
compelled by her uncertainty to give up more of her Charter -protected
privacy than necessary.  In effect, the appellant urges the Court to modify the
well-established vagueness standard by introducing an additional factor into
the vagueness analysis:  the potential chilling impact of the impugned
provision on Charter -protected interests.  I would decline this
invitation to vary the governing analytical framework established by the
Court. [37]                         
The rule against unconstitutional vagueness is
primarily intended to assure the intelligibility of the criminal law to those
who are subject to its sanctions and to those who are charged with its
enforcement.  As this Court stated in Ontario v. Canadian Pacific Ltd.,
[1995] 2 S.C.R. 1031, at para. 82: In the
context of vagueness, proportionality plays no role in the analysis.  There is
no need to compare the purpose of the law with its effects (as in overbreadth)
. . . . A court is required to perform its interpretive function, in order to
determine whether an impugned provision provides the basis for legal debate. [38]                         
This does not mean that the impact of s. 243  on
a woman’s privacy interests is irrelevant to its constitutionality.  However,
it is important to maintain the analytical distinction between true vagueness
and the additional vagueness concern raised by the appellant.  The latter, in
my view, is more appropriately considered an aspect of overbreadth and dealt
with in that context.  As the respondent rightly points out, failing to do so
would create a “lopsided” analysis that “takes account of individual interests
. . . without equal regard to the law’s objectives”: R.F., at para. 63. [39]                         
As this Court held in Nova Scotia
Pharmaceutical, “once the minimal general standard has been met, any
further arguments as to the precision of the enactments should be considered at
the ‘minimal impairment’ stage of s. 1 analysis” (p. 643).  Or, in this
case, where no Charter  violation has yet been established and there is
therefore no need to consider s. 1, additional precision-based arguments
relating to the scope of the provision should be considered in an overbreadth
analysis. [40]                         
Where a law meets the minimum standard of
precision required by the Charter , it may nevertheless by
“[g]enerality and imprecision of language . . . fail to confine the invasion of
a Charter  right within reasonable limits.  In this sense vagueness is an
aspect of overbreadth”: Osborne v. Canada (Treasury Board), [1991] 2
S.C.R. 69, at pp. 94-95. [41]                         
Given that the appellant’s overbreadth arguments
were rejected by both courts below and not raised on this appeal, there is no
proper basis to revisit the issue here. [42]                         
I turn then to the question at the heart of this
appeal:  Does s. 243 sufficiently limit enforcement discretion and provide
citizens with fair notice of the type of conduct that risks criminal sanction? 
As mentioned at the outset, I believe that it does. V [43]                         
Section 243 states: 243. Every one who in any manner disposes of the dead body of a child,
with intent to conceal the fact that its mother has been delivered of it,
whether the child died before, during or after birth, is guilty of an
indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years. [45]                         
Despite this clear connection to the event of
birth, the appellant argues that the word “before” renders s. 243 vague because
it does not clearly distinguish a birth from a miscarriage.  In other words, a
woman may not know whether she has miscarried and is therefore outside the
scope of s. 243, or has instead experienced a stillbirth and may therefore be
caught by s. 243.  From the appellant’s perspective, the transition point
between miscarriage and stillbirth is critical.  It represents the moment when
a fetus becomes a child and therefore delineates the boundary between
permissible and criminal conduct: only the concealment of the body of a child
is caught by s. 243. [46]                         
Thus, the central vagueness question is whether
s. 243 sufficiently identifies the moment on the gestational spectrum when a
miscarriage becomes a stillbirth.  The answer to this question does not lie
entirely and exclusively in the text of s. 243. [47]                         
A court can conclude that a law is
unconstitutionally vague only after exhausting its interpretive function.  The
court “must first develop the full interpretive context surrounding an impugned
provision”: Canadian Pacific, at paras. 47 and 79. [48]                         
To develop a provision’s “full interpretive
context”, this Court has considered: (i) prior judicial interpretations; (ii)
the legislative purpose; (iii) the subject matter and nature of the impugned
provision; (iv) societal values; and (v) related legislative provisions: Canadian
Pacific, at paras. 47 and 87. [49]                         
Relevant jurisprudence as to the scope of this
offence dates back over 150 years to the English case of Berriman.  Ms.
Berriman was charged with concealing the birth of her child.  The police linked
Ms. Berriman to the “half calcined” bones of a baby with a gestational age of
seven to nine months.  Erle J. instructed the jury not to convict if the fetus
could have had no “chance of life”: This offence cannot be
committed unless the child had arrived at that stage of maturity at the time of
birth, that it might have been a living child. It is not necessary that it
should have been born alive, but it must have reached a period when, but for
some accidental circumstances, such as disease on the part of itself or of its
mother, it might have been born alive.  There is no law which compels a
woman to proclaim her own want of chastity, and if she had miscarried at a time
when the fœtus was but a few months old, and therefore could have had no chance
of life, you could not convict her upon this charge. No specific limit can be assigned
to the period when the chance of life begins, but it may, perhaps, be safely
assumed that under seven months the great probably [sic] is that the
child would not be born alive. [p. 390] [50]                         
According to this test, an accused could only be
convicted of child concealment if he or she, with the intent to conceal its
birth, disposed of the body of a child that had reached a point of development
where, “but for some accidental circumstances . . . it might have been born
alive”. [52]                         
I would in any case hesitate to import into s.
243 a fixed threshold based on gestational age that Parliament has so far
chosen to omit. [53]                         
In my view, s. 243 is informed by Berriman. [54]                         
However, where Erle J. found it sufficient in Berriman
that the fetus “might have been born alive”, I would adopt a likelihood
requirement instead.  I agree with the Court of Appeal that, for the purposes
of s. 243, a fetus becomes a child when the fetus “has reached a stage in its
development when, but for some external event or other circumstances, it would
likely have been born alive” (para. 115 (emphasis added)). [55]                         
This “likelihood” standard best comports with
the late term focus of s. 243 and thus affords greater certainty in its
application. [56]                         
To support a conviction under s. 243, it must be
shown that the “remains” disposed of were the remains of a child.  In cases
involving death before birth, the burden is therefore on the Crown to prove
that the fetus would likely have been born alive. [57]                         
This brings me to another important aspect of a
full contextual interpretation of s. 243: its legislative purpose and context. [58]                         
The parties agree that
s. 243 is largely concerned with facilitating the investigation of homicides. 
In order to do so, s. 243 must cover potential victims of homicide. [59]                         
Pursuant to s. 222(1) ,
the homicide provisions of the Criminal Code  apply only when the victim
is a human being.  And pursuant to s. 223(1) of the Code, a child
becomes a human being “when it has completely proceeded, in a living state,
from the body of its mother, whether or not (a) it has breathed; (b)
it has an independent circulation; or (c) the navel string is severed”. [60]                         
In order to facilitate
the investigation of homicides, s. 243 must therefore apply to children that
were either born alive or were likely to be born alive and thus capable of
satisfying the Criminal Code  definition of a human being in s. 223(1) . 
As the trial judge reasoned at para. 156: . . . allowing persons to conduct
themselves as though pregnancy terminated in still-birth, and to say so if
challenged, all without reliable government certification, amounts to an easy
and unacceptable escape for those inclined to eliminate a new-born infant by
killing it. Unchecked and unreviewable disposal of a still-born child
effectively defeats the state’s ability to verify that death preceded live
birth. [62]                         
That said, to fully
achieve its purpose, s. 243 must also facilitate the investigation of ss. 238 
and 242 , which both contemplate the death of a child that has not yet become a
human being within the meaning of s. 223(1)  of the Criminal Code . [63]                         
Section 238  prohibits
killing an unborn child in the act of birth and s. 242  proscribes the failure
to obtain assistance in childbirth, resulting in permanent injury or death
immediately before, during, or a short time after birth. [65]                         
This likelihood approach
is also consistent with s. 662(4)  of the Criminal Code , which, on a
charge of murder or infanticide, permits a conviction under s. 243  where
neither murder nor infanticide is made out, but the evidence proves the
requisite elements of s. 243 . [66]                         
When considered in light of s. 662(4) , it is
clear that the pre-birth application of s. 243 is not intended to reach back
beyond the delivery of a child that would likely have been born alive.  Rather,
its application to a child that died before birth simply ensures that the law
can respond to criminal conduct against newly born infants in cases where the
evidence does not establish that death occurred post-birth. [67]                         
By facilitating the investigation of the
offences discussed above, s. 243 ultimately serves to protect children born
alive and a subset of children that died before birth.  The parties agree that
Parliament can properly legislate with respect to both.  As we have seen, the
appellant explicitly concedes that Parliament may “enact legislation which has
application to the concealment of a fetus at some stages of development prior
to live birth”. [68]                         
With regard to newly born
children, the importance of s. 243 is clear.  As expressed in the Goudge
Report, vol. 1, at p. 4,[2]
society is gravely concerned with investigating offences committed against
society’s youngest: For the
community itself, the death of a child in criminally suspicious circumstances
is deeply disturbing.  Children are the community’s most precious and most
defenceless asset.  The sense of outrage and the urgent need to understand what
happened are overwhelming. [69]                         
Bearing its purposes in mind, the pre-birth application
of s. 243 is appropriately limited to fetuses that were likely to have been
born alive.  In the words of the respondent, the crime of concealment is
“limited by the clear late term focus of the offences s. 243 is supporting”:
R.F., at para. 50. [70]                         
The appellant argues, however, that even if we
describe a child that died before birth as a fetus that would likely
have been born alive, s. 243 remains vague because an accused is dependent on
expert medical evidence to know whether a fetus was, in fact, likely to have
been born alive. [71]                         
Indeed, the doctrine against vagueness cannot be
satisfied by inaccessible laws.  It is not enough for laws to provide guidance
to legal experts; laws, as judicially interpreted, must be sufficiently
intelligible to guide ordinary citizens on how to conduct themselves within
legal boundaries.  As McLachlin C.J. explained in Mabior (in a passage
more fully set out above): “It is a fundamental requirement of the rule of law
that a person should be able to predict whether a particular act constitutes a
crime at the time he commits the act” (para. 14). [72]                         
Nonetheless, reliance on expert evidence is not
necessarily fatal to the constitutionality of a provision.  Section 243 is by
no means the only offence that relies on expert evidence to determine whether
an offence was committed.  For example, without the benefit of a breathalyser,
individuals may not know whether they have consumed an amount of alcohol that
would bring them over the legal limit.  Similarly, in some murder cases an
accused may not know, without expert medical evidence, whether his or her conduct
actually caused the victim’s death. [74]                         
Even if s. 243 provided a detailed description
of the precise moment on the gestational spectrum where a miscarriage becomes a
stillbirth, as the appellant suggests it should, medical evidence would often
be required in any event.  For example, if s. 243 stated that the concealment
offence only applies to a child that died before birth where the gestational
age is over seven months, what additional certainty would that give a woman who
was unsure of the date of conception?  In such a case, expert medical evidence
regarding gestational age would be required to ascertain whether s. 243 would
capture a decision to keep a failed pregnancy private. [75]                         
Similarly, if the word “before” were severed
from s. 243, making it only applicable to a child that died during or after
birth, a woman remains dependent on medical evidence to determine whether her
conduct would fall within s. 243.  As the trial judge noted: “A mother may not
be in the best position to know whether her new-born is alive or dead . . . .” (para. 83).  He went on to explain, at
para. 145: [76]                         
Accordingly, under the severed version adopted
by the trial judge that would apply only to deaths that occur during or after
birth, medical evidence would still be required; it would simply relate to the
time of death instead of fetal development.  Clearly, it is the subject matter,
rather than the imprecision of the law, that gives rise to the need for expert
medical evidence. [77]                         
Finally, the state’s interest in late-term
failed pregnancies is both ascertainable and well established.  Stillbirths are
highly regulated by provincial and territorial legislation: see R.F., at Appendix
D.  The regulations in all provinces and territories impose some kind of
positive obligation to disclose failed pregnancies where the gestational age is
20 weeks or more or where the fetus weighs 500 grams or more: see, for example,
Vital Statistics Act, ss. 1 and 9.1; and associated regulations under
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 1094, s. 20. [78]                         
The foregoing contextual and purposive analysis
persuades me that s. 243 meets the minimum standard of precision required
by the Charter .  In its application to a child that died
before birth, s. 243  only captures the delivery of a child that was likely
to be born alive. [79]                         
And I recall in this context that a conviction
would only lie where the Crown proves that the child, to the knowledge of the
accused, would likely have been born alive. VI [81]                         
I would therefore dismiss the appeal and affirm
the order for a new trial.                     Appeal
dismissed.                     Solicitors
for the appellant:  Sack Goldblatt Mitchell, Toronto; Doucette Boni
Santoro, Toronto.                     Solicitor
for the respondent:  Attorney General of Ontario, Toronto.                     Solicitor
for the intervener the Attorney General of Canada:  Attorney General
of Canada, Ottawa.                     Solicitors for the
intervener the Criminal Lawyers’ Association of Ontario:  Henein
& Associates, Toronto.  [1]   Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385 (1926), at p. 391; Cline v. Frink Dairy Co.,
274 U.S. 445 (1927), at p. 465. [2]   Inquiry into Pediatric Forensic Pathology in Ontario: Report (2008)
(the “Goudge Report”).  