  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Grant, 2015 SCC 9, [2015] 1
  S.C.R. 475 Date: 20150305 Docket: 35664  Between: Her
Majesty The Queen Appellant and Mark
Edward Grant Respondent   Coram: Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis, Wagner and
Gascon JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 65) Karakatsanis J. (Abella, Rothstein,
  Cromwell, Moldaver, Wagner and Gascon JJ. concurring)     r. v.
grant, 2015 SCC 9, [2015] 1 S.C.R.
475 Her Majesty The Queen                                                                                 Appellant v. Mark Edward Grant                                                                                  Respondent Indexed as:  R. v. Grant 2015 SCC 9 File No.:  35664. 2014:  November 14; 2015:  March 5. Present:  Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver, Karakatsanis,
Wagner and Gascon JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for manitoba                     Criminal
law — Defences — Evidence — Admissibility — Unknown third party suspect — Accused
denied involvement in abduction-murder case — Accused sought to adduce evidence
at trial that unknown third party suspect involved in similar alleged abduction
which accused could not have committed — Trial judge found on balance of
probabilities that alleged abduction had not happened and refused to admit
evidence — Appropriate framework for determining admissibility of defence-led
evidence concerning unknown third party suspect — To what extent framework
requires trial judge to assess and weigh evidence of unknown third party
suspect.                     In
2007, G was charged with the first degree murder of D, a notorious cold-case,
on the basis of newly-tested DNA evidence. G denied any involvement in the
murder, and sought to adduce evidence to suggest that, based on the modus
operandi and other physical evidence, D’s abductor had also abducted W while
G was in custody.                     Having
found that the same legal test applied to the admissibility of known third
party suspect evidence and unknown third party suspect evidence, the trial
judge concluded on a balance of probabilities that the alleged abduction of W
had not happened. He refused to admit the evidence. G was convicted of second
degree murder by the jury. The Manitoba Court of Appeal concluded that G should
have been permitted to lead the evidence, allowed his appeal and ordered a new
trial.                     Held: 
The appeal should be dismissed.                     While
the tests governing known third party suspect evidence and similar fact
evidence may provide useful insights into the underlying concerns and
principles, they should not be stretched beyond the particular circumstances that
they were designed to address. Instead, first principles governing the
admissibility of evidence properly balance the competing interests that arise
when the defence seeks to lead evidence of an unknown third party suspect.                     Defence-led
evidence is admissible where (1) the evidence is relevant to a fact in
issue, and (2) the probative value of the evidence is not substantially
outweighed by its prejudicial effects. The trial judge must therefore first
determine whether the evidence is logically relevant to an available defence.
Where the defence’s theory is that an unknown third party committed the
indicted crime, this factual foundation will be established by a sufficient
connection between the crime for which the accused is charged and the allegedly
similar incident(s) suggesting that the crimes were committed by the same
person, coupled with evidence that the accused could not have committed the
other offence. Once a sufficient connection is shown, the evidence will be
admissible unless its prejudicial effects substantially outweigh its probative
value. This assessment is inherently individualized, and is capable of
responding to various levels and forms of prejudice. It does not require the
accused to satisfy a higher admissibility threshold or require the trial judge
to engage in an enhanced evaluation of the evidence. The trial judge may not
invade the province of the jury and determine the strength of the evidence.                     In
this case, the trial judge erred in law in treating the evidence relating to
the alleged abduction of W as known third party suspect evidence and in
requiring G to establish on a balance of probabilities that the alleged
abduction of W took place.  These errors entitled the Court of Appeal to
conduct its own assessment of the evidence. It was entitled to conclude that
there was evidence upon which the jury could find that the alleged crime
against W had occurred and, having regard to the similarities, that it had been
committed by the same person who killed D. The evidence that G could not have
committed the offence against W and the evidence of similarities between the
two offences would have provided some evidence capable of giving the unknown
third party suspect defence an air of reality. While an appellate court is
entitled to step into the shoes of the trial judge if the record permits, in
this case, the Court of Appeal was not in the position to assess and weigh the
extent of the probative value and the extent of prejudicial effect of the
unknown third party suspect evidence. The trial judge’s legal errors were
clearly not minor, and do not attract the application of the curative proviso
in s. 686(1) (b)(iii) of the Criminal Code . The verdict would not
necessarily have been the same had the trial judge applied the correct
principles in determining the test for the admissibility of this defence
evidence. As this case must be re-tried in any event, the balancing of the
probative value and the prejudicial effect of the evidence is best left for the
trial judge. Cases Cited                     Applied: 
R. v. Seaboyer, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 577; distinguished:  R.
v. Handy, 2002 SCC 56, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 908; referred to:  R.
v. Grandinetti, 2005 SCC 5, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 27; R. v. L. (D.O.),
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 419; R. v. Corbett, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 670; R. v. Noël, 2002 SCC 67, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 433; Sweitzer
v. The Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 949; R. v. Harrer, [1995] 3 S.C.R.
562; R. v. Shearing, 2002 SCC 58, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 33; R. v.
Arcangioli, [1994] 1 S.C.R. 129; R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 3; McMillan v. The Queen,
[1977] 2 S.C.R. 824, aff’g (1975), 7 O.R. (2d) 750; State v.
Scheidell, 227 Wis.2d 285 (1999); United States v.
Stevens, 935 F.2d 1380 (1991); Wiley v. State, 74 S.W.3d 399 (2002);
United States v. McVeigh, 153 F.3d 1166 (1998); Caldwell v. State,
356 S.W.3d 42 (2011); Davis v. State, 413 S.W.3d 816 (2013); R.
v. Arp, [1998] 3 S.C.R. 339; R. v. B. (C.R.), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 717; R. v. Scopelliti (1981), 34 O.R. (2d)
524; R. v. Pollock (2004), 187 C.C.C. (3d) 213;
R. v. Kendall (1987), 35 C.C.C. (3d) 105; R. v. Sims (1994), 28 C.R.
(4th) 231; R. v. Hamilton, 2003 BCCA 490, 180 C.C.C. (3d) 80; R. v.
Brousseau, 2006 QCCA 858; State v. Sullivan, 216 Wis.2d 768 (1998); R. v. Murphy, 2012 ONCA 573, 295
O.A.C. 281; R. v. Underwood, 2002 ABCA 310, 170 C.C.C. (3d) 500; R.
v. Clarke (1998), 129 C.C.C. (3d) 1; R. v. Jackson, 2013 ONCA 632,
301 C.C.C. (3d) 358, aff’d 2014 SCC 30, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 672; R. v. C. (T.)
(2004), 189 C.C.C. (3d) 473; R. v. Humaid (2006), 37 C.R. (6th) 347; R. v. Hart, 2014 SCC 52, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 544; R. v. Buzizi, 2013 SCC
27, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 248; R. v. Stinchcombe, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 326; R.
v. Quesnelle, 2014 SCC 46, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 390; Housen v. Nikolaisen,
2002 SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235; R. v. Khelawon, 2006 SCC 57, [2006] 2
S.C.R. 787; R. v. Morin, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 345. Statutes and Regulations Cited Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, ss.
278.1  to 278.91 , 686(1) (b)(iii). Criminal
Justice Act 2003 (U.K.), 2003, c. 44, s. 100(1)(b), (3)(c), (d). Authors Cited Cross on Evidence, 9th Australian ed. by
John D. Heydon. Chatswood, N.S.W.:  LexisNexis Butterworths, 2013. Phipson on Evidence, 18th ed. by Hodge M.
Malek et al. London:  Sweet & Maxwell, 2013.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Manitoba Court of Appeal (Chartier C.J.M. and Monnin and
Hamilton JJ.A.), 2013 MBCA 95, 299 Man. R. (2d) 202, 590 W.A.C. 202, 302 C.C.C.
(3d) 491, [2014] 2 W.W.R. 239, [2013] M.J. No. 322 (QL), 2013 CarswellMan 525
(WL Can.), setting aside a conviction for second degree murder entered
by Joyal A.C.J. and ordering a new trial. Appeal dismissed.                     Amiram
Kotler and Rekha Malaviya, for the
appellant.                     Saul
B. Simmonds, Vanessa Hébert and Laura
Robinson, for the respondent.                     The
judgment of the Court was delivered by                     Karakatsanis J. — I.             
Introduction [1]                             
In 2007, the respondent, Mark Edward Grant, was
charged with the first degree murder of Candace Derksen, a notorious cold-case
murder that occurred in Winnipeg, Manitoba, almost 23 years earlier.  The
Crown’s case depended substantially on the recent analysis of small quantities
of DNA found at the scene of the crime.  Mr. Grant challenged the DNA evidence
and sought to lead evidence suggesting that an unknown third party suspect had committed
the crime.  The trial judge refused to admit the evidence of an allegedly
similar offence committed within months of the Derksen murder, while Mr. Grant
was in custody on an unrelated matter.[1] 
Mr. Grant was subsequently convicted of second degree murder by the jury.  The
Manitoba Court of Appeal concluded that Mr. Grant should have been permitted to
lead the evidence.  It allowed his conviction appeal and ordered a new trial. [2]                             
The issues before this Court are the appropriate
framework for determining the admissibility of defence-led evidence concerning
an unknown third party suspect, and to what extent this framework requires the
trial judge to assess and weigh the evidence. [3]                             
Obviously, the identification of an accused as the perpetrator of
the crime charged is essential to establishing criminal liability.  The burden
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the person before the court is the
guilty party rests squarely on the Crown.  In accordance with the presumption
of innocence, the accused is never required to prove her innocence.  An accused
person’s Charter-protected right to make full answer and defence
entitles her to challenge the Crown’s case and lead evidence to raise a
reasonable doubt about whether the accused committed the crime. [4]                             
However, the accused’s rights are not the
only interests at stake.  The integrity of the administration of justice
requires that the proceedings stay focused on the indicted crime and not
devolve into trials within a trial about matters that may not be sufficiently
connected to the case.  Such tangents risk causing delays, confusion and
distractions that undermine the trial’s truth-seeking function.  This risk is
especially heightened where the defence seeks to introduce other alleged
suspects or crimes into the trial. [5]                             
The parties agree that balancing these interests requires the
trial judge to evaluate the probative value of defence-led evidence of an
unknown third party suspect against the elevated risks it poses to the
integrity of the trial, but disagree about what this evaluation entails.  The
appellant the Manitoba Prosecution Service (the Crown) says that the trial
judge must apply the stringent admissibility tests developed for known third
party suspect and similar fact evidence.  The defence maintains that these
tests place an unfair burden on the accused and that the general rules of
admissibility adequately address the issues of relevance, probative value and
prejudicial effects. [6]                             
In my view, it is not helpful to slot evidence
concerning an unknown third party suspect into categories that were not
designed to accommodate it.  While the tests governing known third party
suspect evidence and similar fact evidence may provide useful insights into the
underlying concerns and principles, they should not be stretched beyond the
particular circumstances that they were designed to address. [8]                             
In this case, I conclude that the trial judge
erred in evaluating and assessing the credibility of the unknown third party
suspect evidence on a balance of probabilities.  I agree with the Court of
Appeal that a new trial is required. II.          
Facts [9]                             
Candace Derksen, a 13-year-old girl, went
missing after leaving school on Friday, November 30, 1984.  Her body was
discovered tied up in a shed in an industrial yard on January 17, 1985.  She
had died of hypothermia resulting from exposure. [10]                         
In May 2007, Mr. Grant was arrested and charged
with first degree murder on the basis of newly tested DNA evidence. [11]                         
Mr. Grant denied any involvement in the
abduction-murder, and sought to adduce evidence of the alleged involvement of
an unknown third party suspect.  That evidence related to the alleged abduction
of a 12-year-old girl (P.W.) after she left school on Friday, September 6,
1985, at a time when Mr. Grant was in custody.  Mr. Grant argued that the modus
operandi and other physical evidence indicated that the same person had
abducted both Candace Derksen and P.W. A.          
Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench [12]                         
In reviewing the applicable legal framework,
Joyal A.C.J.Q.B. concluded that the legal test set out in R. v. Grandinetti,
2005 SCC 5, [2005] 1 S.C.R. 27, applies equally to admissibility of both
unknown third party suspect evidence and known third party suspect evidence. 
Thus, evidence of an unknown third party suspect could be “admitted only after
some threshold evidence ha[d] been demonstrated respecting a link between the
third party, known or unknown, and the crime before the court” (trial transcript,
A.R., vol. III, at p. 48).  The trial judge also referred to this Court’s
jurisprudence for similar fact evidence and, specifically, to R. v. Handy,
2002 SCC 56, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 908. [13]                         
After reviewing the documentary and testimonial
evidence adduced on the voir dire, the trial judge found that he was
“not, even on a balance of probabilities, able to conclude that the alleged
offence [against P.W.] happened” (A.R., vol. I, at pp. 8-9).  As a result, he
found there could be no unknown third party suspect and thus “no useable
similarities” (p. 9).  The trial judge concluded that the evidence was not
sufficiently probative to justify the impact its admission would have on the
length and complexity of the trial, and ordered that the defence not make any
reference to the P.W. incident. B.           
Manitoba Court of Appeal, 2013 MBCA 95, 299 Man.
R. (2d) 202 [14]                         
Before the Manitoba Court of Appeal, Mr. Grant
appealed his conviction and brought a motion to adduce fresh evidence relating
to DNA analysis and juror bias.  After rejecting several grounds relating to
the conviction, Monnin J.A., writing for the court, held that the trial judge
erred in not allowing Mr. Grant to lead evidence relating to an alleged unknown
third party suspect (paras. 9-10, 78). [15]                         
The Court of Appeal concluded that the trial
judge made factual and credibility findings that “he was not entitled to make”
in determining admissibility and that he relied “almost exclusively on the viva
voce evidence of P.W. to the exclusion of all of the other evidence before
him, including P.W.’s two prior statements” (para. 68).  The trial judge erred
in applying the balance of probabilities standard to determine whether the P.W.
incident occurred; he should have instead applied the Seaboyer test that
broadly governs the admissibility of defence-led evidence (paras. 73-74). 
Furthermore, in determining whether the defence theory had an air of reality,
all that was required was “some evidence” that could leave a jury with a
reasonable doubt as to the accused’s guilt (para. 68). [16]                         
The Court of Appeal characterized the evidence
tendered in this case as “more akin to similar-fact evidence” than to known
third party suspect evidence (para. 72).  However, the court concluded that the
test applicable to Crown-led similar fact evidence does not apply when such
evidence is advanced by an accused; rather, defence-led similar fact evidence
is admissible unless its prejudicial effects substantially outweigh its
probative value, in accordance with Seaboyer. [17]                         
The Court of Appeal concluded that the evidence
pertaining to the P.W. incident was “very relevant” and “pointed to the
possibility that the same person who killed Candace Derksen abducted P.W., if
the jury so found that to have occurred” (para. 70).  As Mr. Grant was in
custody at the time of the P.W. incident, this evidence “could provide the
basis upon which a reasonable, properly instructed jury could acquit” (ibid.). 
The court concluded that, since the prejudicial effects of the evidence did not
substantially outweigh its probative value, Mr. Grant should have been
permitted to place the evidence of the P.W. incident before the jury (para.
78).  The court noted that this evidence was also relevant in assessing
the evidence of the defence DNA expert that excluded Mr. Grant as a suspect. 
The accused was denied his opportunity to make full answer, and this legal
error was sufficient to set aside the conviction and order a new trial. III.       
Analysis A.          
Principles Governing the Admission of Defence
Evidence in Criminal Proceedings [18]                         
The truth-seeking function of the trial creates
a starting premise that all relevant evidence is admissible (R. v. L. (D.O.),
[1993] 4 S.C.R. 419; R. v. Corbett, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 670).  Evidence is
logically relevant where it has any tendency to prove or disprove a fact in
issue (Corbett, at p. 715). [19]                         
However, not all relevant evidence is
admissible.  The trial judge must also balance the probative value of the
evidence against the prejudicial effects of its admission (R. v. Noël, 2002 SCC 67, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 433; Corbett;
Sweitzer v. The Queen, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 949; Seaboyer; R. v. Harrer, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 562).  Evidence led by the Crown will be excluded where its prejudicial
effects outweigh its probative value (Seaboyer).  The presumption of the
accused’s innocence leads us to strike a different balance where defence-led
evidence is concerned.  As this Court explained in Seaboyer, “the prejudice must substantially outweigh the value of the evidence
before a judge can exclude evidence relevant to a defence allowed by law” (p.
611; see also R. v. Shearing, 2002 SCC 58, [2002] 3 S.C.R. 33; R. v. Arcangioli,
[1994] 1 S.C.R. 129). [20]                         
In order for the judge to put a defence to the
jury, the accused must point to evidence on the record
that gives the defence an air of reality (R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29,
[2002] 2 S.C.R. 3).  The trial judge must
determine whether there is some evidence that is “reasonably capable of
supporting the inferences required for the defence to succeed” (ibid.,
at para. 83).  The air of reality test applies to all
defences, and acts as a threshold to ensure that “fanciful or far-fetched”
defences are not put before the trier of fact (para. 84).  When applying this
test, the trial judge must take the evidence to be true and must not assess
credibility or make other findings of fact (para. 54). [21]                         
These principles are distinct, but may be
interrelated.  In most cases, where the defence evidence relates to the facts
underlying the offence charged, the logical relevance and the admissibility of
the evidence will be obvious.  However, where the evidence refers to a factual
matrix beyond the offence charged, its relevance to a fact in issue or an
available defence may be less clear.  In such circumstances, the gate-keeping
role of the trial judge may require her to determine whether the evidence is
logically relevant and connected to a defence that has an air of reality.  For
example, while the degree of similarity may be logically relevant to whether
the same person committed the offence, it will not relate to a fact in issue at
trial unless the defence has an air of reality.  In this case, the unknown
third party suspect defence will not have an air of reality unless there is
evidence that the accused could not have committed the other offence.  Thus,
logical relevance will sometimes be assessed with reference to whether the
defence for which the evidence is tendered is available.  That said, the air of
reality test set out in Cinous does not displace the Seaboyer admissibility
test.  The air of reality test and the Seaboyer admissibility test
remain two distinct inquiries. [22]                         
These principles are firmly established in this
Court’s jurisprudence and are not generally challenged by the parties to this
appeal.  Instead, the dispute concerns their proper application to evidence
concerning an unknown third party suspect. B.           
The Known Third Party Suspect Test Does Not
Provide the Proper Template for Determining the Relevance of Unknown Third
Party Suspect Evidence [24]                         
In order for evidence relating to a known third
party suspect to have any probative value, the evidence must show a sufficient
connection between the third person and the crime for which the accused is
charged (Grandinetti, at para. 47; McMillan v. The Queen, [1977]
2 S.C.R. 824).  The defence points to such evidence to raise a reasonable doubt
that someone else committed the crime in question.  Evidence that this third
person had the motive, the means, or the propensity to commit the crime will
often establish this sufficient connection. [25]                         
As this Court recognized in McMillan, the
sufficient connection test is nothing more than an elaboration of the logical
relevance analysis applied in the particular context of allegations that
another, known individual committed the crime (pp. 828-29).  Abella J. affirmed
this point in Grandinetti, where she wrote: The
requirement that there be a sufficient connection between the third party and
the crime is essential.  Without this link, the third party evidence is neither
relevant nor probative.  The evidence may be inferential, but the inferences
must be reasonable, based on the evidence, and not amount to speculation.  [para.
47] Without a sufficient connection
between the third party and the crime, the evidence of a known third party
suspect is simply not logically relevant. [28]                         
This focus on the similarities between the
offences is not a formulation of a new, categorical test. Rather, it reflects
the principles underlying Grandinetti which play out differently in
different factual contexts.  Like known third party suspect evidence, “in the
absence of some nexus with the alleged offence”, unknown third party suspect
evidence will constitute mere speculation (R. v. McMillan (1975), 7 O.R.
(2d) 750 (C.A.), at p. 758, aff’d [1977] 2 S.C.R. 824).  Unless the
circumstances and similarities to the other offence are sufficient to suggest
that the same individual committed both crimes, unknown third party suspect
evidence will not be logically relevant. [29]                         
This is consistent with the
approaches taken by other common law jurisdictions in assessing defence-led
evidence of similar acts.[2] [30]                         
A finding of logical relevance does not end the
admissibility inquiry.  Even the Grandinetti sufficient connection test
speaks only to the probative value side of the Seaboyer equation.  Once
the relevance threshold is met, the trial judge must still be satisfied that
the probative value of the evidence tendered by the defence is not
substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effects. C.           
The Admissibility Test for Crown-led Similar
Fact Evidence Does Not Apply to Defence-led Evidence of the Similar Acts of a Non-accused [32]                         
In addition to applying the Grandinetti
test for known third party suspects, the trial judge in the present case
applied a “balance of probabilities” threshold test to determine whether the
P.W. incident actually occurred.  In so doing, he referred to the admissibility
test for Crown-led similar fact evidence, as set out in Handy.  The
Court of Appeal found that the evidence in question was “akin to similar-fact
evidence”, but noted that, because this is defence-led evidence, Seaboyer,
not Handy, governs its admissibility (paras. 73-74). [33]                         
This conclusion is
consistent with the approach taken by Canadian appellate courts where evidence
of a non-accused’s similar acts is sought to be introduced.  Appellate courts
faced with this issue have consistently found that such evidence is not
governed by the test applicable to
evidence of an accused’s similar acts (see, for example, R. v. Scopelliti
(1981), 34 O.R. (2d) 524 (C.A.); R. v. Pollock (2004), 187 C.C.C. (3d) 213 (Ont. C.A.), at para. 104; R. v. Kendall (1987), 35 C.C.C.
(3d) 105 (Ont. C.A.); R. v. Sims (1994), 28 C.R. (4th) 231 (B.C.C.A.); R.
v. Hamilton, 2003 BCCA 490, 180 C.C.C. (3d) 80; R. v. Brousseau,
2006 QCCA 858). [34]                         
Defence-led evidence concerning an
unknown third party suspect is only similar fact evidence in the sense that its
probative value is derived from the similarity between the incidents where it
is impossible for the accused to have committed the uncharged offence.  An onus
requiring proof on a balance of probabilities is not consistent with the
lower evidential burden of the accused to put a defence in issue by adducing
sufficient evidence “upon which a properly instructed jury acting reasonably
could acquit” (Cinous, at para. 49).  Rendering such defence-led
evidence presumptively inadmissible would effectively impose a persuasive burden
on the accused to prove her innocence.  As this Court noted in Seaboyer,
the test governing defence-led evidence must be accountable to “the fundamental
tenet of our judicial system that an innocent person must not be convicted” (p.
611). [35]                         
Moreover, unknown third party
suspect evidence does not risk causing moral prejudice to the accused.  Such
evidence is intended to be exculpatory when raised by an accused, as it was in
this case.  Although the evidence engages some of the same reasoning prejudice
concerns as does evidence of the prior bad acts of the accused (Arp, at
para. 40; Handy, at para. 37), this prejudice can be addressed directly
under Seaboyer. [36]                         
To conclude, the balance of probabilities test governing the admissibility of similar
fact evidence does not apply to unknown third party suspect evidence proffered
by the accused.  The similarity of the acts goes to the relevance of the
evidence, but imposing the onus of the Handy test on the accused is
neither consistent with the presumption of innocence nor necessary to protect
the accused from moral prejudice.  Any reasoning prejudice or risks to the
integrity of the trial process engaged by this evidence are better addressed
directly within the Seaboyer framework. D.          
The Seaboyer Test Applies to the Admission of
Unknown Third Party Suspect Evidence [37]                         
In my view, the
admissibility of evidence concerning an unknown third party suspect is best
determined in accordance with the broader, principled approach to the admission
of evidence found in Seaboyer.  Evaluating the admissibility of this
evidence under Seaboyer, rather than under disparate tests not designed
for its particularities, allows the trial judge to tailor her evaluation and
weighing of the probative value and prejudicial effects of the evidence to the
specific facts presented.  In accordance with Seaboyer, once the
evidence has been found to be relevant, unknown third party suspect evidence will be admitted unless its prejudicial
effects substantially outweigh its probative value. [39]                         
Second, the Seaboyer test is concerned
with the potential prejudicial effects of the evidence.  Unknown third party
suspect evidence, like Crown-led similar fact evidence, poses a particular risk
of reasoning prejudice.  Introducing evidence of other crimes that are
sufficiently similar to the crime charged may risk “the distraction of members
of the jury from their proper focus on the charge itself aggravated by the
consumption of time” (Handy, at para. 144). [40]                         
However, these significant prejudicial effects
must nonetheless be evaluated in accordance with the fundamental principles
governing criminal proceedings.  In giving constitutional protection to the
accused’s rights to make full answer and defence and to be presumed innocent
until proven guilty, we must accept a certain amount of complexity, length, and
distraction from the Crown’s case as a necessary concession to the
actualization of those rights.  (See, for example, Scheidell,
at para. 65, per Abrahamson C.J., dissenting in the result.) [41]                         
Contrary to the Crown’s submissions, applying Seaboyer
does not “mak[e] the test for admissibility turn on whether or not the third
party is named” (A.F., at para. 44).  Known third party suspect evidence is already
subject to the Seaboyer admissibility test:  do the prejudicial effects
substantially outweigh the probative value?  (See, for example, R. v. Murphy,
2012 ONCA 573, 295 O.A.C. 281 (third party suspect evidence); R. v.
Underwood, 2002 ABCA 310, 170 C.C.C. (3d) 500 (hearsay evidence of a
third party suspect).)  Indeed, defence-led evidence is generally subject to Seaboyer
(Shearing (defence cross-examination of a complainant); R. v. Clarke
(1998), 129 C.C.C. (3d) 1 (complainant’s credibility); R. v. Jackson,
2013 ONCA 632, 301 C.C.C. (3d) 358, aff’d 2014 SCC 30, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 672
(deceased victim’s criminal convictions); R. v. C. (T.) (2004),
189 C.C.C. (3d) 473 (Ont. C.A.) (third party records in the possession of the
accused); Pollock (character evidence of a co-accused); R. v. Humaid (2006), 37 C.R. (6th) 347
(Ont. C.A.) (defence hearsay evidence); Hamilton (bad character evidence
of the deceased)).  Thus, while the principles in Seaboyer will always
apply, they play out differently in different situations. [42]                         
As this discussion demonstrates, many of the
concerns animating the specific tests governing the admissibility of known
third party suspect and similar fact evidence are also addressed in the Seaboyer
analysis.  In all cases, the evidence must be beyond mere speculation and
conjecture.  The value of the evidence must be balanced against the risks posed
to the integrity of the trial when a party seeks to expand the ambit of the
trial to individuals or events not directly related to the crime indicted. E.           
The Trial Judge’s Role as Evidentiary Gatekeeper
and the Seaboyer Test [43]                         
The Crown argues that the trial judge, as
gatekeeper, must assess the quality and reliability of evidence as part of the
admissibility inquiry.  In light of the elevated risks posed by unknown third
party suspect evidence, the Crown submits that the Court of Appeal dangerously
lowered the threshold for third party suspect evidence by applying the “some
evidence” standard articulated in Cinous.  For the reasons that follow,
I do not accept this submission. [44]                         
The trial judge plays a fundamentally important
role as evidentiary gatekeeper, tasked with preserving both the right of the
accused to make full answer and defence and the integrity of the trial
process.  To fulfill this mandate, the trial judge engages in a limited
weighing of the evidence to ensure that the jury only considers evidence (1) that
is relevant to a fact in issue, including an available defence; and (2) whose
probative value is not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effects. 
These inquiries often overlap.  However, the trial judge is not permitted to
invade the province of the jury and determine the strength of the evidence (R.
v. Hart, 2014 SCC 52, [2014] 2 S.C.R. 544, at para. 98). [46]                         
The trial judge must also assess and balance the
extent of the probative value and prejudicial effects of the evidence in
accordance with Seaboyer.  Like the air of reality test, the Seaboyer
admissibility test does not permit the trial judge to decide how much
weight to give the evidence or to make findings of fact.  Doing so would usurp
the role of the jury and would place a persuasive burden on the accused
inconsistent with the presumption of innocence. [47]                         
The Crown argues that the substantial prejudice
arising from evidence concerning an unknown third party suspect requires a
higher threshold for both admissibility and putting the defence to the jury. 
However, substantial prejudice does not require a higher threshold; it simply
weighs heavier in the balance.  The Seaboyer admissibility test does not
presuppose a particular level of prejudice or probative value for certain
categories of evidence; instead, it requires a trial judge to conduct the
balancing process contextually, based on the particularities of the evidence
before her.  As an inherently individualized assessment, it is capable of
responding to various levels and forms of prejudice.  No other test or higher
threshold is required to protect the integrity of the trial process. [48]                         
The same is true of the “some evidence”
threshold in the air of reality test, which the Crown argues the Court of
Appeal erred in applying in this case.  This standard does not indirectly lower
the threshold for unknown third party suspect evidence.  Rather, this standard,
when used in conjunction with the requirement for a sufficient connection
between the crimes, respects the requirements of Corbett, Seaboyer and
Cinous, and properly balances the integrity of the trial process with
the accused’s right to make full answer and defence. [49]                         
This conclusion does not, as the Crown submits
it would, increase the scope of the Crown’s potential disclosure obligations
such that compliance becomes impossible.  The Crown continues to be required to disclose all relevant evidence
to the defence (R. v. Stinchcombe, [1991] 3 S.C.R. 326, at pp. 336-40). 
The application of the Stinchcombe test obviously depends on the
circumstances of each case and each disclosure request. [50]                         
In this case, the disclosure request was based
on notes by the lead investigator in the police file on the Derksen murder concerning a similar crime
(the P.W. incident) that was “very probably” connected to the Derksen murder (A.R., vol.
II, at p. 135).  The evidence for which disclosure was
sought was clearly relevant. [51]                         
Where the similarities or the temporal or
geographic connections between the charged crime and the crime(s) for which
disclosure is sought are insufficient, the evidence will not be relevant, and
disclosure will not be required.  Allowing the defence to establish a
sufficient connection with reference to the crimes, rather than to the suspect,
does not extend the Crown’s duty of disclosure. [52]                         
Nor does this conclusion jeopardize the Crown’s
ability to protect the privacy interests of individuals implicated in unrelated
criminal matters or the confidentiality of ongoing investigations.  The
disclosure test remains one of relevancy, and the legislative measures that
restrict disclosure to protect the privacy interests of individuals implicated
in criminal matters continue to apply (see, for example, Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, ss. 278.1  to 278.91 ; R. v. Quesnelle, 2014 SCC 46,
[2014] 2 S.C.R. 390).  Moreover, the Crown exercises discretion with respect to
the manner and timing of disclosure, thus allowing the Crown to delay
disclosure to ensure the safety of individuals involved in an ongoing
investigation (Stinchcombe, at pp. 339-40).  This discretionary
decision, like all other exercises of Crown discretion in disclosure matters,
must be justified on review (Stinchcombe, at p. 340). F.            
Summary of Analysis [53]                         
To summarize, any
elevated risks of prejudice that arise when an accused seeks to introduce
evidence of an unknown third party suspect do not require the accused to
satisfy a higher admissibility threshold or require the judge to engage in an
enhanced evaluation of the evidence.  Existing rules achieve the appropriate
balance of maintaining the integrity of the trial
process while protecting the right of an accused to make full answer and
defence to the charges against her. [54]                         
Thus, defence
evidence is admissible where (1) the evidence is relevant to a fact in
issue; and (2) the probative value of the evidence is not substantially
outweighed by its prejudicial effects.  Where the connection between the
evidence and a fact in issue at trial is not obvious, the air of reality test
may help a trial judge in determining if the evidence tends to prove a defence
that may become available.  Relevant evidence concerning an
unknown third party suspect will only be excluded where its prejudicial effects
substantially outweigh its probative value. G.          
Application to the Facts [56]                         
These errors entitled the Court of Appeal to
conduct its own assessment of the evidence (Housen v. Nikolaisen, 2002
SCC 33, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 235, at paras. 31-35).  The court considered P.W.’s viva
voce testimony and her prior statements to the police, which the trial
judge had accepted (for the purposes of the voir dire) for the truth of
their contents, in accordance with R. v. Khelawon, 2006 SCC 57, [2006] 2
S.C.R. 787.  The court also considered other statements that had been admitted
on the voir dire for the truth of their contents with the Crown’s
consent, and other evidence pertaining to the incident, including the police
reports noting a possible connection between the P.W. incident and the Derksen
murder. [57]                         
The Court of Appeal concluded that the evidence
was “very relevant” and that its probative value arose from the marked
similarities between the alleged abduction of P.W. and the crime for which Mr. Grant
is charged.  In each case, the victim was of a similar age.  Both victims left
school at the same time of day, on the same day of the week, nine months
apart.  Both were left in unlocked shed-like premises in the same industrial
area of Winnipeg, 2.6 kilometres apart.  Both victims were found abandoned with
their hands and feet tied with similar knots.  In neither case was there
evidence of physical or sexual assault.  The same type of gum wrapper was found
at both scenes (although, in the crime charged, it was found in the deceased’s
pocket, suggesting it may have been hers). [58]                         
I cannot accept the Crown’s submission that
these similarities are insufficient on any test and that the evidence relied
upon by the Court of Appeal would not be available at trial.  As the Crown
cannot resile from its concession that the various statements were admissible
for their truth for the purpose of determining admissibility, the Court of
Appeal was entitled to rely upon this voir dire evidence in assessing
its potential probative value. [59]                         
The Court of Appeal was entitled to conclude
that there was evidence upon which the jury could find that the subsequent
crime had occurred and, having regard to the similarities, that it had been
committed by the same person who killed Candace Derksen.  In light of the
evidence that the accused could not have committed the other offence, there was
some evidence capable of giving the unknown third party suspect defence an air
of reality. [60]                         
The Court of Appeal applied Seaboyer as
follows: It is left to be decided whether this
relevant evidence should be excluded because its prejudicial effect
substantially outweighed its probative value. In this case, the only
prejudicial effect would be the impact this evidence would have had on the trial
process in what was an already complicated and lengthy trial.  From his
reasons, the judge was obviously concerned about this impact.  In my view, that
concern did not substantially outweigh the probative value.  [para. 78] [61]                         
Seaboyer requires
the court to measure and weigh the extent of probative value and the extent of
the prejudicial effect of the evidence.  Obviously, this balancing is highly
fact driven and best done by the trial judge.  The prejudicial effects of this
evidence primarily concern the impact on the complexity, focus, and length of
the trial process.  To some extent, the trial judge can craft a process that
will limit these prejudicial effects.  However, the trial judge did not address
this issue in any detail. [62]                         
While an appellate court is entitled to step
into the shoes of the trial judge if the record permits, in this case, the
Court of Appeal was not in the position to assess and weigh the extent of the
probative value of the unknown third party suspect evidence and the extent of
prejudicial effect of this evidence. [63]                         
The trial judge’s legal errors were clearly not
minor, and do not attract the application of the curative proviso in s. 686(1) (b)(iii)
of the Criminal Code .  The verdict would not necessarily have been the
same had the trial judge applied the correct principles in determining the test
for the admissibility of this defence evidence (R. v. Morin, [1988] 2
S.C.R. 345, at p. 374).  This case must be re-tried in any event.  In these
circumstances, the balancing of the Seaboyer factors is best left for
the trial judge. [64]                         
Before this Court, Mr. Grant also submitted a
motion to adduce fresh evidence relating to DNA analysis and juror bias. 
Because of my finding with respect to the admission of evidence relating to an
unknown third party suspect, it is not necessary to deal with that motion. IV.       
Disposition [65]                         
The appeal is dismissed, and the Manitoba Court
of Appeal’s decision to order a new trial is upheld.                     Appeal
dismissed.                     Solicitor for the
appellant:  Attorney General of Manitoba, Winnipeg.                     Solicitors for the
respondent:  Gindin, Wolson, Simmonds, Roitenberg, Winnipeg. [1]         Transcript of oral reasons for judgment of the Honourable Associate
Chief Justice Joyal (as he then was) of the Court of Queen’s Bench of Manitoba,
dated January 19, 2011, A.R., vol. I, at p. 90. [2]         Australian law
requires the defence to show “a sufficient similarity between the two acts as
to allow the jury to conclude that there is a real possibility that the same
person was involved” (J. D. Heydon, Cross on Evidence (9th Aust. 2013),
at p. 713).  In the United Kingdom, evidence of the bad character of someone
other than the defendant is admissible where the similarities give the evidence
“substantial probative value” (Criminal Justice Act 2003 (U.K.),
2003, c. 44, s. 100(1)(b), (3)(c) and (d); H. M. Malek et al., eds., Phipson
on Evidence (18th ed. 2013), at paras. 22-04, 22-24 to 22-27).  Similarly, in the United States, some
federal and state jurisprudence holds that defence-led evidence of similar acts
will be admissible where it is
“sufficiently similar to the crime at bar so that it is relevant” (United
States v. Stevens, 935 F.2d 1380 (3rd Cir. 1991), at p. 1384; Scheidell,
at paras. 39-41; Wiley v. State, 74 S.W.3d 399 (Tex. Crim. App. 2002),
at p. 406; United States v. McVeigh,
153 F.3d 1166 (10th Cir. 1998), at p. 1191; Caldwell v. State, 356
S.W.3d 42 (Tex. Ct. App. 2011), at p. 47 (citing Wiley and McVeigh);
Davis v. State, 413 S.W.3d 816 (Tex. Ct. App. 2013), at p. 833 (citing Wiley)).  