  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation: R. v. Buzizi, 2013 SCC 27, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 248 Date: 20130510 Docket: 34899  Between: Didier
Buzizi Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent   Official English Translation  Coram: LeBel, Fish, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ.  Reasons
  for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 18)  Dissenting
  reasons: (paras. 19 to 67) Fish J. (Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.
  concurring)   Wagner J. (LeBel J. concurring)    R. v.
Buzizi, 2013 SCC 27, [2013] 2 S.C.R. 248 Didier Buzizi                                                                                                    Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent Indexed as:  R. v. Buzizi 2013 SCC 27 File No.:  34899. 2013:  March 27; 2013:  May 10. Present:  LeBel, Fish, Moldaver, Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court of appeal for quebec                     Criminal law — Defences — Provocation — Accused
convicted of second degree murder — Whether defence of provocation should have
been put to jury — Whether objective and subjective elements of defence of
provocation were established, thereby lending air of reality to this defence.                     A
jury found the accused guilty of second degree murder.  In the middle of the
night, he had intervened in an altercation that ended in the victim’s death. 
The evidence in the record showed that the accused was under the influence of “many
emotions” when he acted:  he was angry, mad, upset, “out of it”, scared,
afraid, worried, trying to protect himself and reacting emotionally.  At trial,
the judge refused three requests by the defence that he put to the jury the
defence of provocation raised by the accused.  The Court of Appeal, in a
majority judgment, affirmed that decision and dismissed the appeal.  All three
justices in the Court of Appeal agreed that the evidence was sufficient in
respect of the objective element.  Only the dissenting judge, however,
considered the evidence to be equally capable of supporting the subjective
element.                     Held (LeBel and Wagner JJ.
dissenting):  The appeal should be allowed.  The verdict of guilty should be
set aside and a new trial ordered.                     Regarding
the objective element, the evidence established that when the accused stabbed
the victim, he had come to his cousin’s defence and had helped push the victim
back in circumstances such that the defence of provocation could no longer be
relied on.  The willing participation of the accused in the fight made it
foreseeable that the victim would react as he did, and the accused could not
claim that his acts were a response to a sudden, unexpected, spontaneous and
unforeseeable situation.                     Even
if the test of correctness is applied to the trial judge’s decision, an
appellate court must bear in mind that the trial judge, who saw and heard the
witnesses, is in the best position to determine whether the evidence that is
capable of supporting the necessary inferences is credible. Cases Cited By Fish J.                     Referred
to:  R. v. Tran, 2010 SCC 58, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 350; R. v. Gill,
2009 ONCA 124, 241 C.C.C. (3d) 1; R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2
S.C.R. 3. By Wagner J. (dissenting)                     R.
v. Pintar (1996), 110 C.C.C. (3d) 402; R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16,
[2006] 1 S.C.R. 609; R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 3; The
Queen v. Tripodi, [1955] S.C.R. 438; Olbey v. The Queen, [1980] 1
S.C.R. 1008; R. v. Gill, 2009 ONCA 124, 241 C.C.C. (3d) 1; R. v. Faid,
[1983] 1 S.C.R. 265. Statutes and Regulations Cited                     Clemente Monterosso and
Sonia Mastro Matteo, for the appellant.                     Thierry Nadon and Mario
Longpré, for the respondent.                     English version of the
judgment of Fish, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. delivered by                     Fish
J. — I [1]                             
At the conclusion of his trial by judge and jury
in the Superior Court, District of Montreal, the appellant, Didier Buzizi, was
convicted of second degree murder. [2]                             
The Quebec Court of Appeal, in a majority
judgment, dismissed his appeal. [3]                             
This is an appeal, as of right, against the
judgment of the Court of Appeal. II [4]                             
The sole issue before us is whether the trial
judge erred in law in refusing three requests by the defence that he put to the
jury the defence of provocation raised by Mr. Buzizi. [5]                             
The two majority judges answered this question
in the negative; Bich J.A., dissenting on this issue, answered in the
affirmative. [6]                             
With respect for those who are of a different
view, I agree with Justice Bich. III [7]                             
The defence of provocation comprises an
objective element and a subjective element (R. v. Tran, 2010 SCC 58,
[2010] 3 S.C.R. 350, at para. 23). [8]                             
To the extent that the evidence adduced before
him was “reasonably capable of supporting the inferences necessary to make out
the defence” (Tran, at para. 41), the trial judge was bound to put
Mr. Buzizi’s defence of provocation to the jury. [9]                             
All three justices in the Court of Appeal agreed
that the evidence was sufficient in respect of the objective element (2012 QCCA
906 (CanLII)).  Only Justice Bich, however, considered the evidence to be
equally capable of supporting the subjective element. [10]                         
I think it is useful to reproduce her reasons on
this point in their entirety:                            Assuming that it is believed, the
appellant’s testimony as I understand it does not foreclose this dual theory,
which has a sufficient (albeit minimal) air of reality to it, and I think it
would be dangerous to parse his statements at this stage in order to determine
whether his act stemmed from fear or uncontrollable anger, whether or not he
had time to reflect, and whether or not he acted “on the sudden and before
there was time for his passion to cool” (s. 232(2)  Cr.C.).  The
trial judge should have put the defence of provocation to the jury and, after
proper instruction, left the jury the task of deciding on the facts. [11]                         
It is difficult to distinguish the instant case
from R. v. Gill, 2009 ONCA 124, 241 C.C.C. (3d) 1, in which the Ontario
Court of Appeal held:                            . . . in this case, the trial
judge’s decision that there was no air of reality to the defence of provocation
appears to be premised on two factors:  first, the appellant’s evidence
disavowing anger as the trigger for his actions, and second, a finding that
there was no evidence of the appellant acting in the heat of passion or as a
result of a loss of self control. IV [14]                         
With respect, I have three brief observations
concerning the reasons of Justice Wagner. [15]                         
First, my colleague finds that an appellate
court must defer to the trial judge in determining whether a defence has an air
of reality.  As my colleague acknowledges, however, the applicable standard of
review in this regard is correctness.  It follows, in my view, that the
trial judge is not at all in the “best position” to determine whether a defence
has an air of reality, since that is a question of law:  “. . . the
interpretation of a legal standard (the elements of the defence) and the determination
of whether there is an air of reality to a defence constitute questions of law,
reviewable on a standard of correctness” (Tran, at para. 40). [16]                         
In addition, and again with respect, I find that
my colleague errs — as did the trial judge — in his application of the “air of
reality” test.  As the Court held in Cinous, “the air of reality test
[is not] intended to assess whether the defence is likely, unlikely, somewhat
likely, or very likely to succeed at the end of the day” (R. v. Cinous,
2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 3, at para. 54).  Rather, the relevant
question is whether the record contains a sufficient factual foundation for a
properly instructed jury to give effect to the defence. [17]                         
Finally, my colleague’s assessment of the
evidence is both incomplete and flawed.  For example, he does not consider at
all the evidence of an eyewitness, Diane
Rudakenga, that the appellant was [translation]
“like . . . out of it . . . like in a trance” (A.R., at p. 1464). V [18]                         
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal, set
aside the jury’s verdict of guilty and order a new trial.                     English version of the reasons of LeBel
and Wagner JJ. delivered by [19]                         
Wagner J. (dissenting) — I have read the reasons of
my colleague Fish J., who adopts the brief reasons of the dissenting judge
in the Court of Appeal.  With respect, I am of the view that they are wrong. 
The reasons for my conclusion follow. [20]                         
The only issue to be resolved is whether the
appellant’s defence of provocation met the air of reality test and should have
been put to the jury. I.       Facts [21]                         
Before addressing this issue, I must briefly
review the principal facts. [22]                         
Doyon J.A. provided a good overview of the
general context in his reasons for the Court of Appeal’s decision (2012 QCCA
906 (CanLII)):                            [translation]  In the middle of the
night, several members of the group moved on to another restaurant/bar, on
Ontario Street.  Around 5:00 a.m., they were asked to leave the premises. 
Some of them gathered in the alley behind the bar.  A verbal altercation broke
out between the victim and Pierre Mumpereze, also known as “Peter”, the
appellant’s cousin.  A man named Rassem Chamaa intervened, but not for long, as
things went no further.  He saw the two men who had been arguing head toward
Ontario Street.  A few minutes later there was another altercation, in which
the appellant was involved, that ended in the death of Mr. Rushemeza.  The
appellant would be found guilty of second degree murder and sentenced to
imprisonment without eligibility for parole for at least 12 years. 
[para. 10] [23]                         
Although the different accounts of what happened
are contradictory in some regards, they are consistent as they relate to the
essential elements. [24]                         
There are some facts that are worth noting. 
From a fair distance away, the appellant saw that his cousin was involved in a
fight with the victim, and he decided to run to where his cousin was and to
intervene by pushing the victim back in order to get his cousin out of harm’s
way.  He then noticed that his cousin was seriously wounded in the throat and
that the victim was brandishing an exacto knife, using it to threaten the
members of the group the appellant was with. [25]                         
After pushing the victim, who was trying to
defend himself by threatening his assailants with his knife, the appellant saw
the victim drop his knife.  Fearing for his life should the victim pick his
weapon up, the appellant then used his own knife, the blade of which was
20 centimetres long, to stab the victim several times. [26]                         
According to the Crown’s theory, the appellant
intentionally caused the victim’s death to take revenge for what the victim had
done to his cousin.  According to the appellant, he stabbed the victim in
response to an act of provocation.  Doyon J.A. explained the defence’s
theory as follows: [28]                         
The trial judge, Champagne J., citing, inter
alia, the comments made by my colleague Moldaver J. in R. v. Pintar
(1996), 110 C.C.C. (3d) 402 (Ont. C.A.), stated:                     I also took into account from the testimony of
the accused that he was scared and highly emotional, that he was afraid, that
the guy, that is to say, the victim, was a big, burly man, that his life was in
danger, that his cousin’s throat had been cut and that he himself had been
attacked. II.    Analysis [29]                         
I agree with the view expressed by my colleague
Fish J. in R. v. Graveline, 2006 SCC 16, [2006] 1 S.C.R. 609, at
para. 10, on the dangers of putting theoretically incompatible defences to
a jury: [30]                         
Furthermore, the following comments made by
LeBel J. in his dissenting reasons in that case reflected the concerns
voiced by Fish J. (at para. 25): [31]                         
In circumstances such as these, a trial judge
who must decide whether to put defences to a jury that appear at first glance
to be incompatible must exercise caution and make sure that each of them has
the common denominator of every successful defence — an air of reality — that
will ultimately make it possible to determine which defences are available to the
accused. [32]                         
It will be helpful to reiterate the reasons why
defences that do not meet the air of reality test should be excluded.  The
cardinal rule was explained in R. v. Cinous, 2002 SCC 29, [2002] 2
S.C.R. 3, at para. 50:                           The
principle that a defence should be put to a jury if and only if there is an
evidential foundation for it has long been recognized by the common law.  This
venerable rule reflects the practical concern that allowing a defence to go to
the jury in the absence of an evidential foundation would invite verdicts not
supported by the evidence, serving only to confuse the jury and get in the
way of a fair trial and true verdict.  [Emphasis added.] A.     Defence of Provocation [34]                         
In the case at bar, I am of the opinion that
neither the objective element nor the subjective element of the defence of
provocation met the air of reality test.                     (1)     Objective
Element [36]                         
This Court has commented in the past on the
distinction between acts resulting from provocation and acts motivated purely
by revenge:  The Queen v. Tripodi, [1955] S.C.R. 438. [37]                         
The evidence related to the elements of the
defence of provocation must be sufficient for a properly instructed jury acting
reasonably to accept the defence if it believes the evidence to be true. [38]                         
Is the evidence sufficient in the case at bar? [39]                         
The evidence adduced at trial established that
when the appellant stabbed the victim, he had come to his cousin’s defence and
had helped push the victim back in circumstances such that the defence of
provocation can no longer be relied on. [40]                         
The appellant himself admitted in his testimony
that he had seen from a distance that his cousin was fighting with the victim,
and that he had decided to intervene in the fight to come to his cousin’s aid
by pushing the victim back. [41]                         
Indeed, the appellant acknowledged that he had
knowingly decided to intervene in his cousin’s fight: [translation]                     Q.    Okay.
And when you pushed him, Maxime Rushemeza, after that, did you say to him,
“Listen, I don’t want to fight”?                     A.    I
didn’t have . . .                     Q.    “Stop
. . .”                     A.    . . .
time to . . . .                     Q.    “Stop
it.  I don’t want to fight with you.”  Did you tell him that? [42]                         
In the circumstances, the appellant’s willing
participation in the street brawl made it foreseeable that the victim would
then brandish his weapon (the exacto knife); the appellant could not therefore
claim to have been taken by surprise in this context. [43]                         
In my opinion, the trial judge had to assess all
the circumstances of the appellant’s acts when he stabbed the victim in order
to determine whether there was any credible evidence, and, if there was, the
judge had to take the evidence that was most favourable to the appellant into account. [44]                         
In this case, the evidence does not support a
conclusion that the appellant’s acts were a response to a sudden, unexpected,
spontaneous and unforeseeable situation. [45]                         
As I mentioned above, the trial judge must
identify evidence capable of showing that the objective element and the
subjective element of the defence of provocation have an air of reality. [46]                         
Even if it were assumed that the evidence
supported the objective element, which I cannot find to be the case, it is my
view that an analysis of the subjective element resolves the issue of whether
the defence of provocation has an air of reality in this case.                     (2)     Subjective
Element                     [translation]  A.    Then, while I was protecting my face, I felt his body touch mine. 
That’s when he dropped his weapon, his . . . his exacto knife. 
That’s when I noticed that it was an exacto knife.  But at the same time, my
first thought was to not let him pick it up.  Because he tried to pick it up. 
When he tried to pick it up, that’s when I grabbed him by his sweater.  I was
able to take my knife.  Then I stabbed him.  [Emphasis added; A.R., at
p. 1805.] [48]                         
The appellant’s own statements made it
impossible for the trial judge to find that the defence of provocation had an
air of reality. [translation]                     Q.    . . .
Was the state of shock, if I understand your answer, is it that you were mad?                     A.    Huh,
mad . . . the thing is, I didn’t really have time to get mad.  I had time
instead to . . . look, I didn’t even have time to do anything
really.  I turned toward him, and he just said:  “You want a piece of this?” 
Then he started slashing at me with his knife.                     Q.    I
may be annoying here.  If I am, I apologize, but . . .                     A.    No
problem.                     Q.    . . .
the shock, if I understand how you’ve defined it for us . . .                     Q.    . . .
it’s that you were mad . . .                     A.    Yes.                     Q.    . . .
about what’d happened to your cousin? [translation]                     A.    No. 
He attacked me.                     Q.    Yes. 
I understand.  But if we assume he attacked you, okay?  After that, you
continued the fight with him?  You didn’t back off, is that right?                     A.    Well,
as I explained to you, I didn’t actually think of backing off, because it
happened so fast, first of all.  And second, he dropped it.  And in my mind,
there was no doubt he was gonna pick it up, but not to put it back in his
pocket and say, “Okay, let’s stop.”  He was gonna pick it up eventually to
attack me.                     Q.    Okay. 
So, if I understand your testimony, despite everything you did, despite the
fact that you stabbed him several times, despite the fact that you attacked and
then retreated, you’re telling the Court that you never agreed to fight?  Is
that what you’re . . .                     A.    I
. . .                     Q.    . . .
saying?                     A.    . . .
never said that.  At one point, yes, I can tell you I had to defend myself. 
So when you defend yourself, in a way, you’re consenting to fight.  But at some
point, since he had his weapon . . . he had his knife . . .
his exacto knife in his hands, and I had my knife in my hands.  But that
doesn’t mean that, because I had my knife in my hands, that I felt any safer.                     Q.    That’s
not my question.                     A.    Okay.                     Q.    My
question is this:  Did you agree at that time to fight with him? . . .                     A.    . . .
it’s sure that I ran to get there.  So . . .                     A.    . . .
I saw where the two individuals were, given that I was not part of the
altercation.  But once I was in the alter . . . altercation, it’s
sure that at some point, I couldn’t see the little details of things that were
around me.                     Q.    When
you in fact began . . . you saw it begin, this altercation, did you
at any time see Peter Mumpereze stab Maxime Rushemeza? [51]                         
Earlier, the appellant had said the following: [translation]                     Q.    . . .
the way you defined it, its effect was that you didn’t know what you were
doing?                     A.    Sure
I knew what I was doing, in the sense that . . . look, I saw what was
going on.  But . . .                     A.    . . .
at the same time, I . . . I didn’t have time to figure anything out,
like.  I . . . it happened really fast, and it happened in a
situation that was dangerous not only for me, but it could have been anybody.                     Q.    Okay.  So if I understand correctly, your
state of shock did not cause you to lose control?  You knew what you were
doing, Mr. Buzizi, according to your answer.  [Emphasis added; A.R., at
p. 1860.] [52]                         
In this case, I agree with the trial judge and
the majority of the Court of Appeal that the appellant knew what he was doing
when he stabbed the victim before the victim could pick up his weapon.  He
interfered, carrying a knife, in a fight he had seen from a certain distance
without even knowing what his cousin’s situation was.  This was not a sudden,
impulsive act in response to an act of provocation by the victim. [55]                         
The reasons of my colleague Fish J. are
based essentially on a parallel he draws with R. v. Gill, 2009 ONCA 124,
241 C.C.C. (3d) 1.  With respect, I find that the conclusions reached in that
case were based on a specific set of facts, which means that any comparison
would be shaky in the circumstances. [56]                         
In my opinion, the principles laid down by this
Court in Olbey and in R. v. Faid, [1983] 1 S.C.R. 265, should
prevail.  In Faid, the Court made the following comments:                            There
can be no doubt that a reasonable jury acting judicially could find a blow to the
head or a knife attack to be a wrongful act or insult of the nature and effect
set forth in s. 215(3).  Provocation no doubt existed here but that is not
the end of the inquiry.  The critical question to be answered in this case was
whether there was any evidence that Faid was provoked.  Was there any
evidence of passion or that he “acted upon” the provocation on the sudden and
before there was time for his passion to cool?  We have only his evidence on
the point and nowhere in that evidence does one find any suggestion that as a
result of the blows or other conduct of Wilson he was enraged, or that his
passions were inflamed, or that he killed in heat of blood.  [Emphasis
added; p. 278.] [57]                         
It is clear that the appellant in the case at
bar was aware of everything he did.  He had the opportunity to come to his
senses, if he had in fact taken leave of them.  Noticing that the victim had
momentarily dropped his weapon, the appellant deliberately stabbed him to keep
him from picking it up again. [58]                         
To determine whether a defence meets the air of
reality test, the trial judge must consider the totality of the evidence
in the record and assume the evidence relied on by the accused to be true (Cinous,
at para. 53).  I agree with Doyon J.A. that the trial judge was correct
to assess the evidence not solely on an objective basis, but taking the
appellant’s point of view and the explanations he gave into account in light of
all his testimony. [59]                         
Both the appellant and other eyewitnesses
maintained that he had acted in a context in which he was experiencing a number
of different emotions. [60]                         
Nevertheless, the strong emotions experienced by
the appellant, whether they resulted from anger or from fear, were not
necessarily contingent upon the existence of a state of provocation.  As a
result, the fact that he experienced them is not on its own sufficient to prove
that he was provoked.  The appellant’s emotional state must be understood in
the context of a drunken street brawl that took place early in the morning.                            [translation] 
The appellant was in shock.  That is understandable, but it is not
enough.  Any person in the same situation would be in shock.  The question to
ask is instead:  Did the provocation cause him to act on the sudden and before
there was time for his passion to cool?  The answer to this question is no. B.     Privileged Position of the
Trial Judge in Applying the Air of Reality Test [62]                         
The important role of the trial judge should be
borne in mind.  The judge must decide whether there is evidence capable of
supporting a defence raised by the accused.  This is not an arbitrary exercise,
as the judge must carefully review the record in order to identify evidence
that, if believed by a properly instructed jury, could lead the jury to accept
the defence’s theory.                            . . .
There is no authority for a threshold that could be satisfied by pointing to
evidence that is incapable of reasonably supporting the inferences
necessary to acquit an accused.  Before putting a defence to a jury, it is the
trial judge’s duty to ask not just whether there is evidence in some general
sense, but whether there is evidence that is reasonably capable of
supporting an acquittal.  This requires an assessment of whether the
evidence relied upon is reasonably capable of supporting the inferences
required for the defence to succeed.  [Emphasis in original.] [64]                         
In her dissenting reasons in the Court of Appeal
— which my colleague endorses — Bich J.A. referred to the air of reality
as a minimal one to justify her decision to order a new trial.  There is no
minimal air of reality test in Canadian law.  A defence either has an air of
reality or does not have one.  Using a qualifier such as “minimal” here would
seem instead to indicate a serious doubt or a certain unease regarding the sufficiency
of the evidence supporting the appellant’s defence of provocation. [65]                         
In light of this unease related to the weakness
of the evidence, even if the test of correctness is applied to the trial
judge’s decision, an appellate court must bear in mind that the trial judge,
who saw and heard the witnesses, is in the best position to determine whether
the evidence that is capable of supporting the necessary inferences is
credible.  This is especially true in a case such as the one at bar in which it
is considered necessary to mention that the air of reality of the defence is
minimal. III.    Conclusion [66]                         
Since there was no evidence that would be
reasonably capable of supporting the objective and the subjective elements of
the defence of provocation, that defence did not meet the air of reality test,
and a properly instructed jury could not have accepted it.  The trial judge
therefore did not err in refusing to put the defence of provocation to the
jury.  The Court of Appeal was right to dismiss the appeal. [67]                         
For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal
and affirm the conviction.                     Appeal
allowed, LeBel and Wagner JJ. dissenting.                     Solicitors for the appellant:  Clément Monterosso,
Outremont; Larouche & Associés, Montréal.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Poursuites criminelles et pénales du Québec, Montréal.   