  SUPREME
COURT OF CANADA  Citation:
  R. v. Hutchinson. 2014 SCC 19, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 346 Date:
  20140307 Docket:
  35176  Between: Craig
Jaret Hutchinson Appellant and Her
Majesty The Queen Respondent -
and - Canadian
HIV/AIDS Legal Network and HIV & AIDS Legal Clinic Ontario Interveners   Coram: McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ.  Reasons for Judgment: (paras. 1 to 75)  Reasons
  Concurring in Result: (paras. 76 to 104) McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J. (Rothstein and Wagner JJ.
  concurring)  Abella and Moldaver JJ. (Karakatsanis J. concurring)   R. v. Hutchinson.
2014 SCC 19, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 346 Craig Jaret Hutchinson                                                                                  Appellant v. Her Majesty The Queen                                                                              Respondent and Canadian HIV/AIDS Legal Network and HIV & AIDS Legal Clinic
Ontario                                                             Interveners Indexed as:  R. v.
Hutchinson 2014 SCC 19 File No.:  35176. 2013:  November 8;
2014:  March 7. Present:  McLachlin C.J. and Abella, Rothstein, Cromwell,
Moldaver, Karakatsanis and Wagner JJ. on appeal from the court
of appeal for nova scotia                     Criminal
law — Offences — Sexual assault — Consent — Complainant consenting to sexual
activity with male partner unaware that he had sabotaged condom — Whether
evidence establishing that there was no voluntary agreement of the complainant
to engage in the sexual activity in question or whether complainant’s apparent
consent was vitiated by fraud — Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46,
ss. 265(3) (c), 273.1(1) .                     The
complainant agreed to sexual activity with her partner, H, insisting that he
use a condom in order to prevent conception.  Unknown to her, H had poked holes
in the condom and the complainant became pregnant.  H was charged with
aggravated sexual assault.  The trial judge found that the complainant had not
consented to unprotected sex and convicted H of sexual assault.  On appeal, the
majority upheld the conviction on the basis that condom protection was an
“essential feature” of the sexual activity, and therefore the complainant did
not consent to the “sexual activity in question”.  The dissenting judge held
that there was consent to the “sexual activity in question”, but that a new
trial was required to determine whether consent was vitiated by fraud.                     Held:  The appeal should be dismissed.                     Per McLachlin C.J. and Rothstein, Cromwell and Wagner JJ.:  The
Criminal Code  sets out a two-step process for analyzing consent to
sexual activity. The first step is to determine whether the evidence
establishes that there was no “voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage
in the sexual activity in question” under s. 273.1(1)  and it requires
proof that the complainant did not voluntarily agree to the touching, its
sexual nature, or the identity of the partner. If the complainant consented, or
her conduct raises a reasonable doubt about the lack of voluntary agreement to
the sexual activity in question, the second step is to consider under ss. 265(3) 
and 273.1(2)  whether there are any circumstances that may vitiate the
complainant’s ostensible consent or participation.  In this case, the main
issue is whether condom sabotage resulted in there being no “voluntary
agreement by the complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question”
under s. 273.1(1)  or whether the condom sabotage constituted fraud
under s. 265(3) (c), with the result that no consent was obtained. Resolving
this issue requires the Court to determine the meaning of the “sexual activity
in question” in s. 273.1(1) .                     There
are essentially two approaches to determining the meaning of what constitutes
voluntary agreement to the sexual activity in question and the role of mistake
or deception in determining whether such agreement existed.  The first approach
defines the “sexual activity in question” as extending beyond the basic sexual
activity the complainant thought she was consenting to at the time to
conditions and qualities of the act or risks and consequences flowing from it,
provided these conditions are “essential features” of the sexual activity or go
to “how” the physical touching was carried out.  The second approach defines
“the sexual activity in question” more narrowly as the basic physical act
agreed to at the time, its sexual nature, and the identity of the partner.  If
the complainant subjectively agreed to the partner’s touching and its sexual
nature, voluntary agreement is established under s. 273.1(1) .  That
voluntary agreement, however, may not be legally effective.                     Properly
interpreted, voluntary agreement to the sexual activity in question in s. 273.1(1) 
means that the complainant must subjectively agree to the specific physical
act itself, its sexual nature and the specific identity of the partner. The
“sexual activity in question” does not include conditions or qualities of the
physical act, such as birth control measures or the presence of sexually
transmitted diseases.  Here, the “sexual activity in question” was sexual
intercourse and the complainant voluntarily agreed to it.  On the question of
whether her agreement to the “sexual activity in question” was vitiated by
fraud, the dishonesty is evident and admitted.  The only remaining issue is
whether there was a sufficient deprivation to establish fraud.  Where a
complainant has chosen not to become pregnant, deceptions that expose her to an
increased risk of becoming pregnant may constitute a sufficiently serious
deprivation to vitiate consent under s. 265(3) (c).  This application
of “fraud” under s. 265(3) (c) is consistent with Charter
values of equality and autonomy, while recognizing that not every deception
that induces consent should be criminalized. In this case, there was no consent
by reason of fraud, pursuant to s. 265(3) (c).                     Per Abella, Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ.:  At its core, this case
concerns the right recognized in R. v. Ewanchuk, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330,
to determine how sexual activity will take place.  Society’s commitment to
protecting a person’s autonomy and dignity requires that individuals have the
right to determine who touches their body, and how the touching
will occur.  This protection underlies the definition of consent set out in
s. 273.1(1)  as “the voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in
the sexual activity in question”.  Consent to the “sexual activity in question”
necessarily means the complainant’s voluntary agreement both to engage in
touching of a sexual nature and to the manner in which that touching is carried
out.  The starting point for the analysis of consent under the actus reus
of sexual assault is s. 273.1(1) .  When a complainant does not voluntarily
agree to the sexual activity which occurred, consent does not exist within the
meaning of s. 273.1(1) , and the inquiry for the purposes of the actus
reus of sexual assault is complete.  If there is no consent ab
initio, it is pointless to inquire whether there was fraud under s. 265(3) (c)
which would have vitiated the complainant’s consent.  In other words, without
voluntary agreement as to the “how” — the manner in which the sexual activity
in question occurred — there is no consent within the meaning of s. 273.1(1) .                     Unlike
under s. 265(3) (c), which requires both a dishonest act and
a deprivation, consent under s. 273.1(1)  has never
required an analysis of the risks or consequences caused by unwanted sexual
touching.  It is the unwanted nature of non-consensual sexual activity that
violates the complainant’s sexual integrity and gives rise to culpability under
the criminal law, not just the risk of further harm that the sexual touching
may create.  Requiring an analysis of the risks or consequences of non-consensual
touching by applying s. 265(3) (c) whenever deception is later
discovered, adds a barrier to the simple ability to demonstrate whether the
activity which occurred was agreed to when it occurred.  It thereby
undermines the values of personal autonomy and physical integrity sought to be
protected by making sexual assault an offence.                     It
does not follow that because a condom is a form of birth control, it is not
also part of the sexual activity.  Removing the use of a condom from the meaning of sexual activity in
s. 273.1(1)  because the condom may have been intended for contraceptive
purposes, means that an individual has no right to
require the use of a condom during intercourse where pregnancy is not at
issue.  All individuals must have an equal right to determine how they are
touched, regardless of gender, sexual orientation, reproductive capacity, or
the type of sexual activity they choose to engage in.  By any definition, when
someone uses a condom, it is part of the sexual activity.  It is therefore part
of what is — or is not — consented to.  When individuals agree to sexual
activity with a condom, they mean an intact condom.  They are not merely
agreeing to a sexual activity, they are agreeing to how it should take
place.  That is what s. 273.1(1)  was intended to protect.                     A
person consents to how she will be touched, and she is entitled
to decide what sexual activity she agrees to engage in for whatever reason she
wishes. The fact that some of the consequences of her motives are more serious
than others, such as pregnancy, does not in the slightest undermine her right
to decide how the sexual activity she chooses to engage in is carried out.  It
is neither her partner’s business nor the state’s.  The complainant’s voluntary
agreement to the manner in which the sexual touching is carried out, requires
the complainant’s consent to where on her body she was touched and with what. 
It does not, however, require consent to the consequences of that touching, or
the characteristics of the sexual partner, such as age, wealth, marital status,
or health.  These consequences or characteristics, while undoubtedly
potentially significant, are not part of the actual physical activity that is
agreed to.                     In
this case, the question is not whether consent was vitiated by fraud.  It is
whether there was consent to the sexual activity in the first place.  The
complainant agreed to engage in sexual activity in a certain manner, that is,
sexual intercourse with an intact condom.  H deliberately sabotaged the condom
without her knowledge or agreement.  The fact that she only learned of the
deliberate sabotaging after the sexual activity took place, is of no
relevance.  What is relevant is what sexual activity she agreed to engage in
with H and whether he stuck to the bargain.  In this case, he did not.  Since
the complainant did not agree to how she was touched at the time it occurred, consent
within the meaning of s. 273.1(1)  did not exist. Cases Cited By
McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J.                     Discussed:
 R. v. Ewanchuk, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330, rev’g 1998 ABCA 52, 57 Alta. L.R.
(3d) 235; R. v. Cuerrier, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 371; R. v. Mabior, 2012
SCC 47, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 584; referred to:  R. v. Clarence (1888),
22 Q.B.D. 23; R. v. Flattery (1877), 2 Q.B.D. 410; R. v. Dee
(1884), 14 L.R. Ir. 468; R. v. G.C., 2010 ONCA 451, 266 O.A.C. 299, leave
to appeal refused, [2010] 3 S.C.R. v; R. v. O.A., 2013 ONCA 581, 310
O.A.C. 305. By
Abella and Moldaver JJ.                     Discussed:
 R. v. Ewanchuk, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330; R. v. Cuerrier, [1998] 2
S.C.R. 371; R. v. Mabior, 2012 SCC 47, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 584; referred
to:  R. v. J.A., 2011 SCC 28, [2011] 2 S.C.R. 440; R. v. Chase
(1984), 55 N.B.R. (2d) 97, rev’d [1987] 2 S.C.R. 293. Statutes and Regulations Cited Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
ss. 7 , 15 . Criminal Code, 1892, S.C. 1892, c. 29,
ss. 259(b), 266. Authors Cited Falk, Patricia J.  “Rape by Fraud and Rape by Coercion” (1998),
64 Brook. L. Rev. 39. Feinberg, Joel.  “Victims’ Excuses:  The Case of Fraudulently
Procured Consent” (1986), 96 Ethics 330. Fischer, David A.  “Fraudulently Induced Consent to Intentional
Torts” (1977), 46 U. Cin. L. Rev. 71. Hooper, Anthony.  “Fraud in Assault and Rape” (1968), 3 U.B.C. L.
Rev. 117. Perkins, Rollin M., and Ronald N. Boyce.  Criminal Law,
3rd ed.  Mineola, N.Y.:  Foundation Press, 1982. Sullivan, Ruth.  Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes, 5th
ed.  Markham, Ont.:  LexisNexis, 2008. Wertheimer, Alan.  Consent to Sexual Relations.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003. Westen, Peter.  The Logic of Consent:  The Diversity and
Deceptiveness of Consent as a Defense to Criminal Conduct.  Burlington,
Vt.:  Ashgate, 2004.                     APPEAL
from a judgment of the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal (MacDonald C.J.N.S. and
Oland, Hamilton, Fichaud and Farrar JJ.A.), 2013 NSCA 1, 325 N.S.R. (2d)
95, 1031 A.P.R. 95, 296 C.C.C. (3d) 22, 1 C.R. (7th) 1, 274 C.R.R. (2d) 254,
[2013] N.S.J. No. 1 (QL), 2013 CarswellNS 22, affirming the conviction for
sexual assault entered by Coughlan J., 2011 NSSC 361, 311 N.S.R. (2d) 1,
985 A.P.R. 1, [2011] N.S.J. No. 723 (QL), 2011 CarswellNS 935.  Appeal dismissed.                     Luke A.
Craggs, for the appellant.                     James A.
Gumpert, Q.C., and Timothy S.
O’Leary, for the respondent.                     Jonathan A.
Shime, Wayne Cunningham and Ryan Peck,
for the interveners.                     The judgment of McLachlin
C.J. and Rothstein, Cromwell and Wagner JJ. was delivered by                     The Chief Justice and
Cromwell J. — I.             
Introduction [1]                             
Control over the sexual
activity one engages in lies at the core of human dignity and autonomy: R. v. Ewanchuk, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 330, at
para. 28. This principle underlies the offences of assault and sexual assault.
Sexual activity without consent is a crime under the Criminal Code,
R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 . [2]                             
In this case, the complainant consented to
sexual activity with a condom to prevent conception.  Unknown to her at the
time, her partner, Mr. Hutchinson,   poked holes in the condom and the
complainant became pregnant.  Mr. Hutchinson was charged with aggravated sexual
assault. The complainant said that she did not consent to unprotected sex. The
trial judge agreed and convicted Mr. Hutchinson of sexual assault (2011 NSSC
361, 311 N.S.R. (2d) 1).  The majority of the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal, per
MacDonald C.J.N.S., upheld the conviction on the basis that condom protection
was an essential feature of the sexual activity, and therefore the complainant
did not consent to the “sexual activity in question”.  Farrar J.A., dissenting,
held that there was consent to the sexual activity, but that a new trial was
required to determine whether consent was vitiated by fraud (2013 NSCA 1, 325
N.S.R. (2d) 95). [3]                             
The immediate problem is how cases such as this
fall to be resolved under the provisions of the Criminal Code .  This is
an issue of statutory interpretation.  Underlying this is a broader question —
where should the line between criminality and non-criminality be drawn when
consent is the result of deception? [4]                             
The Criminal Code  sets out a two-step process for analyzing consent to sexual
activity. The first step is to determine whether the evidence establishes that
there was no “voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in the sexual
activity in question” under s. 273.1(1) . If the complainant consented, or her
conduct raises a reasonable doubt about the lack of consent, the second step is
to consider whether there are any circumstances that may vitiate her apparent
consent. Section 265(3)  defines a series of conditions under which the law
deems an absence of consent, notwithstanding the complainant’s ostensible consent
or participation: Ewanchuk, at para. 36. Section 273.1(2)  also lists
conditions under which no consent is obtained. For example, no consent is
obtained in circumstances of coercion (s. 265(3) (a) and (b)),
fraud (s. 265(3) (c)), or abuse of trust or authority (ss. 265(3) (d)
and 273.1(2) (c)). [5]                             
We conclude that the
first step requires proof that the complainant did not voluntarily agree to the
touching, its sexual nature, or the identity of the partner.   Mistakes on the
complainant’s part (however caused) in relation to other matters, such as
whether the partner is using effective birth control or has a sexually
transmitted disease, are not relevant at this stage. However, mistakes
resulting from deceptions in relation to other matters may negate consent at
the second stage of the analysis, under the fraud provision in s. 265(3) (c)
of the Criminal Code . [6]                             
Applying this template to the facts in this case
leads us to conclude that, at the first step, the complainant voluntarily
agreed to the sexual activity in question at the time that it occurred.  The
question is whether that consent was vitiated because she had been deceived as
to the condition of the condom.  This question is addressed at the second
step.  The accused’s condom sabotage constituted fraud within s. 265(3) (c),
with the result that no consent was obtained.  We would therefore affirm the
conviction and dismiss the appeal. II.          
The Provisions of the Criminal Code [7]                             
Section 265(1)  of the Criminal Code  establishes
the general offence of assault:                               265. (1) A person commits an assault when                                (a) without the consent of
another person, he applies force intentionally to that other person, directly
or indirectly;                                (b) he attempts or threatens,
by an act or a gesture, to apply force to another person, if he has, or causes
that other person to believe on reasonable grounds that he has, present ability
to effect his purpose; or                                (c) while openly wearing or
carrying a weapon or an imitation thereof, he accosts or impedes another person
or begs. [8]                             
Section 265(2) states
that this section applies to all forms of assault, including sexual assault. [9]                             
The offence of sexual assault is created by s.
271 :                               271. Everyone who commits a sexual assault is guilty of                                (a) an indictable offence and
is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years and, if the
complainant is under the age of 16 years, to a minimum punishment of
imprisonment for a term of one year; or                                (b) an offence punishable on
summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 18
months and, if the complainant is under the age of 16 years, to a minimum
punishment of imprisonment for a term of 90 days. [10]                         
Section 273.1(1)  defines “consent” as follows:                              273.1 (1)
Subject to subsection (2) and subsection 265(3) , “consent” means, for the
purposes of sections 271 , 272  and 273 , the voluntary agreement of the
complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question. [11]                         
These provisions define
the basic offence of sexual assault.  They are supplemented by two additional
sets of provisions which give a non-exhaustive list of circumstances in which no
consent is obtained.  Section 265(3) , which applies to all assaults, lists four
such situations involving the accused’s abuse of authority and use of force,
fear and fraud:                              265. . . .                               (3)  For the purposes of this section,
no consent is obtained where the complainant submits or does not resist by
reason of                                (a) the application of force to
the complainant or to a person other than the complainant;                                (b) threats or fear of the
application of force to the complainant or to a person other than the complainant;                                (c) fraud; or                                (d) the exercise of authority. [12]                         
Section 273.1(2) lists
five non-exhaustive situations where no consent is obtained for purposes of the
sexual assault offences:                              273.1 . . .                               (2) No consent is obtained, for the
purposes of sections 271 , 272  and 273 , where                                (a) the agreement is
expressed by the words or conduct of a person other than the complainant;                                (b) the complainant is
incapable of consenting to the activity;                                (c) the accused induces the
complainant to engage in the activity by abusing a position of trust, power or
authority;                                (d) the complainant
expresses, by words or conduct, a lack of agreement to engage in the activity;
or                                (e) the complainant, having
consented to engage in sexual activity, expresses, by words or conduct, a lack
of agreement to continue to engage in the activity. [13]                         
Section 273.1(1) makes
the definition of “consent” for the purposes of sexual assault “[s]ubject to”
subsection (2) and to s. 265(3) . Thus, s. 273.1(1) does not replace the
circumstances of no consent in ss. 273.1(2)  and 265(3) . Fraud, for example,
continues to negate consent to sexual assault, pursuant to s. 265(3) (c). III.       
Issue [14]                         
The main issue here is
whether the Crown proved that the complainant did not consent to the sexual
touching by the appellant. Did the condom sabotage, as the majority of the
Court of Appeal held, result in there being no “voluntary agreement of the
complainant to engage in the sexual activity in question” under s. 273.1(1)  of
the Criminal Code ? Or should the condom sabotage be analyzed, as the
dissenting judge in the Court of Appeal concluded, under the fraud provision in
s. 265(3) (c) of the Criminal Code ? [15]                         
Resolving this issue
requires this Court to determine the meaning of the “sexual activity in
question” in s. 273.1(1) . [16]                         
The basic rule of statutory interpretation is that “the words of an Act are to be read in their
entire context, in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the
scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament”: R.
Sullivan, Sullivan on the Construction of Statutes (5th ed. 2008), at
 p. 1. The task is to determine the intent of Parliament, insofar as this
can be done, by looking at the words used and the scheme and object of the
provision.  Every part of a provision or set of provisions should be given
meaning if possible:  Sullivan, at p. 210. IV.       
Analysis A.          
Sexual Autonomy and the Criminal Law: Overview [17]                         
The sexual assault offences invoke the criminal law to protect sexual autonomy. The Criminal
Code  and jurisprudence establish a high level of protection of the right to
choose whether to engage in sexual activity and with whom.  The absence of
consent to sexual activity, as part of the actus reus of the offence, is
judged subjectively from the complainant’s point of view: Ewanchuk, at
paras. 25-26. Consent cannot be implied, must coincide with the sexual
activity, and may be withdrawn at any time.  Additionally, no consent is
obtained if the apparent agreement to the sexual activity is obtained by
coercion, fraud or abuse of authority.  (We note that this is a case of
apparent agreement — the complainant subjectively agreed at the time sexual
intercourse occurred.  This is not a case where there was no such
agreement.  The question is whether, in spite of that agreement, no consent was
obtained in law because that agreement was obtained as a result of Mr.
Hutchinson’s deceit about the condition of the condom.)  Individually and
collectively, these features of sexual assault law protect Canadians’ sexual
autonomy. [18]                         
But the law has long recognized that there are
limits on how completely it may fulfil that objective through the blunt
instrument of the criminal law. As the most serious interference by the state
with peoples’ lives and liberties, the criminal law should be used with appropriate
restraint, to avoid over-criminalization.  It draws a line between conduct
deserving the harsh sanction of the criminal law, and conduct that is
undesirable or unethical but “lacks the reprehensible character of criminal
acts”: R. v. Cuerrier, [1998] 2 S.C.R. 371, at para. 133; A. Wertheimer,
Consent to Sexual Relations (2003).  The companion of restraint is certainty. 
The criminal law must provide fair notice of what is prohibited and clear
standards for enforcement: R. v. Mabior, 2012 SCC 47, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 584, at paras. 14 and 19. [19]                         
The need for restraint and certainty, which
sometimes work at cross-purposes to absolute protection of sexual autonomy, has
influenced the law’s approach to consent, particularly where consent has been
obtained by deception. B.           
Interpreting the Provisions: Two Approaches [20]                         
There are essentially
two approaches to the question of what constitutes “voluntary agreement . . .
to . . . the sexual activity in question” and the role of mistake or deception
in determining whether such agreement existed. [21]                         
The first approach,
which has many variants, defines the “sexual activity in question” as extending
beyond the basic sexual activity the complainant thought she was consenting to
at the time to conditions and qualities of the act or risks and consequences
flowing from it, provided these conditions are “essential features” of the
sexual activity (reasons of the majority of the Court of Appeal, at paras. 71
and 81) or go to “how” the physical touching was carried out (reasons of Abella
and Moldaver JJ.).  Under this approach, whether a complainant’s mistake
prevents voluntary agreement to the sexual activity under s. 273.1(1)  depends
on the nature of the mistake. The difficulty with this approach, as we shall
see, is that it provides no clear line between mistakes that result in no
consent under s. 273.1(1) , and mistakes that do not.  The result of this lack
of clarity may be inappropriate criminalization and uncertainty in the law. [22]                         
The second approach
defines the “sexual activity in question” more narrowly as the basic physical
act agreed to at the time, its sexual nature, and the identity of the partner. 
If the complainant subjectively agreed to the partner’s touching and its sexual
nature, voluntary agreement is established under s. 273.1(1)  of the Criminal
Code .  That voluntary agreement, however, may not be legally effective. The
Code also sets out a number of situations in which, notwithstanding
apparent agreement, no consent is obtained. In particular, deceptions may
negate consent if they meet the requirements for fraud under s. 265(3) (c). [23]                         
The choice between these
approaches is a matter of statutory construction.  Which approach is correct
depends on (1) the wording, scheme and object of the provisions of the Criminal
Code ; (2) the jurisprudence on the provisions and their common law
predecessors; and (3) the underlying objectives of the criminal law.  We will
consider each of these in turn. (1) The Wording,
Scheme and Object of the Legislation and the Scheme of the Provisions [24]                         
The plain words of the provisions, read in their ordinary and natural sense, support a narrow
interpretation of the basic definition of “consent” in s.  273.1(1) . The
ordinary meaning of the “sexual activity in question” is the physical act
agreed to; there is nothing in the wording to suggest that it includes the
conditions or qualifications of the sexual act. [25]                         
The scheme of the provisions — a basic
definition of “consent” in s. 273.1(1) , coupled with circumstances vitiating
such agreement in s. 265(3)  and s. 273.1(2)  — also supports a narrow
interpretation of “voluntary agreement . . . to . . . the sexual activity in
question”. [26]                         
The “essential features”
approach of the Court of Appeal and the “how the physical act is carried out”
approach of Abella and Moldaver JJ. do not conform to this two-part scheme. The
fraud provision in s. 265(3) (c) deals with situations where consent to
the sexual activity has been given because of a deception by the accused. But
under these approaches, all deceptions about “essential features” of the sexual
activity or about “how” the sexual activity was carried out would result in a
finding of no consent to the “sexual activity in question” under s. 273.1(1) .
Many deceptions would be dealt with at the first step under s. 273.1(1) , rather
than where the scheme of the Criminal Code  suggests they should be dealt
with, under s. 265(3) (c). Section 273.1(1)  would do most of the work
that the fraud provision was intended to do, rendering the fraud provision in
s. 265(3) (c) redundant in many cases, contrary to the principle that
every word and provision in a statute has a meaning and a function. [27]                         
Finally, the object of
s. 273.1, as revealed by its legislative history, does not support a broad
reading of the “sexual activity in question”.  The definition of “consent” in
s. 273.1 was part of a parcel of amendments added to the Criminal Code 
in 1992, intended to address Parliament’s concerns about sexual violence
against women and children and to promote and ensure the full protection of s.
7  and s. 15  Charter  rights (see the preamble to Bill C-49, containing
the 1992 Criminal Code  amendments, S.C. 1992, c. 38). The centerpiece of
the revisions was a new provision narrowing the defence of honest belief of
consent. An accused who chooses to rely on the defence of honest belief of
consent is required to take reasonable steps to ascertain that the complainant
was consenting. Parliament’s intention was to “overcome the apparent
unwillingness by some to let go of the debunked notion that unless a
complainant physically resisted or expressed verbal opposition to sexual
activity, an accused was entitled to assume that consent existed”: R. v.
Ewanchuk, 1998 ABCA 52, 57 Alta. L.R. (3d) 235, at para. 58.  Section 273.1
therefore signalled that the focus should be on whether the complainant
positively affirmed her consent to the “sexual activity in question”.  There
was no suggestion that Parliament intended to expand the notion of “sexual
activity” by including not only the sexual act for which consent is required,
but also potentially infinite collateral conditions, such as the state of the condom. [28]                         
In summary, the primary
tools of statutory construction all point to a rejection of the broad
interpretation of the “sexual activity in question” under the “essential
features”/“how the act was carried out” approach.           (2) The Jurisprudence [29]                         
This Court has
interpreted the fraud provision in s. 265(3) (c) of the Criminal Code 
in the context of HIV non-disclosure cases: Cuerrier; Mabior. In
our view, adoption of the “essential features”/“how the act was carried out”
approach would put the outcomes in those cases in question and replace the
clarity and restraint achieved by those decisions with confusion and
over-criminalization. [30]                         
Initially, the common
law of fraud in sexual relations focussed on the nature of the deceit and asked
whether it went to certain “essential” characteristics of the act. If the
deception went to the sexual nature of the act or the identity of the partner,
it was said to vitiate consent: R. v. Clarence (1888), 22 Q.B.D. 23 (Cr.
Cas. Res.).  This test was incorporated into Canada’s first Criminal Code  in
1892 (S.C. 1892, c. 29). Parliament restricted deceptions vitiating consent to
“false and fraudulent representations as to the nature and quality of the act”
(ss. 259(b) and 266).  The formulation, however, did little to bring
certainty or rationality to the law of consent to sexual activity.  The problem
was where and how to draw the line between those aspects of the sexual activity
that went to the “nature and quality of the act” and those that did not: A.
Hooper, “Fraud in Assault and Rape” (1968), 3 U.B.C. L. Rev. 117, at p.
121.  Simply put, the “nature and quality of the act” did not show courts where
to draw the line — or even help them to do so —  between deceptions that did
and did not vitiate consent. [31]                         
In view of this unsatisfactory state of affairs,
the Criminal Code  in relation to sexual offences was overhauled in 1983.
In 1983, the language of the “nature and quality of the act” was dropped and
the language of the present s. 265(3) (c) was adopted so that “no consent
is obtained where the complainant submits or does not resist by reason of . . .
fraud” — without any specification of the nature of the deception (S.C.
1980-81-82-83, c. 125, s. 19). [32]                         
While for a time
Canadian courts continued to apply a restrictive interpretation of fraud,
influenced by the earlier jurisprudence concerning the “false and fraudulent
representations as to the nature and quality of the act”, the law of fraud in
relation to sexual assault, as we shall see, had a new beginning in Canadian
law with the Court’s judgment in Cuerrier. [33]                         
Three aspects of Cuerrier are
particularly important. First, the majority held that the concept of fraud in
the new s. 265(3) (c) was not restricted to deceptions as to the nature
and quality of the act: para. 108. The former jurisprudence was rejected as
being too restrictive, but at the same time, the majority recognized that some
limitations on the concept of fraud are clearly necessary: para. 135. [34]                         
Second, the majority
introduced an analysis of fraud that required two elements to be present before
consent was vitiated by fraud: deceit and injury or, expressed differently,
dishonesty and deprivation or risk of deprivation: Cuerrier, at paras.
110-16. With only two narrow exceptions that we will discuss shortly, consent
will be vitiated by fraud only when consent is obtained by lies or
deliberate failure to disclose coupled with a significant risk of
serious bodily harm as a result of the sexual touching:  paras. 125-39. As Cory
J. wrote for the majority, at para. 135: The existence of fraud should not
vitiate consent unless there is a significant risk of serious harm.  Fraud
which leads to consent to a sexual act but which does not have that significant
risk might ground a civil action. However, it should not provide the foundation
for a conviction for sexual assault.  The fraud required to vitiate consent
for that offence must carry with it the risk of serious harm. [Emphasis
added.] [35]                         
Third, the majority
accepted that the traditional notion of fraud in relation to the nature and
quality of the act and the identity of the partner would continue to vitiate
consent: Cuerrier, at para. 118. We understand this to mean that
deceptions in relation to the sexual nature of the act and the identity of the
partner (narrowly defined) vitiate consent without proof that the sexual
activity gave rise to the risk of serious bodily harm. [36]                         
The basic architecture of this approach was very
recently approved by the Court in Mabior. The Court said: . . . the
Cuerrier approach is in principle valid.  It carves out an
appropriate area for the criminal law — one restricted to “significant risk of
serious bodily harm”.  It reflects the Charter  values of autonomy,
liberty and equality, and the evolution of the common law, appropriately
excluding the Clarence line of authority.  The test’s approach to
consent accepts the wisdom of the common law that not every deception that
leads to sexual intercourse should be criminalized, while still according
consent meaningful scope. [Emphasis added; para. 58.] [37]                         
The Court in Mabior explained how the Cuerrier
test applies to deceptions about HIV status. The Court concluded that HIV
non-disclosure will not vitiate consent under s. 265(3) (c) if (1) the
accused’s viral load at the time of sexual relations was low; and (2) condom
protection was used. Notably, voluntary agreement to the sexual activity, under
s. 273.1(1)  was not in issue; the case proceeded on the basis that there had
been subjective consent to the sexual touching at the time it had occurred and
the only issue was whether fraud vitiated consent under s. 265(3) (c). [38]                         
An approach that asks
whether the deception went to an “essential feature” of the act or “how the
sexual act was carried out” is inconsistent with the Court’s approach in Cuerrier
and Mabior.  Consider two hypotheticals.  In the first, the accused lies
about the fact that the condom has holes in it so that the complainant who
insists that he uses a condom will consent to the sexual activity.  In the
second, the accused lies about his HIV status so that the complainant will
consent to have sex without a condom.  From a legal perspective, what is the
difference between, on one hand, deceiving the complainant about the condition
of the condom and creating a risk of pregnancy, and on the other hand,
deceiving the complainant about HIV status so that she will agree to
unprotected sex?  Since Cuerrier, it is clear that the latter situation
must be analyzed under the fraud provision in s. 265(3) (c) of the Criminal
Code .  Why then not the former? Consistency and certainty in the law
require that both situations be treated the same. [39]                         
Both the Court of Appeal majority’s approach and
the approach proposed by Abella and Moldaver JJ. are also fundamentally at odds
with the holdings in Cuerrier and Mabior that apparent consent is
vitiated by fraud only where there is both deception and deprivation. Under the
Court of Appeal’s approach and that of our colleagues, mistakes — they need not
be deceptions — about conditions and qualities of the physical act will result
in a finding of no consent under s. 273.1(1)  even in the absence of harm or
risk of harm. This is contrary to the fundamental point made in Cuerrier
and affirmed in Mabior: “The fraud required to vitiate consent for that
offence must carry with it the risk of serious harm” (Cuerrier, at
para. 135). [40]                         
These inconsistencies
are not merely semantic — they may affect outcomes under the “essential
features”/“how the act was carried out” approach. HIV status may well be an
“essential feature” of the sexual activity under the Court of Appeal majority’s
approach. It could also be characterized as part of the “how” under Abella and
Moldaver JJ.’s approach. If the use of an intact condom goes to the manner in
which the sexual activity occurred, why not the exchange of diseased fluids?
Thus, under these approaches, deceptions about HIV status could result in a
finding of no consent under s. 273.1(1) , even where the accused had a
low viral load at the relevant time and condom protection was used. That
conclusion, however, would be in direct conflict with Cuerrier and Mabior. [41]                         
In short, adopting the “essential features”/“how
the act was carried out” approaches would make the law inconsistent, highly
formalistic and unduly uncertain.  The law would be
inconsistent because there is no reason in principle to analyze a case of a lie
that obtains consent to unprotected sex and a lie as to the condition of a
condom differently.  It is highly formalistic because an error with respect to
any essential feature or “physical” element, presumably including whether a
condom is of a certain make or design, would vitiate consent while lies on
matters relating to the physical safety of the complainant would not, absent an
actual risk or harm.  It is uncertain because, as we shall see, it is difficult
to tell which matters form part of the “essential features” or the “how” and
which do not. (3)        Underlying Objectives of the Criminal Law: Restraint
and Certainty [42]                         
Our jurisprudence has
consistently confirmed that in interpreting criminal law provisions, the twin
watchwords of restraint and clarity must inform the inquiry.  In Cuerrier
and Mabior, this Court narrowly limited the sorts of deceptions that
vitiate consent in order to create certainty in the law and limit criminal
liability to serious, reprehensible conduct. The Court held that deceptions
with respect to anything other than the sexual nature of the act or the
identity of the partner will only vitiate consent if there is dishonesty which
gives rise to a risk of physical harm, beyond the injury inherent in being lied
to in order to induce consent. This jurisprudence provides a clear line between
criminal and non-criminal conduct and avoids over-criminalization. Adopting the
“essential features” or “how the physical act was carried out” approach would
undercut the important objectives achieved by the Court’s jurisprudence.  These
approaches re-introduce a vague and unclear test for consent and broaden the
scope for criminalization, including for HIV non-disclosure, thus effectively
reversing this Court’s efforts to restrain and clarify the scope of
criminalization in those circumstances in Cuerrier and Mabior. [43]                         
The Court of Appeal
majority’s “essential features” approach is inherently uncertain and prone to
over-criminalization.  Historically, such approaches have proven unworkable
because they are incapable of producing a sufficiently clear or restrained
standard for the purposes of defining the scope of criminal liability. [44]                         
The majority of the
Court of Appeal held that the “essential features” of the sexual activity are
determined by the complainant’s subjective conditions for consent to that
activity. There need be no deception or dishonesty on the part of the partner. 
It follows that the “essential features” of the sexual activity vary from
person to person. It would therefore be impossible to predict what a particular
person considers “essential”. It is also unclear how “essential” the feature
must be to the complainant. The majority of the Court of Appeal also held that
not all conditions for consent will be considered “essential features” of the
sexual activity; they drew the line between characteristics that merely affect
motive to engage in the sexual activity and characteristics that are
“components” of the sexual activity. But this line is blurry. We are told that
the use of an effective condom is a “component” of the sexual activity, not
part of the motive to engage in the sexual activity. Yet the elimination of the
risk of pregnancy may well be a motivation for agreeing to the sexual act.
Indeed, on the complainant’s evidence in this case, she would not have
consented to sex without a condom. [45]                         
Justices Abella and
Moldaver introduce a variation on this approach but one which, as we see it, is
equally uncertain. Under their approach, the “sexual activity in question”
extends to “how” the sexual touching occurs, but not to the consequences of the
sexual activity. But it is not clear what the “how” of the act includes, or
whether agreement is undermined by only deception or also by a complainant’s
unilateral mistake. Presumably, it extends to any physical aspect of the sexual
activity to which the complainant has not agreed in advance — a vast swath of
conduct indeed. And again, the line is blurry; many aspects of the sexual
activity can be characterized as both part of the “how” and part of the
consequences. This case provides an example. Abella and Moldaver JJ. hold that
a sabotaged condom is part of “how” the sexual touching occurred, but
sabotaging a condom also amounts to a deception about the potential
consequences of the physical act — namely, pregnancy. [46]                         
These approaches would
also result in the criminalization of acts that should not attract the heavy
hand of the criminal law. We have already noted the difficulty of seeing why
the presence of a sexually transmitted infection would not be a “component” of
the sexual activity or part of “how” the sexual touching occurs. Under the
Court of Appeal majority’s “essential features” test, a man who pierces a
condom may be found guilty of sexual assault; why would a woman who lies about
birth control measures not be equally guilty? Under Abella and Moldaver JJ.’s
test, the quality or effectiveness of a condom changes the sexual
activity that takes place; why would it not follow that an individual might be
prosecuted for using an expired condom or a particular brand of condom? 
Anomalies abound.  The “how the physical act was carried out” test appears not
to capture a woman who lies about taking birth control pills, but it might well
capture a woman who lies about using a diaphragm. [47]                         
Conversely, the “how the act was carried out”
approach would not capture conduct that is as equally reprehensible as Mr.
Hutchinson’s actions, like substituting a partner’s birth control pills with
sugar pills.  We do not see any principled basis for criminalizing the act of
sabotaging condoms, but not the act of sabotaging birth control pills. [48]                         
This difficulty is
apparent on the facts of this case. The trial judge found that the complainant
did not voluntarily agree to sexual intercourse without contraception and that
Mr. Hutchinson knew this:  paras. 44 and 47. What was critical to her consent
was contraception and what she sought to mitigate was the risk of pregnancy. 
Yet on the approach adopted by our colleagues, her lack of voluntary agreement
would result from the use of sabotaged condoms, but not from a lie by Mr.
Hutchinson to the effect that he was sterile. These different results on the
issue of voluntary agreement respectfully lack rational justification in a case
such as this one in which the whole concern of the complainant was pregnancy —
a risked consequence of the sexual activity. Her consent did not turn on the
“how” of the sexual act, but on whether the risk of pregnancy was mitigated to
a degree which she thought sufficient. [49]                         
Ultimately, these
approaches lead to empty semantic arguments incapable of furnishing a
principled and clear line between criminal and non-criminal conduct. This
conclusion is reinforced by the experience of other jurisdictions. [50]                         
We earlier referred to
the difficulties of line drawing inherent in the “nature and quality of the
act” test in Clarence and the Canadian Criminal Code until its
revision in 1983.  Courts experienced great difficulty in formulating
principled reasons for why a certain deception did or did not relate to the
nature and quality of the act and there was no principled basis upon which to
confine the test to serious deceptions meriting the ultimate force of the
criminal law:  see, e.g., Hooper; Cuerrier. [51]                         
A further example is the
distinction made in U.S. criminal and tort law between deceptions going to the
fact (“fraud in the factum”) which vitiate consent for the purposes of rape and
battery and other deceptions that act as inducements (“fraud in the
inducement”) which do not. As expressed by one leading text, the rule is that
“if the deception relates not to the thing done but merely to some collateral
matter” the consent is valid:  R. M. Perkins and R. N. Boyce, Criminal Law (3rd
ed. 1982), at p. 1079.  No matter how beguiling it appears at first, the
distinction has proved unworkable. It is not helpful in differentiating between
legally effective and ineffective consent and where it attempts to draw the
line has no basis in principle: see, e.g., P. J. Falk, “Rape by Fraud and Rape
by Coercion” (1998), 64 Brook. L. Rev. 39, at pp. 159-61; D. A. Fischer,
“Fraudulently Induced Consent to Intentional Torts” (1977), 46 U. Cin. L.
Rev. 71, at pp. 79, 87 and 98. As Peter Westen put it, “The
interchangeability of [fraud in the factum and fraud in the inducement] enables
courts and commentators to conceptualize any fraud that they regard as
sufficient to invalidate acquiescence as a fraud in the factum”: The Logic
of Consent (2004), at p. 198 (emphasis in original); see also, E. W.
Puttkammer, “Consent in Rape” (1924-1925), 19 Ill. L. Rev. 410, at p.
423; Wertheimer, at p. 206; J. Feinberg, “Victims’ Excuses: The Case of
Fraudulently Procured Consent” (1986), 96 Ethics 330. [52]                         
What these lines of
authority have in common is that they, like the “essential features” or “how
the physical act is carried out” approach, attempt to draw a line between
deceptions that do and do not vitiate consent by adjectivally categorizing the
subject matter of the deception. Deceptions described as going to the “nature
and quality of the act” or the “fact” (as opposed to the “inducement”) vitiate
consent, while other types of deceptions do not.  But the attempted distinction
has proven to be too unclear, too easily manipulated, and too unconnected with
underlying policy rationales to provide a useful marker of liability. [53]                         
The lesson is clear.  Broad adjectival
approaches to the “sexual activity in question” produce not only uncertainty,
but also may criminalize conduct that lacks the necessary reprehensible
character, casting the net of the criminal law too broadly. There is no reason
to expect that attempting to categorize deceptions as to whether they go to the
“essential features” of the act or to “how the physical act is carried out”
will fare any better that did other adjectival approaches in the past. C.           
The Correct Approach [54]                         
We conclude that Farrar
J.A. was correct to interpret the “sexual activity in question” in s. 273.1(1) 
to refer simply to the physical sex act itself (for example, kissing, petting,
oral sex, intercourse, or the use of sex toys). The complainant must agree to
the specific physical sex act. For example, as our colleagues correctly
note, agreement to one form of penetration is not agreement to any or all forms
of penetration and agreement to sexual touching on one part of the body is not
agreement to all sexual touching. [55]                         
The “sexual activity in question” does not
include conditions or qualities of the physical act, such as birth control
measures or the presence of sexually transmitted diseases. Thus, at the first
stage of the consent analysis, the Crown must prove a lack of subjective
voluntary agreement to the specific physical sex act. Deceptions about
conditions or qualities of the physical act may vitiate consent under s.
265(3) (c) of the Criminal Code , if the elements for fraud are
met. [56]                         
This approach fits within the ordinary meaning of s. 273.1(1)  and the scheme of the Code,
and it does not pose problems of uncertainty, over-criminalization, or
inconsistency with Cuerrier and Mabior. [57]                         
In our view, “voluntary agreement . . . to . . . the
sexual activity in question” also encompasses both the sexual nature of the
activity (i.e., that the act was sexual in nature as opposed to being for a
different purpose, such as a medical examination) and the identity of the
partner (defined in the narrow sense of the specific identity of a partner who
is personally known to the complainant). While identity and the sexual nature
of the act were troublesome issues for the early cases, and while Cuerrier,
in obiter, suggests that they might be considered at the second stage of
the consent analysis under s. 265(3) (c), the better view is that
“voluntary agreement . . . to . . . the sexual activity in question” will not
exist under s. 273.1(1)  if the complainant did not subjectively agree to the
sexual nature of the act or the specific identity of the partner. As a result,
a complainant’s mistaken belief about the identity of the partner or the sexual
nature of the act — whether or not that mistake is the result of a deception —
will result in no consent under s. 273.1(1)  of the Criminal Code . [58]                         
The sexual nature of the act is
expressly included by the reference in s. 273.1(1)  to the “sexual
activity in question”. If one voluntarily agrees to a non-sexual activity (for
example, a medical examination), one is not voluntarily agreeing to a sexual
activity.  Similarly, in our view, the identity of the partner, in the narrow
sense, should be included in the “sexual activity in question” under s.
273.1(1) ; if a complainant agrees to sexual activity with A, who is a specific
individual known personally to her, she is not agreeing to sexual activity with
B. [59]                         
A number of early cases support this interpretation. For example, in R.
v. Flattery (1877), 2 Q.B.D. 410 (Cr. Cas. Res.), the court upheld a
conviction of rape where a man obtained sex from a girl on the pretext of
medical treatment. The court noted that the case was not a case where a man
induced consent to sex through fraud; rather, the victim consented to a surgical
operation — not to a sexual act. Thus, there was no consent to any sexual
activity. [60]                         
Similarly, R. v. Dee (1884), 14 L.R. Ir. 468 (Cr. Cas. Res.), the
court upheld a conviction of rape where a man pretended to be the victim’s
husband. May C.J. stated that “[t]he act she permitted cannot properly be
regarded as the real act which took place; therefore, the connexion was done,
in my opinion, without her consent, and the crime of rape was constituted” (p.
479). [61]                         
In Dee, Palles C.B. stated: . . . an act done under the bona
fide belief that it is another act different in its essence is not
in law the act of the party. That is the present case — a case which it is
hardly necessary to point out is not that of consent in fact sought to be
avoided for fraud, but one in which that which took place never amounted to
consent. The person by whom the act was to be performed was part of its
essence. The consent of the intellect, the only consent known to the law, was
to the act of the husband only . . . . [Emphasis in original; p. 488.] [62]                         
In Clarence, Stephen J. acknowledged that there is abundant
authority for the idea that frauds about identity or the sexual nature of the
act vitiate consent. However, he commented: I should myself prefer to say that
consent in such cases does not exist at all, because the act consented to is
not the act done. Consent to a surgical operation or examination is not a
consent to sexual connection or indecent behaviour. Consent to connection with
a husband is not consent to adultery. [p. 44] [63]                         
More recently, the Ontario Court of Appeal in R. v. G.C., 2010 ONCA 451, 266 O.A.C.
299, leave to appeal refused, [2010] 3 S.C.R. v, adopted this approach
and held that the complainant’s belief that the partner was her boyfriend when
it was in fact his identical twin resulted in no consent to the “sexual
activity in question” under s. 273.1  of the Criminal Code . (See also R.
v. O.A., 2013 ONCA 581, 310 O.A.C. 305.) V.          
Application [64]                         
The first question is
whether the complainant voluntarily agreed to the “sexual activity in
question”. On the approach we propose, the “sexual activity in question” was
the sexual intercourse that took place in this case. Effective condom use is a
method of contraception and protection against sexually transmitted disease; it
is not a sex act. [65]                         
There is no dispute that the complainant
subjectively consented to sexual intercourse with Mr. Hutchinson at the time
that it occurred. We conclude that the Crown did not prove that there was no
voluntary agreement to the “sexual activity in question” under s. 273.1(1)  of
the Criminal Code . [66]                         
The next question is whether any of the
circumstances in which voluntary agreement is not effective apply. These
circumstances are listed in s. 265(3)  and s. 273.1(2) . The only provision
argued is s. 265(3) (c). So the key issue is whether the complainant’s
agreement to the sexual activity in question was vitiated by fraud under s.
265(3) (c) of the Criminal Code . [67]                         
As we have seen, “fraud”
for the purposes of consent has two elements: (1) dishonesty, which can include
the non-disclosure of important facts; and (2) deprivation or risk of
deprivation in the form of serious bodily harm which results from the
dishonesty (Cuerrier). Did the Crown prove that no consent was obtained
by virtue of fraud? [68]                         
The dishonesty in this
case is evident and admitted. Mr. Hutchinson obtained the complainant’s consent
to sexual intercourse only by failing to disclose the critical fact that he had
sabotaged the condoms and thereby compromised their contraceptive value. The
only remaining issue is whether there was a sufficient deprivation to establish
fraud. [69]                         
Mr. Hutchinson argues
that the universal threshold for deprivation under s. 265(3) (c) post-Cuerrier
is a “significant risk of serious bodily harm”, and that the Crown did not
establish that here.  The Crown argues that a new trial is required to
determine whether the risk of pregnancy caused by the sabotaged condoms
constituted a “significant risk of serious bodily harm”. These arguments
over-read Cuerrier.  The Court in Cuerrier was addressing the
specific risk of sexually transmitted diseases.  It did not foreclose the
possibility that other types of harm may amount to equally serious deprivations
and therefore suffice to establish the requirements of fraud under s. 265(3) (c). [70]                         
The concept of “harm”
does not encompass only bodily harm in the traditional sense of that term; it
includes at least the sorts of profound changes in a woman’s body — changes
that may be welcomed or changes that a woman may choose not to accept —
resulting from pregnancy. Depriving a woman of the choice whether to become
pregnant or increasing the risk of pregnancy is equally serious as a
“significant risk of serious bodily harm” within the meaning of Cuerrier,
and therefore suffices to establish fraud vitiating consent under s. 265(3) (c). [71]                         
We conclude that where a
complainant has chosen not to become pregnant, deceptions that deprive her of
the benefit of that choice by making her pregnant, or exposing her to an
increased risk of becoming pregnant by removing effective birth control, may
constitute a sufficiently serious deprivation for the purposes of fraud
vitiating consent under s. 265(3) (c). [72]                         
This application of “fraud” under s. 265(3) (c)
is consistent with Charter  values of equality and autonomy, while
recognizing that not every deception that induces consent should be
criminalized. To establish fraud, the dishonest act must result in a
deprivation that is equally serious as the deprivation recognized in
Cuerrier and in this case. For example, financial deprivations or mere
sadness or stress from being lied to will not be sufficient. [73]                         
In this case, while the
Crown did not establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the complainant’s
pregnancy was the result of the damaged condoms, Mr. Hutchinson exposed her to
an increased risk of becoming pregnant by using a faulty condom.  As the trial
judge found, a condom with a pinprick in it is no longer effective birth
control (para. 27).  This constituted a sufficient deprivation for fraud, within
the meaning established in Cuerrier. [74]                         
We conclude that there
was no consent in this case by reason of fraud, pursuant to s. 265(3) (c)
of the Criminal Code .  Mr. Hutchinson is therefore guilty of
sexual assault. VI.       
Disposition [75]                         
We would dismiss the
appeal.                     The reasons of Abella,
Moldaver and Karakatsanis JJ. were delivered by [76]                         
Abella and
Moldaver JJ. — This case involves a woman who agreed to sexual intercourse with a condom.  When a
woman agrees to have sexual intercourse with a condom, she is consenting to a
particular sexual activity.  It is a different sexual activity than sexual
intercourse without a condom.  Her reasons for requiring a condom as
part of the activity may be to prevent pregnancy, or they may be a matter of
personal preference.  But whatever her reasons, they are beyond the scope of
the criminal law.  What is within its scope is what she actually agreed
to, not why.  The deliberate and undisclosed thwarting of her agreement as to
how the intercourse is to take place turns the sexual activity into a
non-consensual act, regardless of its consequences.  This engages s. 273.1(1) 
of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 , whose purpose is to
ascertain whether there was consent to the activity in the first place.  This
is, first and foremost, a function of everyone’s right to decide whether and
how to engage in sexual activity. [77]                         
The factual events which
gave rise to these proceedings are not in dispute.  The complainant agreed to
have sexual intercourse with Craig Hutchinson with a condom so that she would
not get pregnant. Condom use, therefore, clearly meant an intact condom.  Mr.
Hutchinson secretly poked holes in the condom and used it during sexual
intercourse.  The complainant only learned of this when he later told her what
he had done.  At trial, Mr. Hutchinson was convicted of sexual assault under s.
271  of the Criminal Code . [78]                         
The issue before this
Court is which Criminal Code  provision applies in examining whether
there was consent.  The trial judge and a majority of the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal
found that s. 273.1(1)  applied and concluded that under that provision, there
was no consent to the sexual activity in question.  The dissenting judge was of
the view that the complainant had consented to sexual intercourse generally and
that the condom was not part of the sexual activity.  He would have ordered a
new trial to determine whether the consent had been vitiated by fraud under s.
265(3) (c). [79]                         
We would dismiss the appeal.  The starting point
for the analysis is s. 273.1(1) .  The question is not whether consent was
vitiated by fraud, it is whether there was consent to the sexual activity in
the first place.  In our view, there was no such consent, making s. 273.1(1) 
the applicable provision.  The complainant in this case agreed to engage in sexual
activity in a certain manner, that is, sexual intercourse with a condom.  It
goes without saying that when someone agrees to sexual intercourse with a
condom, she is agreeing to sexual intercourse with an intact condom. 
The deliberate sabotaging of that condom without her knowledge or agreement
makes what happened different from what the complainant agreed to.      Since
the complainant never agreed to engage in sexual intercourse with a sabotaged
condom, there is therefore no consent under s. 273.1(1)  and the inquiry for the
purposes of the actus reus of sexual assault is complete. Analysis [80]                         
The relevant provisions,
s. 273.1(1)  and s. 265(3) (c), state:      273.1 (1) Subject to subsection (2) and subsection 265(3) , “consent” means, for the purposes of
sections 271 , 272  and 273 , the voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage
in the sexual activity in question.  265.
. . .  (3) For the purposes of this section, no consent is obtained where
the complainant submits or does not resist by reason of  (a)
the application of force to the complainant or to a person other than the
complainant;  (b)
threats or fear of the application of force to the complainant or to a person
other than the complainant;  (c)
fraud; or  (d)
the exercise of authority. [81]                         
In R. v. Ewanchuk, [1999] 1 S.C.R.
330, this Court set out the governing framework for
analyzing whether the elements of sexual assault are met in a given case.  The mens
rea for sexual assault requires the accused to have knowledge of, or be
willfully blind to, the complainant’s lack of consent.  The central focus of
the analysis of the actus reus of sexual assault, on the other hand, is
to determine what the complainant agreed to, and what in fact took place.  The actus
reus requires proof of three elements: “(i) touching, (ii) the sexual
nature of the contact, and (iii) the absence of consent” (para. 25).  While the
first two elements are determined objectively, the third — the absence of
consent — “is subjective and determined by reference to the complainant’s
subjective internal state of mind towards the touching, at the time it
occurred” (para. 26).  It is the third component of the actus reus that
we are concerned with in this appeal. [82]                         
In Ewanchuk, the foundational principles underlying the law of sexual assault were distilled by
Major J. as follows: Society is committed to protecting the
personal integrity, both physical and psychological, of every individual.
Having control over who touches one’s body, and how, lies at the
core of human dignity and autonomy. The inclusion of assault and sexual assault
in the Code expresses society’s determination to protect the security of
the person from any non-consensual contact or threats of force. The common law
has recognized for centuries that the individual’s right to physical integrity
is a fundamental principle, “every man’s person being sacred, and no other
having a right to meddle with it, in any the slightest manner” . . . .  It
follows that any intentional but unwanted touching is criminal.  [Emphasis
added; para. 28.] [83]                         
In other words,
society’s commitment to protecting a person’s autonomy and dignity requires
that individuals have the right to determine who touches their body, and
how the touching will occur.  The right to determine how sexual
touching is to occur clearly encompasses a person’s right to determine where
one’s body is touched and by what means.  At its core, this case
concerns the right recognized in Ewanchuk to determine how sexual
touching will take place. [84]                         
This protection
underlies the definition of consent set out in s. 273.1(1)  as being “the
voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in the sexual activity in
question”.  When it defined consent in s. 273.1(1)  in this way in 1992,
Parliament’s intent was to address the “fundamental” issue of giving full and
clear meaning to the concept of “consent” (Kim Campbell, Minister of Justice
and Attorney General of Canada, House of Commons Debates, vol. IX, 3rd
Sess., 34th Parl., June 15, 1992, at pp. 12027-28; see also pp. 12041 and
12043). As another parliamentarian explained:      Consent is the crux of
sexual assault trials. If it has been established that consent has been given,
the woman’s claim of attack is rejected. It is imperative that the law be
absolutely clear on this matter, as must the partners involved in the sexual
activity.       The bill states that
consent is the voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in the sexual
activity in question. There is no need for lawyers to be present. All you need
are two people who understand each other’s needs . . . .  (Shirley
Maheu, M.P. from Saint-Laurent—Cartierville, ibid., at p. 12045) [85]                         
Since the protection of
personal integrity underlies the requirement for consent in s. 273.1(1) ,
consent to the “sexual activity in question” necessarily means the
complainant’s voluntary agreement both to engage in touching of a sexual nature
and to the manner in which that touching is carried out.  In other words,
without voluntary agreement as to the “how” — the manner in which the sexual
activity in question occurred — there is no consent within the meaning of s.
273.1(1) . [86]                         
The dissenting judge in
the Court of Appeal, like McLachlin C.J. and Cromwell J., concluded that the
specific sexual activity in question here was “sexual intercourse”.  Since the
complainant consented to sexual intercourse, there was consent within the
meaning of s. 273.1(1) .  In the dissenting judge’s view, the term “sexual
activity” in s. 273.1(1)  has a narrow meaning, referring only to “actual
incidents of physical touching, whether oral sex, or intercourse, or another
‘category’ of activity, and not to the conditions of that touching” (para.
127 (emphasis in original)).  With respect, adverting to generic, categorical
labels of sexual activity obscures the purpose of the consent inquiry regarding
the actus reus of sexual assault.  The complainant must consent to the
sexual touching which actually took place (Ewanchuk, at
para. 26).  And this Court confirmed in R. v. J.A., [2011] 2
S.C.R. 440, that the relevant time for determining that consent is when the
activity occurred.  To interpret “sexual activity in question” in s. 273.1(1) 
without regard to the specific touching that occurs extinguishes the right of a
person to decide whether to give or withhold consent to the sexual activity
which is to take place. [87]                         
The dissenting judge’s
technical definition of “sexual activity in question” also suggests that once a
person consents to a “category” of sexual activity, the inquiry goes to s.
265(3)  to determine whether that general consent was vitiated.  This, with
respect, reads out the protection in Ewanchuk for the “how” of the
sexual touching.  A person who has consented to being touched over her clothing
above the waist, is not consenting to being touched under her clothing below
the waist. Both instances are “touching”, but only one was agreed to.  In the
same way, agreeing to “penetration” does not thereby mean consenting to any or
all forms or penetration. The notion that general consent is given under s.
273.1(1)  so long as the other person’s actions fall somewhere within the
generic category of what the complainant agreed to, such as touching or
penetration, is untenable.  It represents the triumph of terminology over
personal integrity and completely undermines Ewanchuk’s basic principle
that “any intentional but unwanted touching is criminal” by virtue of
the fact that it was unwanted (para. 28 (emphasis added)). [88]                         
A person consents to how
she will be touched, and she is entitled to decide what sexual
activity she agrees to engage in for whatever reason she wishes. The fact that
some of the consequences of her motives are more serious than others, such as
pregnancy, does not in the slightest undermine her right to decide the manner
of the sexual activity she wants to engage in.  It is neither her partner’s
business nor the state’s.  The complainant’s voluntary agreement to the manner
in which the sexual touching was carried out, requires the complainant’s
consent to where on her body she was touched and with what.  It does
not, however, require consent to the consequences of that touching, or the
characteristics of the sexual partner, such as age, wealth, marital status, or
health.  These consequences or characteristics, while potentially significant,
are not part of the actual physical activity that is agreed to.  If we included
them in the meaning of the sexual activity in question under s. 273.1(1) , we
would be criminalizing activity that thwarts the motives of a
complainant, instead of focussing on the unwanted physical activity that
actually took place.  To state the proposition demonstrates its unacceptable
reach.  While it is true that the third element of the actus reus — the
complainant’s absence of consent to the touching —is a subjective inquiry, it
must nonetheless relate to the specific way in which he or she is touched, not
to why.  The avoidance or pursuit of pregnancy may well motivate why the
specific sexual activity is being agreed to, but the motivation for the sexual
activity is not the sexual activity itself. [89]                         
That is why we would not adopt the
“essential features” test proposed by the majority of the Nova Scotia Court of
Appeal, under which “if there is no consent to an essential feature of the
sexual act itself, there can be no consent to ‘the sexual activity in
question’” (para. 46).  By focussing on what is an “essential” feature of the
sexual activity to the complainant, there is a risk of capturing “features”
which are not a part of the how of the sexual activity.  In other words,
the language of “essential features” opens the door to a broader inquiry than
whether the complainant consented specifically to the sexual touching which
occurred.  To the extent that our colleagues have conflated our approach
with the “essential features” test, it does not, with respect, reflect our
reasons. [90]                         
But neither do we agree
that the fraud provision in s. 265(3) (c) must be the framework for
analyzing consent in sexual assault cases whenever deception is involved.  When
a complainant does not voluntarily agree to the sexual activity which occurred,
consent does not exist within the meaning of s. 273.1(1) , and the inquiry for
the purposes of the actus reus of sexual assault is complete. [91]                         
Unlike under s. 265(3) (c), which
requires both a dishonest act and a deprivation, consent
under s. 273.1(1)  has never required an analysis of the risks or consequences
caused by unwanted sexual touching.  This Court has consistently affirmed that
it is the unwanted nature of non-consensual sexual touching that
violates the complainant’s sexual integrity and gives rise to culpability under
the criminal law, not just the risk of further harm that the sexual touching
may create.  Requiring an analysis of the risks or consequences of all
non-consensual sexual touching if deception is later discovered, adds a barrier
to the simple ability to demonstrate whether the activity which occurred was
agreed to when it occurred.  It thereby undermines the values of
personal autonomy and physical integrity sought to be protected by making
sexual assault an offence. [92]                         
Regardless of whether deception occurred in a
given case, the analysis under s. 273.1(1)  must link consent to the specific
sexual activity which occurred, including how the sexual touching was
physically carried out.  In other words, did the complainant consent to where
she was touched and by what?  We therefore think the following two-part
test for analyzing consent under the actus reus of sexual assault flows
inevitably from Ewanchuk: Under s.
273.1(1), has the complainant consented to the identity of her sexual partner,
the sexual nature of the touching, and the manner in which the sexual touching
was carried out? If so, are
there any circumstances that vitiate the complainant’s consent under s.
265(3) ? [93]                         
This approach does not,
as our colleagues suggest, “do most of the work that the fraud provision was
intended to do”.  What it does do, is give meaning to the word
“consent”.  Indeed, as our colleagues themselves point out, there are many
situations in which a person’s deception does not change the manner in which
the sexual activity is actually carried out. Section 265(3) (c) may well
apply to those deceptions that do not fall under s. 273.1(1), either because
the deception does not go to the manner in which a person is touched, does not
involve the identity of one’s partner, or does not pertain to the sexual nature
of the touching.  If there was no consent ab initio to the sexual
activity, however, it is pointless to inquire under s. 265(3) (c) whether
consent was vitiated by fraud.  The two inquiries are conceptually distinct and
must remain so.  One goes to the manner in which the sexual touching is
carried out, the other to the consequences of the sexual touching.  The
fact that the violation of someone’s consent results in a deprivation does not
change the fact that there was no consent to begin with. [94]                         
In our view, both R. v. Cuerrier,
[1998] 2 S.C.R. 371, and R. v. Mabior, [2012] 2 S.C.R. 584, are
examples of cases that were properly decided under s. 265(3) (c).  In
those cases, this Court set out the applicable approach to sexual assault cases
under s. 265(3) (c) involving non-disclosure or deception as to the
existence of a disease.  The complainants had consented to the manner in
which the sexual activity had been carried out, the identity of their sexual
partner, and the sexual nature of that touching.  The complainants had
consented to sex with and, in some cases, without condoms, and the sexual
intercourse took place in accordance with that agreement.  The significant
issue before the Court was whether the complainants’ consent had been vitiated
by fraud because the accused had not disclosed that he was HIV-positive (Cuerrier,
at para. 77; Mabior, at para. 106).[1] 
As the risk of HIV transmission is a consequence of sexual activity, and the
complainants had consented to the manner in which the sexual activity occurred,
these cases were properly decided within the realm of s. 265(3) (c).  There are, moreover, important policy considerations that justify
deciding HIV non-disclosure cases under s. 265(3) (c).  Requiring a
“significant risk of serious bodily harm” in HIV non-disclosure cases ensures
that the criminal law does not further stigmatize and criminalize an already
vulnerable group. [95]                         
This approach was never intended to replace the
governing framework for analyzing consent in sexual assault cases set out in Ewanchuk.  
By further redefining the deprivation component of the fraud test affirmed in Mabior
only two years ago, our colleagues leave open the possibility that other
“equally serious deprivations” could establish deprivation in future cases. 
This makes the deprivation component a moving target, and generates uncertainty
in an already complex area. [96]                         
While the starting point
for the analysis is s. 273.1(1), unlike our colleagues, we see no legal danger
or uncertainty in recognizing that in a given case, lack of consent could
theoretically have been established under either provision. What is
fraught, however, is redefining the concept of consent in a way that
significantly limits the protective scope of s. 273.1(1) and erodes a person’s right, confirmed in Ewanchuk,
to decide what sexual activity will take place. [97]                         
The heart of our disagreement with McLachlin
C.J. and Cromwell J. turns on whether the use of a condom is included in the
manner in which the sexual activity is carried out.  According to our
colleagues, the use of a condom during sexual intercourse does not change the “specific
physical sex act” which occurs, but rather is merely a “collateral conditio[n]”
to the sexual activity.  In their view, so long as there is consent to “sexual
intercourse”, this general consent is not vitiated by a deception about condom
use unless it exposes the individual to a deprivation within the meaning of s.
265(3) (c), which they conclude in this case means depriving a woman of
the choice to become pregnant by “making her pregnant, or exposing her to an
increased risk of becoming pregnant”. [98]                         
With respect, it does not follow that because a
condom is a form of birth control, it is not also part of the sexual activity. 
Removing the use of a condom from the ambit of what is consented to in the
sexual activity because in some cases it may be used for contraceptive
purposes, means that an individual is precluded from requiring a condom during
intercourse where pregnancy is not at issue.  That is, individuals who
engage in sexual activity that has no risk of pregnancy, either because of age,
fertility, or gender, for example, would have no legal right to insist upon the
use of a condom.  If one of those individuals has insisted upon the use of a
condom, and their partner has deliberately and knowingly ignored
those wishes — whether by not using a condom at all, removing it partway
through the sexual activity, or sabotaging it — that individual will
nonetheless be presumed to have consented under the approach suggested by our
colleagues.  In other words, because the person could not become pregnant, the
criminal law will not uphold his or her right to sexual autonomy and physical
integrity.  With respect, even aside from the problematic analogy between
pregnancy and bodily harm, this result does not reflect the fact that everyone
has a right to insist on a condom as part of the sexual activity — for whatever
reason.  All individuals must have an equal right to determine how they are
touched, regardless of gender, sexual orientation, reproductive capacity, or
the type of sexual activity they choose to engage in.  We fail to see how condoms
can be seen as anything but an aspect of how sexual touching occurs.  When
individuals agree to sexual activity with a condom, they are not merely
agreeing to a sexual activity, they are agreeing to how it should take
place.  That is what s. 273.1(1) was intended to protect. [99]                         
It is worth remembering
that three decades ago, this Court overturned a decision of the New Brunswick
Court of Appeal, R. v. Chase (1984), 55 N.B.R. (2d) 97, that touching a
woman’s breast was an assault, but not a sexual one.  The Court of Appeal
concluded that a breast was only a “secondary” sexual characteristic and that
“sexual” should be given “its natural meaning as limited to the sexual organs
or genitalia”.   A man who had grabbed a woman’s breasts had therefore
committed an assault, but not a sexual assault, since the contact was not with the
sexual organs of the victim but to the mammary gland, a secondary sexual
characteristic.  . .
. to include as sexual an assault to the parts of a person’s body considered as
having secondary sexual characteristics may lead to absurd results if one
considers a man’s beard. Nor am I prepared to include those parts of the human
body considered erogenous zones lest a person be liable to conviction for
stealing a goodnight kiss. . . .  It seems to me that the word “sexual” as used
in the section ought to be given its natural meaning as limited to the sexual
organs or genitalia. [paras. 13-14] In this Court, McIntyre
J., had “no difficulty” overturning the Court of Appeal’s decision, concluding
instead that a sexual assault had been committed by the accused ([1987] 2
S.C.R. 293, at p. 303). [100]                     
To say that condom use
is not part of the sexual activity in question under s. 273.1(1) but rather a
collateral condition, is reminiscent of the artificially narrow approach to the
word “sexual” taken by the Court of Appeal in Chase and rejected by this
Court. We must similarly take care not to adopt an interpretation of “sexual
activity in question” that unreasonably or arbitrarily excludes certain forms
of touching from the meaning of s. 273.1(1).  By any definition, when someone
uses a condom, it is part of the sexual activity.  It is therefore part of what
is — or is not — consented to.  And if what is consented to is sexual activity
with a condom, the condom is expected to be intact.  If it is not intact because
of its deliberate sabotaging, the activity that has been agreed to has been
unilaterally changed by the saboteur. [101]                     
What took place here was sexual intercourse with
a sabotaged condom, a sexual activity to which the complainant did not
consent.  The fact that she only learned of the deliberate sabotaging after
the sexual activity took place, is of no relevance.  What is relevant is what
sexual activity she agreed to engage in with Mr. Hutchinson and whether he
stuck to the bargain.  He did not.  Since the complainant did not agree at any
time to how she was touched, consent within the meaning of s. 273.1(1) did not
exist. [102]                     
Nor can we see why
requiring the consistent approach to consent in sexual assault set out in Ewanchuk
— and never abandoned by this Court — can now be said to lead to
“over-criminalization”.  Sexual assault is a crime.  What s. 273.1(1) does is
explain, clearly and simply, that the actus reus of sexual assault is
made out when someone does not agree to the manner of the sexual touching, that
is, when an individual engages in sexual touching in a way that is contrary to
the complainant’s wishes, thereby violating his or her bodily integrity. This
on its own, however, is half the story.  The mens rea for the offence of
sexual assault captures those who knowingly touch the complainant in a
way that he or she has not agreed to, thereby disregarding the complainant’s
right to determine how he or she is sexually touched.  While the criminal law
must remain sensitive to concerns about over-criminalization, those concerns
should not be used to generally undermine the hard-fought legislative protection
for someone’s right to determine how he or she is sexually touched.  It is also
worth remembering the Chief Justice’s comments in J.A. — with the
Court’s unanimous agreement on this point — where she observed that “even mild
non-consensual touching of a sexual nature can have profound implications for
the complainant” (paras. 63 and 121). [103]                     
The complainant in this
case agreed to engage in sexual activity in a certain manner, that is, sexual
intercourse with an intact condom.  Mr. Hutchinson deliberately sabotaged the
condom without her knowledge or agreement.  It trivializes the seriousness of
the violation of the complainant’s integrity that occurred to analogize a
sabotaged condom, as our colleagues have done, to its brand or expiration
date.  Because of the deliberate deceit of her partner, the sexual activity was
not carried out in the manner that the complainant had agreed to.  Put simply,
the complainant did not consent to how she was touched, and thus she did not
voluntarily agree to the sexual activity in question under s. 273.1 of the Code. [104]                     
We would therefore dismiss the appeal.                     Appeal
dismissed.                     Solicitors for the
appellant:  Burke Thompson, Halifax.                     Solicitor for the
respondent:  Public Prosecution Service of Nova Scotia, Halifax.                     Solicitors for the
interveners:  Cooper, Sandler, Shime & Bergman, Toronto; HIV
& AIDS Legal Clinic Ontario, Toronto.  [1] Additionally, the accused in Cuerrier was charged
with aggravated assault under s. 268  of the Criminal Code ;
accordingly, the definition of consent set out in s. 273.1(1)  for sexual
assault offences was not at issue.  